The following are several books that analyze mass dance events around the world. They use the collective movement events as a pretext to study the behavior of people in relation with social and poltical contexts. Use them to inform your background knowledge on the subject. Pay attention to the connections between dance, sound, rhythm, cadence, and their relationship with power systems.

Some books are older, and their reproduction using OCR is not perfect. Try to work around the artifacts introduced by the OCR process. The occurence of ______ means that a small part of the text is missing.

=============================\n\n\n


Dances with Spiders: Crisis, Celebrity and Celebration in Southern Italy
Karen Liidtke



The book "Dances with Spiders: Crisis, Celebrity and Celebration in Southern Italy" by Karen Liidtke explores the history, culture, and practice of Tarantism in Southern Italy. The book is divided into two parts, with the first part focusing on the past and present of spider webs, and the second part discussing healing and the tarantula. Each chapter in the book delves into different aspects of the Tarantula's role in Italian culture, including its history, origins, and its connection to healing. The Spider's Cult Today



A tiny, elderly woman, enveloped in black, leans against a stone pillar of the gateway leading to her home. Her body is tilted slightly, poised weightlessly against a wall twice her size, one knee bent in adjustment, toes touching, side by side. Her shoulder acts as a pivot, supported by one hand extended across her chest, balancing her dainty shape against the whitewashed bricks. Lost in her gaze, piercing and blue underneath a black headscarf taming strands of beige-white hair, she watches silently. I look up to check for traffic from behind before turning onto the main road, and find this image framed in my rear mirror. I want to pull out my camera to fix this picture in a permanent frame, but something stops me. Instead, I scan it in my mind and turn to wave, but the scene remains immobile. Her eyes no longer reach this far. Yet they seem to see me departing, simultaneously with many others whom she has accompanied to this gate in farewell, collapsing decades of her life in a single gaze. She doesn’t know if I'll return. I don’t know if I'll still find her here again.

Over a period of four years (1998-2002), she has promised to come and visit me in England on condition that I leave her a good road map. She has also repeatedly offered to find me a husband in her hometown so I could settle down there. When I return to visit in August 2005, her offer still stands and she extends it to the female friend accompanying me. Her incessant jokes and sunny presence give no hint of the equally strong crises that have marked her life: the sudden fainting spells; the terrorised screams; the shaking that takes over her petite but potent body; the rigidity that leaves her muscles seemingly dead and alive at once.


If we do not honour our past we lose our future. If we destroy our roots, we cannot grow. Friedensreich Hundertwasser!

The Salentine peninsula is an arid, rocky, olive-tree terrain exposed to two main winds and seas. The Tramontana brings cool air across the mountain ranges of northern Italy, blowing the waves of the Ionian Sea onto the sandy shores of the western coast. On the other side, the Scirocco drives desert air from North Africa onto the largely rugged and steep cliffs of the eastern Adriatic coast. Throughout history, these winds and waves have made this far limb of Italian soil into a cultural crossroads at the heart of the Mediterranean, bringing crusaders, invaders, travellers and pilgrims in bygone times, and an influx of refugees and tourists in recent years. It is here, in the heel of Italy’s boot, at the southernmost tip of Apulia, that the European black widow, the feared tarantula, reigned in real and mythic terms. For centuries, the healing cult of tarantism (or tarantolism) was the only cure for those ‘bitten’ or ‘possessed’ by the tarantula spider. Its victims had to dance for days on end to the pizzica (the Apulian tarantella).? Only in this way, it was said, could the spider’s poison be expelled and — often temporary — relief be assured. In the post-war period, pesticides were said to have largely eradicated the tarantula from Salentine terrain, and with it, popular belief explains, the tradition of tarantism and its protagonists, the tarantate (or tarantolate).+ Subsequent research, bringing socio-economic factors into relief, has inevitably questioned this popular rationalization.

Dances with Spiders

Officially, but not quite in practice, tarantism became nothing but a memory, shamefully dismissed or happily relegated to a distant past. However, in the 1990s, the pizzica resurfaced, turning into a local craze mesmerizing masses of dance and music enthusiasts. Reinvented and revitalized, this music has come to attract crowds and sponsors, fabricating and marketing a unique sense of regional identity on the basis of its captivating rhythms and powerful mythic origins.” This book explores how and why the pizzica has boomed in the Salento, creating repercussions on a national and international level. It does so by enquiring whether this current popularity has anything to do with the historical ritual of tarantism, other than as a source of rhetorical legitimation for contemporary forms of the tarantula’s music and dance.° It asks, more specifically, whether the notion of recovering well-being — in the sense of vitality, presence and choice motivating daily life despite perceived physical or other imperfections — is still of any relevance. A clear picture emerges of the potential of music and dance both to further conflict and to promote well-being, with respect to acute questions of identity in an increasingly globalized world. While conflicts — based on such differences as gender, age, regional origins or musical execution — may be musically played out against each other, experiences in which ‘music takes over’ may provide a way of sensing and making sense of everyday life beyond such clashing views. In the Salento, a vital shift appears: from the confrontation of life crises to the vibrant promotion and celebration of a local sense of celebrity and identity.'

Salentine Tarantulas: Spider Dances and Discourses

The European black widow, alias tarantula, is said to take its name from the Apulian port of Taranto, perched on the convex bend of the Ionian Sea where the heel and arch of Italy’s boot meet (Naselli 1951). There is some debate about which spider type was actually associated with the spider’s cult, with the Latrodectus tredecim guttatus and Lycosa tarantula being prime candidates (Lewis 1991).8 However, unlike its South American counterparts and horror-movie favourites, the so-called Italian tarantula or European black widow Introduction: Tarantula Territory (Latrodectus tredecim guttatus) is a petite three centimetres in length and bald, so to speak (Katner 1956). Yet its bite may cause dramatic general symptoms, including severe muscle cramps and convulsions. The region of Apulia, and much of southern Italy, made up its natural habitat. Importantly, however, most cases of tarantism never featured an actual spider bite. No real spider was involved. This is where myth, mystery and symbolism make their powerful entry on stage, a fact that has intrigued thinkers for centuries.

Publications on tarantism, from earliest fourteenth-century manuscripts to twenty-first-century research, have focused primarily on musical, medical, psychological and socio-religious interpretations (Kircher 1641; Baglivi 1696; Hecker 1865; De Raho 1908; Giordano 1957; De Martino 196la). Some work has drawn on medical anthropology (Lanternari 1995, 2000) or theatre and dance studies (Santoro 1982, 1987; Almiento 1990; Schott-Billmann 1994; Di Lecce 1998). Recent documents on tarantism and its music (Di Lecce 1994; Chiriatti 1995; Chiriatti et al. 2007; Basile 2000; Carignani 2004; Nocera 2005; Agamennone 2005; Romanazzi 2006; Attanasi 2007; Montinaro 2007) and the current musical scene in the Salento (De Giorgi 1999, 2002, 2004, 2005; Nacci 2001, 2004; Lamanna 2002; Santoro and Torsello 2002; Durante 2005; Thayer 2005; Imbriani and Fumarola 2007) provide ethnographic data in Italian and some valuable theoretical insights. The tarantula has also inspired the creativity of various fiction writers (Di Ciaula 2001; Schmeer 2001, Bandini 2006, Marino 2007).

Complementary studies on rituals in European and Mediterranean contexts present important comparative material (Boissevain 1992; Ferrari de Nigris 1997; Tak 2000; Del Giudice and van Deusen 2005). Meanwhile, anthropological research on rituals, trance and spirit possession has made reference to tarantism in regard to theoretical discussions on healing and altered states of consciousness (Lewis 1971; Rouget 1986; Lapassade 1994, 1996a, b, 1997, 2001). This study seeks to develop the existing literature on the basis of fresh data regarding the personal experiences of past and present participants in the tarantula's music and dance, by asking whether the tarantula still 'bites to heal' and what this may reveal about performance and well-being more generally.

Since 1953, Evelina has been bitten twice. Every May and June, ever since, she has succumbed to the crises the tarantula evokes: fainting spells, nausea, stomach pains. She is one of the few tarantate who remain in the Salento. Now in her eighties, her story is that of a woman transfixed by taboos. Her life reveals history bodily inscribed, with a complex cultural code channelling her personal anguish. Her story is reminiscent of many others, mainly women, who were struck by traumatic events, harsh living conditions, socially and sexually repressive roles or unspoken judgements, who exploded emotionally, venting their anger and desires in ritualized form, so as to (often temporarily) reinstate a sense of integrity, wholeness, soundness, in the face of everyday life.

By the turn of the millennium, the spider was officially listed as exterminated, er______ What is more, nationally and internationally renowned musicians (Joe Zawinul, Noa, Stewart Copeland, and others) have been invited to play and take the tarantula on tour. All this has come to make up the so-called world of neo-tarantism.1 The Salento makes fertile terrain for exploring the tarantula's music and dance in past and present contexts. Tarantism is extremely well documented historically, as the earliest written references to this phenomenon date back to the fourteenth century (Mina 2000). Similar traditions existed in Sardinia (Gallini 1967), Calabria (Lombardi Satriani 1951), Campania (Rossi 1991) and other regions of Italy (Pitré 1894; Zanetti 1978), as well as Spain (Cid 1787; Doménech y Amaya 1792; Schneider 1948; Leén Sanz 2000, 2008), but literary evidence of these is comparatively limited. Moreover, cases of tarantism have persisted, in transmuted forms, into the twenty-first century. Although today this phenomenon has largely died out, rare cases were observed until the 1990s, despite modern psychiatric and pharmaceutical alternatives (Di Lecce 1994; Chiriatti 1995; Nocera 2005).

With the turn from the twentieth to the twenty-first century, tarantism has been recast as neo-tarantism. This creates a comparative advantage for looking at the tarantula's music and dance in a single geographical context, both when securely anchored within a strong cultural belief system and when recomposed and reimposed within a new temporal and socio-economic context. Tarantism is, moreover, a key theme in Italian anthropology, thanks to historian of religion Ernesto De Martino's (1961a) classic study on this topic, La terra del rimorso.1 This major point of reference in research on the tarantula's cult straddles the two main strands of anthropological studies in Italy: folklore studies considering 'folklore' as a response to the historical experience of oppression and as a possible basis of subaltern cultures such as those of the tarantate (De Martino 1960; Gramsci 1985); and cultural anthropology, concerned with the 'value orientations' of individuals living in changing social and economic contexts (Tentori 1976; Tullio-Altan 1976).

These emphases much resemble Anglo-American research in the Mediterranean (Saunders 1984; Herzfeld 1987; Driessen 2002) with its consideration of the honour and shame complex (Davis 1969; Peristiany 1965; Schneider and Schneider 1971; Goddard 1987; Giordano 2002), family structures (Banfield 1958; Silverman 1968; Ginsborg 1990), and clientelism and patronage (Filipucci 1996; Gribaudi 1996). Most importantly, the so-called 'Southern Question', probing attempts to explain underdevelopment, as well as sociocultural and economic gaps between Italy's north and its southern regions, or Mezzogiorno, has dominated anthropological studies in recent years, providing a significant contextualization for past and present manifestations of the tarantula's cult (Giordano 1992; Schneider 1998).1

In the Salento, the pizzica is generally, simplistically, seen to characterize the traditional music and dance scene, thereby pushing a large repertory of music, including work, love and funeral songs, into the background.1 Moreover, it is commonly, if reductively and erroneously according to some, divided into three types: the pizzica tarantata, pizzica de core and pizzica scherma (Di Lecce 2001b).1 All are performed in a circle of participants, and can be linked by broad similarities in rhythm and musical execution, but distinguished by dance steps, rhythmic subtleties and diverging intentions.!> The pizzica tarantata was the healing dance of the tarantate performed in a ritual context with the explicit aim of bringing about a greater state of well-being. The pizzica pizzica, pizzica de core or pizzica di cuore (literally, ‘pizzica of the heart’) is danced on social occasions to have fun and to seduce, while the pizzica scherma (literally, fencing pizzica), or simply scherma, as many in the know insist, is a fighting dance executed almost exclusively by men. Controversies regarding terms and neologisms immediately come into the spotlight. Dance ethnologist Giuseppe Gala warns that the term pizzica de core, for instance, is a recent invention: in the past, dances for entertainment were simply known as pizzica pizzica or tarantella.!° Similarly, the pizzica scherma is often, apparently falsely, considered to be a synonym of the danza delle spade (sword dance) or danza dei coltelli (knife dance).!” More recently, the catchphrase pizzica e taranta has become common currency with the term ‘taranta’ signifying not only the spider but also Salentine music and dance more generally. This points to a collapsing of these components in linguistic terms, indicative of the multiple and fluctuating meanings characterizing this performance context.'* In this study, I adopt the term pizzica pizzica to denote the courtship dance, whereas I use the notion of pizzica in the sense of a music and dance genre (including various types of pizziche) holding a key position in the repertory of the tarantula's music and dance, comprising all musical and choreographic events, past and present, orbiting around the spider's image. Despite the vast quantity of documents on tarantism, limited information is available on the origins of the pizzica, its links to tarantism and its relationship to the southern Italian tarantella more generally (Bragaglia 1949, 1950; Galanti 1950; Costa and Costa 1999; De Giorgi 2002: 53-59). David Gentilcore writes that in the seventeenth century ‘the style of dance known as tarantella became widespread throughout the south of Italy’ (2000: 265). Generally, however, the ritual form of the tarantella is seen to have come first. ‘The ritual dances of tarantism, which we could call “liturgical”, clearly lay behind this “profane” tarantella. In the mid-eighteenth century “to dance like a tarantata” [ballare a tarantata] meant to dance the tarantella’!’ (Gentilcore 2000: 265). Carmelina Naselli (1951) comes to similar conclusions following her investigation into the etymology of the term tarantella. She cites Giorgio Baglivi to explain that one specific tune used during tarantism rituals in the seventeenth century was seen as particularly efficacious and consequently named tarantella, perhaps because its fast rhythm recalled the speed and mobility with which the tarantula 6 Introduction: Tarantula Territory spider could move. Yet others asserted that the spider itself moved rhythmically when a tarantella was played [see Fig. 2.1]. Others link tarantism to the tarantella, because the symptoms treated involved an irresistible urge to dance (De Raho 1908: 3). At the same time, dancing the tarantella was also compared to the convulsions of those bitten by the tarantula.?° Whatever its precise origins the tarantella has evolved into diverse regional styles (Ne______ The etymological link to the verb pizzicare, meaning "to bite," "pinch," or "sting," further evokes the tarantula's presence. The scherma is said to derive from prison settings, where dance was a way of settling disputes that could not be voiced otherwise (Monaco 2006). Antonio Gramsci's (1965) observations on these dances are popularly quoted. For those in the know, steps and gestures embody hidden codes. Festive occasions, such as the festival of San Rocco, where the Rom populations of Apulia (earning their living from selling livestock and known for their expertise in dancing) met Salentine farmers (who brought their tambourines and music to pass time and celebrate), are thought to have kept this dance alive (Di Lecce 1992; Melchioni 1999; Tarantino 2001; Chiriatti and Miscuglio 2004; Monaco 2006; Inguscio 2007). Although classifications of the pizzica are varied and contested, the pizzica pizzica, scherma, and pizzica tarantata may be clearly distinguished, despite possibilities of personal variation and change in each new enactment, on the basis of key features seen to characterize each of these dances.

The pizzica pizzica marks celebrations and is mostly danced by a man and a woman, although two women (and less frequently two men) may also dance together [see Fig. 9.1]. In the classic match, the woman dances in small skips and pirouettes, luring and coaxing, escaping her partner while flirting and inviting him to follow with graceful, seductive gestures of her hands, often waving a handkerchief. The man moves more boldly, following his partner, arms seeking to delimit the space around her in a territorial manner, knees slightly bent, assertive and yet almost in submission (Negro and Sergio 2000). The scherma, in contrast, is used to settle conflicts, frequently over women, to clarify who is the strongest, who has the last say [see Dances with Spiders Fig. 9.2]. Two dancers take over the circle centre. Right hands gripped in a tight fist, they turn around the axis of this fulcrum, let go and face each other. Index and middle fingers imitate knives, cutting through the air in rotating motions. The aim is to strike the adversary with force and virility. Tensions run high and electricity moves in the circle, creating sparks with every successful hit. Previously this dance was performed exclusively by men and — as many like to tell and others contest — with actual knives.

Finally, the tarantata danced the pizzica tarantata in spider-driven rituals. Despite vast variations in ritual practices, certain dance phases generally marked these events (De Martino 1961a). At the outset, the tarantata would lie prostrate on a white sheet stretched out on the ground until a musical note performed by a small orchestra of musicians moved her into action, bringing her desperation to the surface, into her moves, screams, gestures, and grimaces. Her head would beat from side to side and her back arch upward. She would roll over and over and eventually jump up to execute elements of the pizzica pizzica in an ever more frantic manner, before spinning on the spot and collapsing to the ground. Just a short break would provide some rest before another dance cycle was resumed with the same dancer. The crises of the tarantate involved symptoms associated with a range of physiological rhythms, ranging from the lethargic (listlessness, drowsiness, paralysis) to the hyperactive (convulsions, trembling, shaking), all of which may be seen to be out of sync with 'healthy' bodily rhythms of the heart, pulse, metabolism, or respiration. "In the ritual context, the effects of the tarantula's poison were summoned up through audio, visual, kinaesthetic and olfactory stimuli, such as incessant rhythms, rapid movements, colourful ribbons or wild flowers. The afflicted was stimulated to express and accentuate her crisis, to become and enact all that which the tarantula, as an indigenous element of the Salentine fauna, was seen to embody. Her crisis became an integral part of her cure. It was made tangible, audible, visible and accessible to the senses, providing scope for the transformation of experiences and self-perceptions, in individual, social and political terms. A cure was achieved when the individual treated felt better, when a visceral sense of well-being, of presence or 'kinaesthetic attentiveness' (Desjarlais 1996: 145) manifested itself through vitality, spontaneity and perceptive responsiveness.

How this happened and whether it still does were the questions that took me to southern Italy.

Tracking Down the Spider: Research Techniques and Intentions

I first came to the Salento in late August 1996 on a brief holiday. On the highway to Lecce, the Salentine capital, an Apulian friend assured me that we were heading for the most beautiful part of Italy. My unspoken expectations, merging hearsay of tarantism and stereotypes of southern Italy, grew with his enthusiasm for showing us a region of which the defects and hardships were skilfully dispersed into jokes, clearing the windscreen beyond surface appearances to that considered worthy of identification.

In the early evening, we walked through the streets of Lecce, with their yellow street lights transforming the baroque frills of white stone buildings and endless churches into stunning shadows. I was struck by the numerous votive corners with religious statues, glowing light bulbs and flowers set into house walls; by crowds promenading the streets in high-street fashions; by designer stores flanking workshops of artisans, cobblers or bicycle menders, tucked away in windowless basements below street level.

We camped for a couple of days near the Baia dei Turchi, the bay of the Turks, just north of the Adriatic port of Otranto: a major source of conflict by 2006, between local environmentalists and entrepreneurs responsible for illegally constructing the foundations of a summertime bar on this spot. The coastline here was a dazzling turquoise, alternating cliffs and sandy patches, scarcely dotted with sunbathers, occasional fishermen and carelessly discarded rubbish.

Like many parts of the Salento, Otranto speaks of a history of foreign domination. The fortified city centre, with its castle rendered famous by Horace Walpole’s (1764) gothic tale, conserves a cathedral with a millennium-old mosaic floor of intertwined mythical and biblical figures and a chapel of skulls and bones commemorating the martyrs of the fifteenth-century Turkish assault. One afternoon we drove to Galatina, trade fair town and home to the chapel of St Paul, patron saint of the tarantula's victims. Thanks to the apostle's protection, this municipality has always been ascribed immunity to the spider's bite and no cases of tarantism have, apparently, been registered among its citizens. In August 1996, the town sign was punctured by two holes recalling bullet shots. The fields around were burnt black with ashes. Industrial sites marked the periphery, while the historical town centre appeared abandoned." It was three o'clock in the afternoon, and the heat had driven everyone but a few phantom strollers off the streets. To our astonishment, the local library was open, and the director kindly furnished me with a number of texts on tarantism. Curiosity threw me into anthropological mode: hands and feet complementing poor language skills, antennae stretched to a maximum. We moved to the central piazza, stretching out at the feet of the main church's elaborate facade. In my mind, the pavement stones came alive in black and white moving images: films I had seen of the tarantate, brides of St Paul, dressed in white, running in wild circles on this very square, driven by vehement impulses, screaming in high-pitched voices, terrorizing spectators and attacking those dressed in bright colours [see Fig. 1.2]. A clergyman crossed our tracks and cars circled around us like a traffic island in the square centre, as the priest's tales of horse-drawn carriages bringing desperate men and women to St Paul's shrine, mixed with his greetings to passers-by.

The tiny chapel remained closed all year, except for three days at the end of June when the town patrons were celebrated and numerous pilgrims came to its threshold. On rare occasions, the doors were opened out of season to calm those seeking St Paul's blessing. For us, too, the keys were sought out, and we were taken into the tiny space long since deconsecrated by the Catholic Church. The air was thick, lacking ventilation, suggestive of emotional outbursts lived and exorcised between these walls. In the years to come, I was to return often, following up old stories, observing new ones.

Yet, beyond the imposing coastline, I failed to see the predicted beauty of this region. What struck me were the pale, sometimes lifeless, colours: yellow grass, grey stone-ridden earth, silver olive groves, a late-summer landscape drained of moisture. No strong distinctions caught the eye beyond cement structures of unfinished buildings or abandoned farmhouses, distorted out of focus by the heat. There was no record of the colourful spectacle springtime blossoms create each year. Nevertheless, something seduced me to undertake fieldwork here, in this part of southern Italy.

Introduction: Tarantula Territory

My point of departure to look at the tarantula's music and dance was a strong curiosity to find out more about this tradition, exploring the labels of normality and madness cloaked in varying explanations of affliction and cure. The tarantate of southern Italy have variously been branded as mad, hysterical, psychologically unstable, exhibitionistic; the connotations of 'not being credible' associated with these classificatory tags marked the lives of many. These views, however, contradict the respect accorded to them by others, who emphasize their access to unique insights, 'something like white magic', due to their relation to the tarantula.! This range of opinions and the motivations that lay at their foundation intrigued me. Often I was asked: 'Do you believe in the tarantula?' My response was that, in some way and over a considerable time span, tarantism had been seen to work. It would not have lasted for centuries if its effects had not been considered and experienced as beneficial. Inevitably, however, the notion of efficacy depends on the criteria applied. Tarantism has worked both to liberate and to oppress. It has been a channel of release and resolution when there was no other perceived way out. In these terms, it has been a safety valve and golden cage all in one. Nevertheless, for the purposes of anthropological research, it is valuable to accept the belief system of tarantism as one possible reality, as one possible epistemology of healing. For those afflicted by the tarantula spider, its poison was real in its effects, even in the absence of an actual bite. Apparent contradictions in empirical terms dissolved as different notions of reality came into play. The anthropologist moves between these, not always without risk, open to various ways of reading the world.

At the outset of my fieldwork, a professor in theatre history at the University of Lecce advised me as follows, touching on the subtle divide between taking part, in order to understand, and keeping apart, so as not to lose touch with the ground under one’s feet: "Tarantism is a phenomenon made up of a million folds. If you unfold it, explain it, it won't exist anymore. It is not a fixed or bounded system. Instead, it is something dynamic, constantly being translated and transformed. You must focus on the relations between things. In order to relate, you have to open up, break and diffuse your own boundaries. If something does not finish, it can be transformed. You need to consider how things speak to each other, how objects and people play together. And you [11] Dances with Spiders too have to be prepared to open up, to engage with others, to break your own ways of thinking. Our way of seeing the world appears to be the most efficient for our current lives. But, this does not mean that there are no other ways of seeing the world."

This book does not claim to explain the tarantate’s rituals or the contemporary pizzica scene. Instead, it strives to paint an impressionistic picture of the manifold facets of everyday life within which the notes and steps of the tarantula’s music and dance came and come alive. With this intention, it portrays both unique lives and dynamic cultural contexts. It can never do justice to the whole — there are many musicians I have never talked to, many dancers I have never met, audio-visual recordings and written documents I have not located — but it can begin to provide a sense of what it meant and means to live in this part of Italy.

It is important to stress, moreover, that this research may be seen to address the lives of only a minority of Salentines today: by 2006, the number of (ex)tarantate was estimated to be no more than five or six, while in 1998 fifteen to twenty were still said to be alive. Widespread opinion completely denies their existence, since none are believed to be practising rituals any longer. What is more, despite the crowds attracted by pizzica concerts, those linking this music and dance (still or again) to a therapeutic potential (variously defined) are limited in number and often contradicted by more popular views, defining this contemporary boom exclusively in terms of entertainment, politics, tourism, commercialization and questions of identity. Finally, there are many who have had enough of all the buzz around the spider and are likely to roll their eyes when yet another pizzica is played.

Initially, when I came to the Salento, I did not know whether it would still be possible to find anyone who had lived through the ordeals attributed to the tarantula. At the same time, I had no idea that the music and dance once associated with this healing tradition were about to boom beyond anyone’s expectations. Before I knew it, my footnotes on this aspect turned into entire chapters. My research, spanning a decade (1996-2008), involved two main tracks of investigation: the historical healing ritual of tarantism and the contemporary performances of the tarantula's music and dance. I was based in Lecce and traveled throughout the surrounding area, participating in conferences, book presentations, photographic exhibitions, and other events. I gathered insights through impromptu conversations, observing and participating in celebrations, fairs, and concerts.

I learned to dance the pizzica but never mastered the tambourine. I attended performances of music groups specializing in the pizzica, followed different courses, and participated in rehearsals and tours with the group Arakne Mediterranea.

My research extended to dancing the pizzica and actively participating in concert settings, which guided this research and evoked a question posited by ethnomusicologists Gregory Barz and Timothy Cooley (1997): "What do we see when we acknowledge the shadows we cast in the field? What do we hear, smell and taste?"

This book, a dance with shadows, has limitations: I never saw a ritual of tarantism, relying on the memories of others. Each story can be played against others and cross-checked against historical documents to ensure the maximum possible reliability of the data presented. Secondly, the approach taken may be seen to achieve no more than documenting the last vestiges of tarantism. Such criticism needs to be taken seriously. The temptation of continuity is highly seductive, as historian Peregrine Horden (2000, 2003) warns, and it would be reductive to consider the small number of remaining tarantate as representative of ‘tarantism’, seeing that not only its protagonists but also understandings of the term tarantism itself have undergone and continue to undergo incessant changes.

Thirdly, this study compares the tarantula’s music and dance in highly different performative contexts, which are difficult to pigeonhole or define in themselves and, according to some, completely incomparable. ‘The pizzica today’, as many Salentines would insist, ‘has nothing to do with tarantism, although a process of bastardization between the two has taken place.’ Motivations for performing may be seen as utterly split between the diverging aims of healing (in the past) and hedonism, including tourism (today). Moreover, past and present dances may be differentiated according to the categories of ritual versus theatre or spectacle, bringing into relief the manifold problems associated with the use of these categories.

Fourthly, my data inevitably are conditioned not only by my own view, but also by the people I have come to know. Generally speaking, I have had more contact with groups who led the 1990s revitalization and am less familiar with more recently formed bands.

Finally, ethical issues emerge, since this study addresses sensitive material related to affliction and suffering, which risks becoming sensational and commercial in a context that celebrates the pizzica and has turned research on tarantism into a fashion. This brings to mind a question guiding anthropologist Valentine Daniel's (1996: 3) work on violence: ‘How to give an account of ... shocking events, without giving in to the desire to shock?’ As a consequence, I have opted to use pseudonyms in a few cases in which I was not given express consent to use real names, and trust that those who would have liked to be mentioned by name will empathize with this decision. It allows this research to be made accessible to those whose cultural identities are addressed, while at the same time respecting the individual identity of those who have entrusted me with their views and experience.

Crisis, Celebrity and Celebration: Contextualizing Salentine Tarantulas

A focus on process and performativity guides this exploration of bygone tarantism rituals and today’s pizzica events as cultural forms of expression for articulating the highs and lows of daily life. It suggests that, just as in the days of the tarantate, dynamics of projection and identification continue to mark the worlds of those engaging with the spider’s image today: whereas the tarantate had to identify with their afflicting spider in order to evoke its presence and then pacify or expel it, Salentines today use the music and dance that once drove out poison to create an identity distinguishing themselves from others, be these northern Italians, Europeans more generally, tourists, participants in the ‘world music’ scene or yet others. Some Salentines speak of having the pizzica in their blood, creating a sense of community defined on the basis of musical DNA, seen to render them unique (Gala 2002a, b; Pizza 2002a, b). Such a ‘self’ versus ‘other’ contrast may express more subtle dynamics characterizing contemporary Western society: fears of dissolving boundaries, fleeting points of reference, and a gaping meaninglessness of existence more generally. Although such dissolving boundaries may equally further a sense of community among humanity at large, well-being may be jeopardized by crises expressed under new labels today — stress, depression, nervous breakdown or addictions — or fatalistic and fanatical points of view. In such situations of distress, the tarantula’s music and dance can (but not necessarily do) intervene, by transforming perceptions of the self, others, and reality at large.

Spider dances draw attention to motivations for and experiences of performing beyond explicitly choreographic or musicological criteria, bringing into focus ethnomusicological and other literature on the relation between music and identity (Stokes 1994; Feld 2000; Connell and Gibson 2003). Identity has been widely defined in opposition to alterity, a dichotomy that anthropologists have carefully deconstructed, in an effort to ‘discard any essentialized notion of difference, to eschew any overemphasis on identity as sameness, and to resist any temptation to moralize about “othering” (Gingrich 2004: 15).

Anthropological studies have highlighted how any group’s apparently consolidated identity may involve a cross-boundary struggle for control and contestations from within the group, challenging the absolute character of discourses on identity and the existence of defining boundaries that are not only a matter of degree but also of kind (Cohen 2000: 1-2). ‘Wherever we look in the world, people are fighting back in a struggle for identities which they can regard as more sensitive to themselves, rejecting self-denying generalization and subordination to collective categories’ (Cohen 1994: 177). This has led to sensitive and complex debates on rights to identity, and who defines such identities, in the face of imposed matrices of perception.

The French-Lebanese writer Amin Maalouf (2000) stresses how a widespread habit of thought assumes that we have one major affiliation defining our identity. This, he warns, is a simplistic recipe for massacres. He calls for a new concept of identity not based on the denial of the ‘self’ versus the denial of the ‘other’, but recognizing instead that each and everyone’s identity is complex, unique and irreplaceable — a minority in itself. Current perceptions of phenomena such as ‘globalization’ inevitably reinforce a need for identity, while at the same time they potentially hold the key to a new perspective emphasizing the common identity of humankind.

Global media play a key role in this context. Morley and Robins (1995) have considered the media’s implications in reimagining a contemporary Europe ‘without frontiers’. Anxieties provoked by shifting and dissolving boundaries and points of reference, leading to a sense of disorientation and loss of control, are soothed by ‘calls for the pure (if mythic) certainties of the “old traditions” (ibid.: 8).


Without discrediting mass migrations in the past, being European (as well as global citizenship more generally) increasingly demands juggling continental, national, and regional identities in one. It implies negotiating with and commitment to that which is considered to be different. It implies a world with increasingly porous boundaries, ‘an intensification of global interconnectedness’ (Inda and Rosaldo 2002: 2), characterized by multiple understandings and realities of ‘globalization’ with its ‘crisscrossing flows and intersecting systems of meanings’ (ibid. Music, as one of many performance genres, is a further key player in this context. ‘World music’ — a prime label for the tarantula’s music and dance — may be seen as ‘today’s dominant signifier of a triumphant industrialization of global sonic representation’ (Feld 2000: 146). Music is more often than not seen to epitomize places, fostering not only marketing strategies, relying on claims to the ‘traditional’, ‘authentic’, and ‘original’, but also music tourism (Connell and Gibson 2003). Meanwhile, spatial coordinates assign credibility and money value to music. Music and place reciprocally define each other (Stokes 1994). The pizzica, for example, draws its contemporary power from associations with historical tarantism, frequently seen to be rooted in Salentine territory. Attempts at deconstructing such links challenge music’s selling power, its mystic appeal and spiritual magnetism.

Steven Feld (2000: 154) points to ‘world music’, moreover, not only as a discourse, but also as a fundamental zone of activities and representation involving ‘intersubjective clashes for musicians, recordists, industry players, journalists, and academics’. The varying intentions of these diverse actors come into play and conflict, raising accusations of cultural commoditization and theft reminiscent of those expressed in the face of tourism (Kirtsoglou and Theodossopoulos 2004), echoed in much of the literature on this topic. Some stress that ‘the tourist is a kind of contemporary pilgrim, seeking authenticity in other “times” and other “places” away from that person’s everyday life’ (Urry 2000: 9).

Such views are reinforced by recent studies on pilgrimage and healing showing how typical motivations of curing afflictions, whether of a physical or spiritual nature, are complemented in the animated field of modern-day pilgrimages with those of quests for identity, for ‘reassembling the self’, and interpersonal connection (Badone and Roseman 2004; Basu 2004; Coleman and Eade 2004; Dubisch and Winkelman 2005). Others see tourist aspirations as less enchanted, as thriving on ‘pseudo-events’ (Boorstin 1961) and, more significantly, have problematized the notion of authenticity as existing not only in various stages (MacCannell 1999) but also as a negotiable and constantly changing point of reference (Chambers 1999).

This multifaceted picture provides a backdrop for a look at the contemporary music and dance scene in the Salento. Mutations in the tarantula’s music and dance show how experiences of the self both mould and are moulded by the props, actions, and choices of protagonists. Definitions and diagnoses of performers reveal culturally specific self-perceptions, including views of affliction and well-being. Research in medical anthropology and performance studies (including anthropological approaches) provides useful guidelines in this respect.

Medical anthropologists have emphasized the cultural specificity of health or illness (Kleinman 1980; Young 1982; Helman 1984) and the socially constructed nature of the human body (Blacking 1977; Turner 1992; Lock 1993; Csordas 2002). Work on theatre and performance studies, meanwhile, has problematized Western notions of ‘theatre’, ‘dance’ and ‘performance’, searching for cross-culturally applicable categories in order to discover what performance can reveal about society (Turner 1982; Schechner 1985; Barba and Savarese 1991; Beeman 1993; Thomas 2003). Studies on dance have turned attention to embodied cultural practices and individual experience in performance.

These studies, together with research in the ‘anthropology of the senses’ (Stoller 1989; Howes 1992, 2004; Geurtz 2002; Desjarlais 2003; Classen 2005) have prompted medical anthropologists to explore the therapeutic impact of dramatic media in performative contexts (Laderman 1991; Devish 1993; Roseman 1993; Jennings 1995; Laderman and Roseman 1996; Sklar 2001; Sax 2004), as well as notions of embodiment and experience with respect to the curative 18 Introduction: Tarantula Territory process (Desjarlais 1992; Csordas 1994, 2002). Recent publications addressing the relation between healing, dance and music have made reference to tarantism, but almost exclusively with regard to its historical forms (Tomlinson 1994; Gouk 2000; Horden 2000, 2003; Del Giudice 2003). In this context, I regard the tarantula's dance in terms of performance, on the basis of the premise that ‘performance enters all domains of human existence in both secular and religious fields; the “dramas of everyday life”, as well as the “dramas set apart”, i.e., theatre and ritual’ (Jennings 1995: 9). Performance practices such as music making and dance viewed in terms of actor training, as a process rather than an end product, imply that ways of using the human organism alternative or complementary to those of daily life are acquired. If the recovery of well-being, meanwhile, is seen in terms of a negotiative process transforming culturally specific notions of affliction into those of well-being and vitality, this means that alternative or complementary ways of perceiving and experiencing the human organism are learned. Acting theories (Artaud 1958; Grotowski 1976; Stanislavski 1980a, b, 1981; Brook 1993, 1998; Schechner 2002) may be drawn upon to show how performance may be used to express the inner experience of a specific character, including that of affliction, in socially accepted terms. In this sense, the actor's experience of theatrical malleability, the potential of moving among many different roles, may both reflect and shape sociocultural upbringing. This correlation may underlie the direct and potentially therapeutic impact of performance practices on the experience of everyday life, taking into account that well-being relates both to the microscopic level of individual health and illness and to the macroscopic level of collective life and social policy (Jennings 1994; Laderman and Roseman 1996; Lock and Scheper-Hughes 1996). Preview: Summarizing this Book Part I, Past and Present Spider Webs, sets the scene, showing how the tarantula's cult continues, as it has for centuries, to intrigue Salentines and others alike. On 29 June, St Paul, patron saint of the tarantate, is revered and celebrated. Chapter 1, ‘Seeking St Paul’, 19 Dances with Spiders takes a look at festivities in the town of Galatina, pilgrimage site of his devotees, displaying the contradictory and complex ways in which the tarantula's myth and music have been both preserved and reinvented. Chapter 2, ‘Webs through Time’, places this first-hand scenario in historical perspective. A review of the rich and varied literature on tarantism and its origins shows how this ritual tradition not only represents but also disputes specific conceptions of human nature, society and reality______ Chapter 3, "Curing Myths and Fictive Cures," reveals how the traditional, curative form of the tarantula's dance has died out, with rare exceptions carefully concealed from the public eye. However, for a few elderly Salentines, devotion to the tarantula and St. Paul continues to be the only way out of their misery. The majority of Salento's inhabitants believe that tarantism has been eradicated and is now a myth of the past, with only the music and dance considered worth preserving.

In its novel, reformulated sense, the spider's cult is gaining new fans daily, while its concerts are attracting crowds in the thousands, as Chapter 4, "Ads and Antidotes," confirms. The myth, music, and dance of tarantism inevitably serve contemporary purposes: some seek experiences of "magic" (variously described), or expressive forms accentuating personal virtuosity. Others desire a cultural source of identity and orientation, often reflected in tourist ads and media hype. At the same time, spider dances have become a means through which to take a position and demand change, be it political, ecological, or other.

Chapter 5, "Sensing Identities and Well-being," moves on to look at personal stories behind the buzz continuing to bring alive discourses of recovering well-being. Part III, "From Ritual to Limelight," involves an analysis of ambiguities and contradictions that bring to the fore subtle social dynamics and power structures impeding or fostering well-being. "Dances with spiders" in the Salento implies both performances addressing life crises and festive entertainments shimmering in the 20 Introduction: Tarantula Territory limelight.

Chapter 6, "SpiderWoMen Transfixed," explores what criteria characterize the perceptions and afflictions of old and new tarantati, and questions how these relate to views of human nature and reality, as well as treatment choices more generally. Chapter 7, "Tarantula Threads and Showbiz Airs," takes a look at places, times, props, and techniques making up the complex choreographies of past and present spider dances. In the past, no cure was possible unless the tarantula's thread, that stimulus which persuaded the tarantate to dance, was found. Today, a concert's success depends on detecting the appropriate air or music compelling bystanders to take part and applaud.

Beyond financial backing, networking, and good technological resources, this requires not merely technical virtuosity, but above all the mutual interaction of performers and their willingness to surrender to the music. Chapter 8, "SpiderWoMen Transformed," focuses on personal experiences of the tarantula's music and dance in the context of performance circles ascribed "magic" qualities. It considers how rhythmic interaction can sensitize performers' abilities to access vitality and choices promoting well-being, thereby providing a playground to move beyond the afflicted victim role to that of a creative "choreographer."

The Conclusion, Chapter 9, "Dancing Beyond Spiders," draws together the key threads of this study. Considerations of tarantism and its modern developments suggest that afflictions associated with the tarantula's cult in the past persist under new labels today. It emphasizes the need for a greater sensitivity towards the potential value of certain human conditions, which may be pathologized according to Western psychiatric categories, while being inherently transformative and therapeutic if safeguarded by a network of social support and meaning. What is more, the Salento today reveals how performance arts, such as the pizzica, can effect changes in the perception of ourselves, others, and reality at large. This transformative capacity has the potential not only to distress and divide but also to heal and unite.

Dances with Spiders Notes

1. Hundertwasser Haus, Vienna.
2. The two terms 'tarantism' and 'tarantolism' may be used interchangeably, although the former is more frequently heard in the Salento and hence also adopted in this study. The notion of cult is used here in a broad sense to indicate both a body of organized cultural practices and beliefs shared by a group of people (tarantism in its traditional forms), and a phenomenon that is popular or fashionable among a devoted group of enthusiasts (the contemporary revitalization of the tarantula's music and dance).
3. The tarantella dance characteristic of southern Italy is known for its skipping steps and lively 3/8 or 6/8 rhythms, often in accelerating tempo. There are many regional variations, including the Apulian pizzica or pizzica pizzica, which is today largely associated with the Salento. Interestingly, the term tarantella is rarely used by Salentines to refer to the pizzica, but features in other well-known contexts: as concert pieces, such as Chopin's opus 43; as a theatrical prop in Henrik Ibsen's A Doll's House; and, more recently, as a tarantallegra jinx in J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (1998).
4. Luse the feminine singular and plural forms of these two synonyms to talk about the victims of the tarantula in the past. Although this goes against the conventions of Italian grammar, particularly when speaking about plural forms which also include men, this choice is motivated by the fact that most of those afflicted were women. Generally speaking, both terms (tarantata/tarantato or tarantolata/tarantolato) and both feminine and masculine plural forms (tarantate or tarantati) are used interchangeably, depending on the sex of the victim referred to or the preferences of the speaker. When talking about the contemporary context, I choose the term modern or new (nuovi) tarantati, to refer to those engaging with the symbol of the tarantula today, as both men and women are involved.
5. use the terms 'revitalized' or 'revitalization' in this study, following Tak (2000: 209), to avoid the term 'revival', which may be misread as a return to a previously existing situation, discounting the impact of changes in the political economy.
6. I -use the expression 'tarantula's music and dance' to refer to Salentine music, including especially but not exclusively the pizzica, associated both with past rituals of tarantism and the contemporary revitalization movement. Although this expression risks conflating past and present performances, furthering assumptions of continuity, the notion of 'tarantula' is taken here as a multi-purpose denominator shaped by and shaping diverse, eclectic and potentially contradictory choices, intentions and performances. The pizzica is commonly described as musica popolare in the Salento, a term indicating traditional musical genres that are orally transmitted within a specific ethnic region or group, not to be confused with 'pop music' or commercial genres of music with a widespread and often short-term appeal characterizing Westernized and modernized societies. The term 'folk music' is avoided so as to focus on the specificity of Salentine music, while at the same time acknowledging the vast and varied repertoires characterizing the music and dance scene of the Salento. In this study, the geographical range of the Salento is largely taken to be the Provincia di Lecce — reaching from a few towns just north of the capital to the very southern tip of the peninsula — although the Salento is generally seen to comprise the three provinces of Lecce, Brindisi, and Taranto. This choice is based on the fact that the area around Lecce has been most strongly (but not exclusively) exposed to the revitalization of the pizzica and thus is also largely where I undertook my research.

The Latrodectus tredecim guttatus, also known as the Mediterranean black widow, malmignatte, or karakurt spider, is found throughout the Mediterranean region. It is characterized by thirteen red spots on its otherwise black dorsal abdomen (hence its Latin name for 'thirteen spots'). Its bite is venomous to humans, unlike that of the Lycosa tarantula, or wolf spider, which is essentially harmless. See also, Chapter 6, 'Diagnosing Spiders: Identifying Tarantula Cases'.

'Bites by widow spiders often are initially painful, but sometimes are not felt. The local dermal reaction is minimal, usually consisting of little more than an area of erythema (redness) around the bite site, which disappears within several hours; no tissue necrosis occurs following bites by widow spiders. A potent neurotoxin in the venom induces the disease state latrodectism, which manifests itself with severe muscle cramping and spasms; the cramping usually begins in the large muscle masses of the legs, or the abdomen. The abdomen can exhibit a board-like rigidity, and the pain has been compared to that of acute appendicitis, and to childbirth. Some widow bite victims experience anxiety, profuse sweating, nausea, piloerection (hair standing on end), increased blood pressure, and other unpleasant manifestations. Paralysis, stupor and convulsions, as well as psychological abnormalities may occur in severe cases. Death can occur in a small percentage of cases, particularly when the victim is a small child or elderly person.' 

The origin of this term remains, to my knowledge, unclear. I first came across it in conversations with informants on my arrival in the Salento in April 1997. US scholar Luisa Del Giudice writes: 'I believe I coined this term in 1996 to refer, in conversation and in interviews, to the folk revival movement which had as its point of reference historic tarantismo. I note with the passing of the years that it has become a term with a certain currency' (Del Giudice 2005: 219). Others attribute this notion to the French academic George Lapassade, who undertook research in the Salento during the 1980s, or associate it with the sociologist Anna Nacci, author of the books Tarantismo e neotarantismo (2001) and Neotarantismo (2004). For translations, see De Martino (1966, 1999, 2005). For reviews in English, French, and German, see Anon. (1967); Cassin (1962); De Martino (1961b). In this book, general considerations regarding De Martino's work on tarantism refer to his original 1961 study in Italian (1961a). Specific references to and quotations from this work refer to Dorothy Zinn's 2005 translation. Economic underdevelopment and unemployment are widespread in the Salento, as in much of southern Italy. In the 1960s and 1970s, severe poverty led a large proportion of the working population to emigrate to northern Italy or northern Europe. Many jobs continue to be characterized by unreliable incomes and little, if any, social security, despite modernization in terms of technology, communication, transport and, especially, tourism. This fact is reminiscent of ethnomusicologist Anthony Seeger’s (1987: 25-51) admonition regarding ‘categories of orality’, including both song and speech forms, highlighting the importance of looking at both music and dance in relation to other art forms, as ‘everything is always partly defined by what it is not’ (ibid.: 25). Various types of pizzica songs exist in parallel to religious songs (funeral laments, hymns, Christmas and Lent songs), songs of work and protest, lullabies and rhymes, as well as narrative songs. Dances of the pizzica, moreover, exist today in a context in which village squares host events with musicians and dancers singing and stepping to all kinds of rhythms, particularly during summer nights: from mazurka, polka or waltz, to synchronized group dances and Latin American styles or the less prescribed motions and words of rap and rave fans, not to mention the overflowing open-air discos with their multiple and varied dance floors, dominated by techno and house beats. Dance ethnologist Giuseppe Gala has also coined new labels to speak about the contemporary neopizzica or emopizzica as he calls it: slow-pizzica, trance-pizzica, energico-pizzica, techno-pizzica (Gala 2002a: 109-53). Maurizio Nocera, meanwhile, speaks of the pizzica di sofferenza, the pizzica of suffering, a term he heard various tarantate use to describe their healing dances (Lecce, 1 April 2006). Daniele Vigna explains, for example, that while in the pizzica pizzica the ‘triplet is characteristic, in the scherma circle it is the strong beat which provides the base’ (Monaco 2006: 89). 

The north Italian region of Piedmont, for example, is known for its sword dances in San Giorio, Limone, Giaglione and Venaus (Val di Susa). See Galanti (1950: 7). This confusion in terminology has raised criticism among those who view it as a misrepresentation of historical facts and a repercussion of the widespread popularity of large-scale media events such as the annual Night of the Tarantula concert. 

Beyond the possible (but atypical) local effects of actual bites, visible as red and swollen punctures on the skin, the tarantate revealed a series of general reactions: vomiting, sweating, stomach, muscular and heart pains, nausea, vertigo, fainting, headaches, hyperventilation, cyanosis, dyspnoea, weak pulse, fever, extreme cold, numbness, delirium, loss of appetite, sleepiness, insomnia, fatigue, paralysis, convulsions and trembling (Russell 1979: 410-11). Extremes of bodily and rhythmic mobility or immobility stood out. Behavioural symptoms were equally varied, including depression, a strong sense of fear and anguish, weeping, laughing, permissive sexual conduct, as well as jumping, dancing and singing as symptoms overlapped with treatment techniques.


If we may reduce 2500 years of local history to a snapshot, the region known as the Salento was inhabited in Antiquity by a variety of peoples: the Messapians, lapygians, Bruttii and Sallentini. These people remained partly independent of the strong Greek colonies of Magna Graecia, but both the Greeks and the earlier inhabitants fell to the Romans during their expansion in the third century Bc. Parts of this Roman-held territory were held by the late Roman and Byzantine rulers while the rest was taken by the Longobards from the north. Brief periods of Arab rule in some sites were followed by Byzantine rule in the ninth century, succeeded by a Norman conquest in the late eleventh century. These were followed by Swabian, Angevin, Aragonese, Spanish, Austrian Hapsburg and Bourbon rulers, with a brief Ottoman Turkish presence in the fifteenth century. The overlapping conquests, with their attendant changes of language, faith, costume and music, helped define the Salento prior to the Unification of Italy in 1861 (see Carducci 1993). In 1480, an Ottoman fleet commanded by General Gedik Ahmed Pasha captured the port city of Otranto. Eight hundred citizens refusing to give up their Christian faith were ruthlessly decapitated. Officially recognized as martyrs by the Church, their remains are exhibited to this day in seven large built-in display cabinets in the city's cathedral.


I use the notion 'Salentines' here to refer to the inhabitants of the Salento. However, it is vital to note that this geographically defined group includes highly diverse members in historical, cultural and ethnic terms.

Maurizio Nocera, Lecce, 1 April 2006, and Luigi Chiriatti, Lecce, 2 February 1998. Vittorio Marras, Nardò, 9 May 2006. See Beattie (1977), Turner (1982, 1989), Schechner (1985) and Beeman (1993) for discussions on the notions of ritual and theatre.

In his book Opillopillopiopillopillopa: viaggio nella musica popolare salentina 1970-1998, Luigi Chiriatti (1998) lists the following groups: Aia Noa, Alla Bua, Arakne Mediterranea, Argalio, Astéria, Avlieddha, Canzoniere Grecanico Salentino, Compagnia delle Arti Xanti Jaca, Ghetonia, I Coreuti, Le Striare, Mascarimiri, Menamenaméd, Officina Zoé, Pierpaolo de Giorgi e I Tamburellisti di Torrepaduli, Terra de Menzu, Traudia. By 2007, a number of these groups no longer existed. For most there has been a turnover of group members. Others, such as Gli Ucci, are not mentioned. Meanwhile, other groups have emerged. These include: Acchiatira, Aioresis, Ajara, Antonio Amato Ensemble, Aria Antica, Aria Corte, Aria Frisca, Arsura, Artenoscia, Athanaton, Briganti di Terra d'Otranto, Conserva Mara, Cotulapete, Criamu, Erva, Gli amici della Taranta, I Calanti, I Figli di Rocco/Maneka, (ex Figli di Rocco), I Scianari, Kalime te Scirocco, Kamafei (ex Kumenei), Kumenei, L'Ardiche, La Taricata, La 'zzamara, Lu Rusciu Nosciu, Macaria, Mays, Nidi d'Arak, Niuri te Sule, Oce te jentu, Original Salento Tarantae, Quista é@ la strada delle donne belle, Salentorkestra, Salentotd, Santu Pietru cu tutte le chiai, Scazzaca Tarante, Tammurria, Terreneure, Zimbaria. This list does not claim to be comprehensive, as groups may form and break up, nor does it give a sense of respective media coverage and popularity.

All translations, unless otherwise stated, are my own and I take full responsibility for any misunderstandings. The quotations cited draw from my field notes, transcribed tape recordings and conversations retrieved from memory or elaborated from memos taken during interviews______ See Cohen (1994), Morris (1994), and Gingrich (2004) for discussions on the notions of ‘self’ and ‘other’ in anthropology. See Gupta and Ferguson (1997) and Rapport (2003) for discussions on the power to define and transform the ‘self’ in social and cultural contexts that cannot be spatially localized. Gingrich (2004: 14) outlines successive stages in anthropological debates on identity, starting with the 1940s studies on culture and personality, the 1960s neo-Marxist approaches, the turn towards self-reflexivity characterizing research in the 1980s, and the 1990s criticism of identity as a notion conceptualized on the basis of static or fixed notions. For a problematization of the notion of globalization, see Inda and Rosaldo (2002).

Steven Feld (2000: 146-51) traces the emergence of world music within the global music industry in relation to broader processes of globalization. For a discussion of key problems entailed in the notion of performance, see Schieffelin (1996: 59-84).

Part I Past and Present Spider Webs
For centuries, the tarantula ruled the lives and thoughts of many inhabitants of the Salentine peninsula. In present-day Salento, it has woven its way onto the stage. The initial chapter, ‘Seeking St Paul’, sets the scene, throwing the spotlight on Galatina, trophy town of the spider cult, ever since the interception of the Catholic Church brought the wild dances of the tarantate under the rule of their patron saint St Paul. On 29 June, his feast day is celebrated, and in 2001, the pilgrimages of old and new tarantati converged here, bringing to the fore contradictions and complexities that have puzzled thinkers for at least seven centuries. Chapter 2, ‘Webs through Time’, spins this first-hand account into the vicissitudes of European history, unravelling the dynamic links between views of human nature, society, and reality at large.

Fig. 1.1 The Festival of St Peter and Paul, Galatina, 28 June 1999. The religious procession with the statue of St Paul and the golden bust of St Peter (photo: Karen Liidtke). Figs 1.2 and 1.3 The tarantate in Galatina in the early 1970s, dancing on the San Pietro piazza and before the altar inside St Paul's chapel (photos: Paolo Longo).

Chapter 1 Seeking St Paul: Historical and Contemporary Enactments
My Saint Paul of the tarantulas, you who have stung all the girls. My Saint Paul of Galatina, give me, and all the others, grace.! I follow Evelina and her family into the main church on the city's central square, San Pietro piazza, to attend the first mass of this festival day, as I have ever since we first met in 1998, on the eve of St Paul's feast day. It takes a little while to get there: on the square, Evelina's son and his wife explain that Evelina had been fine this morning, but had gone through her 'troubles' earlier in the year." As we stand and listen, others gather around to ask a question or two. Evelina's family speaks openly about this without much ado. In April and especially in May, they had come to Galatina, to St Paul's chapel, on several occasions, sometimes even at night. They had been extremely concerned, fearing Evelina might die, as she would faint for up to two hours. This was at a time when her grandson was due to leave to work in the north of Italy, and they wondered if her condition was linked to his coming departure. They had consulted the family doctor and village priest, but both had advised them to simply wait, knowing that her pilgrimage to St Paul's chapel in Galatina would bring relief. It appeared to offer the only source of alleviation. It was only 4.30 a.m. when I arrived in Galatina, city of St Peter and Paul, on 29 June 2001. Festivities mark this feast day and the cult of St Paul, offshoot of the tarantula’s cult, is taking its modern 31 Dances with Spiders course, both unique in this cultural context and yet similar to pilgrimages elsewhere (Dubisch and Winkelman 2005). I begin here with an account of what happened in Galatina in the early hours of St Peter and Paul’s feast day in 2001. It was the fifth time I had witnessed this event. Never before, however, had I felt so many diverse strands of the tarantula’s world come together on one occasion. As old and new tarantati mingled with onlookers and devotees, tensions between what was seen as real or fake emerged, as did the defensiveness and desperation of some appropriating this site for the expression of their personal crises. This occasion brought to the fore key actors and key dynamics composing the worlds of tarantism and neo-tarantism today.

The following description of what happened on Galatina’s main square on 29 June 2001 makes reference to film footage shot on this very town square in preceding decades, aiming to paint a picture of what has been and is a central stage of the tarantula’s cult [see Fig 1.2]. Dances at Galatina: a Crossroads of Old and New Tarantati

Ever since the Catholic Church began to clamp down on dance rituals in the eighteenth century, Paul, protector against poisonous animals, spouse and saviour of the tarantate, has attracted the tarantula’s victims to Galatina in their attempts to gain relief. The chapel of St Paul at Galatina has proven to be their most resilient public performance platform. Paul’s followers draw their faith from the Bible’s account in the New Testament (Acts 28: 3—5), which documents his immunity to a snakebite following a shipwreck on Malta (Montinaro 1996; Ligori et al. 2001). In his travels Paul is to have passed through Galatina. Nicola Caputo (1741) describes: aid the local belief according to which St Paul landed on the Otranto peninsula and went to the town of Galatina to visit some of its Christians. While there, he bestowed upon a local Christian and his descendants the power to heal those bitten by poisonous animals, by making the sign of the cross over the wound and having the victim drink water from ... the well attached to the house known as casa di San Paolo. (Gentilcore 2000: 267) Only in the eighteenth century was a chapel built inside this house on Via Garibaldi and dedicated to the apostle. Its well was believed to 32 Seeking St Paul hold healing water, making it a gathering point for the tarantate.* By 1959, the well was closed for hygienic reasons and the chapel itself was deconsecrated a few years later. Nevertheless, Paul is the reason behind the small crowd scattered in front of the chapel entrance. Architecturally, little hints at the significance of this doorway. It is identical to the other front portal of the building in which the chapel is set.* And yet this inconspicuous site has attracted innumerable pilgrims since its consecration and, what is more, continues to do so. As I walk into the chapel, I see a starved, strained body crouched on the altar steps below the tapestry of St Paul. It is impossible to identify who this is, but the tense muscles and cramped posture speak for themselves. A man enters the chapel with a guitar, kneels by the shrine and begins to play softly. The sounds are directed towards the distraught body, which collapses onto its left side, moving away from the guitar and indicating for the music to stop. The musician rises and exits, leaving the inert devotee stretched out in front of the altar. Only after some twenty minutes does this young man come to his feet, against what appears to be an enormous weight pulling him down. It is Matteo. I had never seen him before. He leaves the chapel with heavy, tormented strides, as if immune to those around and seemingly not quite present.

Now there is a small group with tambourines and other instruments just outside the chapel restlessly playing pieces of Salentine music. Voices ring out, repeating one of the well-known hymns of the tarantate: 'Santu Paulu meu de le tarante'. Their songs evoke the tarantula, St Paul and Galatina, but are mostly cut short, as if in nervous anticipation of an interruption they would rather pre-empt.

There is Annalt Sabetta, known by some as Ia striara, the witch. In her role as 'astrologist, singer, guitar and accordion player, assistant to the tarantate' (Collu 2005: 123), she is — almost imperceptibly — directing the goings-on at the chapel. She calls out to the musicians: 'Tl grant you three, four more minutes.' It is she who has left a bouquet of dried flowers and peacock feathers wrapped in red crépe paper on the altar. With it, on a white note, there is a dedication: 'For Luigi Stifani'. Annali explains that she had been in Galatina on this precise day last year, the day that Stifani, famous musician of the tarantate, had died (Stifani 2000; Inchingolo 2003). 'It is significant', she adds, 'that he died on this very day!' This final passage of his life, too, is seen as marked by a link to the tarantula.

Annali is not the only one to identify omens in significant coincidences: in the past, the diagnoses of the tarantate, too, were often based on haphazard encounters with poisonous animals or St Paul, seen to be causative incidents for their afflictions.

A young man approaches Annalu: 'You're a witch, aren’t you?' She responds with a laugh, theatrically mocking herself without giving a clear reply: 'Ooooh, yes, I fly!' and her arms swoop up and down in winged motions. Then, she steps out of the chapel and from its threshold, stretches up both arms, directing her attention to the group of young musicians and repeatedly closing her hands into fists. They oblige her gesture and, reluctantly, stop playing.

It begins to rain. Not so distant lightning and thunder set the scene. I stand sheltered under the eaves talking to photographer Fernando Bevilacqua, in his fifties and fervent supporter of local musicians and artists. I’m not surprised to see him here. As we talk, Matteo, moving uneasily around the square, approaches Fernando, interrupting our conversation: 'Even the skies have heard my plea!' Fernando seconds his interpretation: 'If somebody wants something strongly enough, things happen.' Matteo welcomes the rain, the water, while Fernando draws a connection beyond coincidence, perhaps evoking the purifying and cooling qualities of these drops.

Apart from the hum of some thirty people and various video cameras hovering around the chapel entrance, the streets of Galatina are only just beginning to wake up. A rubbish van or two empty dustbins. Cleaners sweep around market stalls, scooping up the dirty traces of the previous night’s celebrations. The first vendors, having spent the night behind their stands closed in by canvas blinds, begin to stretch and surface for a coffee in a nearby bar, open early for festive profits. The street lights still throw shadows onto the piazza and the zone carved out by those who have come for St Paul’s sake is randomly criss-crossed by others who are oblivious to this space or simply tolerant of it. Cars pass by the chapel, some with partygoers returning home from the previous night’s disco, unaware of the hush their passing sends through the small crowd. Will their car stop in front of the chapel doorway? Someone is clearly being expected.

To the citizens of Galatina, this occasion must appear mild and harmless in comparison to not so long ago. Many tell vivid accounts of what happened here in their lifetimes, in the twentieth century. Some tarantate, I was told, came to Galatina on foot, many by carriage and, in later years, by bus or car. Their symptoms often worsened in anticipation of this journey. Some fell into a crisis on departure from their homes. Others saw their crises reappear as they crossed the gates of Galatina. Some stopped here to urinate, expelling bodily fluids as they drew closer to the abode of their celestial husband, St Paul: perhaps a way of providing release from the agitation of coming once again face to face with their fate? Other tarantate collapsed as they arrived at the chapel of St Paul. Some eyewitnesses report that it was as if the venue itself and the presence of other tarantate created a contagious reaction, which caused the crises of the newly arrived to re-emerge.

‘I’ve been terrified at times to come here,’ says Evelina’s daughter-in-law. ‘Other tarantate seemed to go crazy, shrieking about and jumping around on the altar.' Many performed frantic rounds on San Pietro piazza in front of the small chapel, at times attacking the crowds, infuriated by photographers and cameramen, many of whom took refuge on strategic rooftops and balconies. Everyone who grew up in Galatina knew better than to wear bright clothes or shiny objects on the days the tarantate came to town. Too many had fallen victim to their assaults. Today, these are stories people love to tell.

Often it was a bright shirt or dress, red or yellow in particular, or a watch catching the sunlight, which attracted the tarantate’s vexed attention and left the terrified owners escaping for their lives, so as not to be left standing on the square, as had happened to others, watchless or, worse still, stripped naked. Intriguingly enough, red is also the colour marking the dorsal abdomen of the European black widow, one of the spider types held responsible for the tarantate’s plight.

Verbal assaults still mark the morning of 29 June 2001. ‘Andate via! Andate via borghesi!’ (Go away! Go away, bourgeois!) The angry shouts of Matteo ring out from where he is sitting between two young women in hippy attire on a doorstep opposite the chapel. Interestingly, his antagonism evokes a prevailing image of southern Italy as defined by what it historically lacked in relation to an ideal model of northern Italian cities: namely, a bourgeoisie, among other factors (Gribaudi 1996). Matteo’s voice is directed towards a small group, among whom I recognize the face of a university professor who is also studying the contemporary buzz around the tarantula. A debate is going on about whether anybody would still come to pay their respects to St Paul or whether all were here in vain, wishfully thinking things were still going to happen. ‘Get lost! Go away!’ Again and again Matteo defends this site, appropriated this year for his own needs, echoing through his own proprietary manner the middle-class bullying he is attacking, while, perhaps, distancing himself from his own — possibly middle-class — upbringing. Annalii moves over to him, conveying some restraining words in passing. Inside the chapel, meanwhile, the altar carries the traces of other devotees. There is a bottle of milk. It was left by one devotee, a young woman in her thirties, well-known for her striking voice. There is also a piece of round bread, left by a middle-aged man, with ragged hair, torn trousers, bare feet and a strong smell of alcohol, who is now distributing pieces of another loaf to everyone present.

An elderly lady dressed all in black (perhaps an ex-tarantata?) appears on the chapel threshold. A man is by her side. Their manner radically distinguishes them from those who have come so far. The woman walks reluctantly, trailing a little behind her companion, clearly disturbed and unsettled. Is it the crowd looking on? Is it the memories this site stirs up? Is it the fear of what it might bring alive? She kneels a few steps away from the altar, keeping a little behind her companion’s legs as if to shield herself, while making the sign of the cross. Her lips move in prayer. After no more than a minute or two, both leave in restrained haste. An air of relief moves through the small room. Everyone starts to breathe again, moving joints gone stiff.

For a moment, our attention had been completely captivated and I am left in awe: a split-second sense of the deep-seated, possibly apprehensive, devotion that has brought so many to this shrine, stage of the last public performances of tarantism. This perception evokes images of the tarantate in my mind, footage shot by Gianfranco Mingozzi in Galatina in the early 1960s.° A tarantata all dressed in white drags her feet to the chapel entrance, leaning heavily on two supporters. Another is carried over the threshold. Her limbs drop loosely and heavily. Inside the chapel the light is dim. Flames, brought here as signs of devotion, flicker through the red plastic of cylindrical wax containers.

An old lady lies on the only available bench. Her fingers clasp the hand of a man sitting by her petrified face. A hooded figure squats on the altar step. A young girl in white kneels in front of St Paul’s barricaded statue, while a relative supports her from behind. Another tarantata has climbed on top of the altar. Her head leans against St Paul’s tapestry, as if listening attentively, hopefully.

Voices and prayers ring through the air. They are melodic, desperate, grateful and occasionally punctuated by the piercing cry of the tarantate: ‘A-hi!’ Inquisitive faces, framed in sunlight, peer through the chapel’s portal. The crowd outside is packed tightly. Some are there for the festival, many to witness the tarantate.

The mass of onlookers splits open at a tarantata’s command. Dressed in black she approaches the chapel on her knees, cutting an aisle into the surrounding throng. She moves, at first, as if lame or injured. Then, suddenly, she is on her feet, galloping back and forth. The crowd retreats as her steps carve out a large circle. Her arm thrashes upwards threatening the film camera shooting from an overlooking balcony. A policeman seeks to calm her male assistant, enraged by the film crew. The afflicted continues her reckless rounds. Her guardian stands motionless, hands on hips. She begins to swirl on the spot and he moves close, holding his arms around her body and skilfully catching it as she drops backwards, unconscious, it seems. With a slight gesture he summons the policeman nearby to pass over a cushion lying ready, which he tucks under her tousled hair. The festival procession passes [see Fig. 1.1]. Accompanied by a band, the papier-mâché statue of St Paul and the golden bust of St Peter are paraded through the city center. Clergy in full ceremonial attire lead the way past gaudy market stalls and underneath arched festival frameworks of bright, colored light bulbs. A tarantata races out of the chapel, attacking and splitting the crowd. A policeman blocks her attempts to reach the procession, and she is taken back to the chapel with three others controlling her convulsions and resistance. More tarantate arrive. Others leave. A tug on my arm brings me back to the present, interrupting the movie passing in my mind.

Marilena Angrisani greets me. She is from Naples, in her twenties, and it is the third year we meet at Galatina. Her graduate thesis was based on a month of fieldwork on women's views of tarantism (Angrisani 2000). Like her, there are others I only ever see on this occasion, once a year. Michela Almiento also completed a thesis on the tarantate (Almiento 1990). From Brindisi and now in her forties, she is one of the few to have participated in the last rituals reported to have taken place here in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Her friendship with the tarantata who danced then has brought her back each year to face St Paul together with this elderly lady. We met initially through my own research.

Then I greet Ada Metafune, physiotherapist and well-known dancer of the pizzica. We know each other well, but I have never seen her in Galatina before. She has told me how her life has been marked by the pizzica, leading her to describe herself as a modern tarantata.

Dances with Spiders

We squat next to each other in the chapel, waiting, and she tells me that she has always wanted to come, but has never quite managed to make it at four in the morning. "Perhaps I wasn't ready?" she wonders. "But this year I told myself we're going!" She invites me to her house later in the day. A television crew has asked her to re-enact a ritual dance for them. She has done this many times, on stage and for the camera, but insists that this will be the last: "I want to hang up the frock of the tarantate! It's as if I've passed that phase now, as if this last time today will close the circle. It's not by chance that they've asked me to do this just now."

Once again, just like Matteo's reference to the rain, coincidences are read like omens, as personal trajectories are seen to cross those of the external world in more than a random manner, creating a sense of invisible forces at play.

I meet Fabio. "There're always lots of disrespectful people," he says. "Maybe this year we too can do something to maintain a bit of respect!" Clearly Annalii isn't the only one concerned about safeguarding this occasion. She knows this place and most people there. She is also the first to announce the arrival of another newcomer: "Look who's coming! Crazy horse!" She uses the English words to refer to the nickname of this strongly built man in his early thirties: Claudio "Cavallo" (literally meaning "horse") Giagnotti and his group Mascarimiri are well-known for their progressive approach to Salentine popular music or "trad-innovazione", as they like to call it (Romano 2006; Colopi and Giagnotti 2008).

It is almost 6 a.m. when a car finally stops directly in front of the chapel entrance. It is carrying a tiny elderly lady, wrapped in black and accompanied by four relatives. Like a magnet, their arrival gathers the waiting crowd dispersed in the vicinity into a tight throng around the chapel entrance. The tiny woman is Evelina. She gets out of the car without any assistance and steps towards the chapel. I haven't seen her for a while. She extends both hands to me in greeting, but keeps on walking. It is St Paul she has come to see and he is the one she must greet. A few steps into the shrine, a shrill cry emanates from her body and her arms fly up, as if hit by a laser beam radiating from the tapestry depicting St Paul above the altar. She collapses into the arms of two family members, who gently place her nimble body onto a sheet and cushion spread out on the ground. She lies there, immobile, for a few minutes. The air in the chapel is dense with anticipation. Onlookers line the walls, standing or crouching, seemingly sunk away in contemplation, with a combination of respect and curiosity creating a strange mix of outwardly attentive introspection.

After no more than a few minutes, Evelina begins to move her limbs and opens her eyes. Her daughter-in-law helps her to her feet and space is made on the small bench flanking the chapel wall, where she sits quietly, lost in herself, looking strained and extremely tired. For almost half a century now, coming to Galatina has proven to be the only balm for her suffering. ‘Sometimes, in June, we had to come three or four times a day,’ says her son. His wife adds: ‘In 1968, it was much worse. Now for some ten years she has been better. It’s strange, since there’s no apparent reason. They say that when the tarantula that bites you dies you feel better too, but you mustn’t take Evelina as an example. She doesn’t move much and never danced.’!° Evelina’s offering to the saint has always been that of a pilgrimage, channelling her crises according to modified ritual terms, more acceptable than ritual dances, although officially dismissed by Catholic doctrine.

Traumatic events have conditioned her life: the death of her brother and father at an early age and the birth of her child out of wedlock. Condemned to remain single by social and religious mores, she has increasingly isolated herself in her homestead, with trips to work on the fields and her pilgrimage to Galatina becoming exceptional forays beyond its walls. This year she appears to be in better shape. Often, in the past, she would faint before leaving the house on St Paul’s day and her family had to drive her to Galatina unconscious. In previous years, her grandson tells, ‘she was lying on the back seat, giving off muffled sounds. Her fingers were clawed together like the fangs of a spider, occasionally twitching, as if wanting to grab or bite something.”'!

The tarantula’s presence is identified in Evelina’s bodily state of rigidity and as a common part of her environment. ‘La nonna (Gran)’, as she is affectionately called, ‘seems to attract spiders. In the fields too, there are always some around her. She never kills them.’!? Even in the absence of music and dance, the feared spider is seen to have singled out Evelina. Now too, in the chapel, she is the centre of everyone's attention, although many squat or lean against the chapel walls as if lost in prayer or contemplation, not wanting to appear too inquisitive.

Suddenly, the fulcrum of attention swerves. Matteo is carried into the chapel, having abandoned himself to the arms of Fernando and Cavallo. Evelina blurs out of focus as they place him on the ground by the altar steps. Matteo’s pleas to St Paul blend with those to Cavallo: ‘Aiutami! Suona per me!’ (Help me! Play for me!) Cavallo stands, hands drooping indecisively by the side of his large body, uncertain, it seems, about how to react. Someone brings in a tambourine and Fernando speaks out in a firm, quiet voice: “Can we all leave?” Evelina’s son is the first to exit. Others move towards the door, hesitating at the threshold, through which the lens of a video camera cranes. Even Evelina is disturbed. She gets to her feet and, accompanied by her daughter-in-law, moves to the small room behind the altar closed off by a thick red curtain. Before leaving the chapel, she must urinate (her family brings a plastic container carried in an inconspicuous paper bag) to expel what is tormenting her in a final act of release. Once again, bodily fluids cross bodily boundaries, reversing the direction of poison seen to be injected through the skin’s surface. Then Evelina too leaves the chapel with the rest of her family.

I sit for a split second more, torn between the desire and curiosity to observe what will happen and the request for everyone to leave. I decide to leave and consequently rely on the fragmented tales of others to describe what happened next behind the closed chapel door, acting as both a visual and a partial acoustic barrier. Initially, I am told, a few people managed to remain in the chapel. A man came out calling for a young girl for whom Matteo had asked. Ada recounts later how Matteo furiously beat around himself at the outset and she had found herself the target of one of his blows. We joke about this (perhaps with more than an ounce of belief?), evoking contagious magic: no doubt, he will have conveyed some vital energy to her for her performance later that day. Eventually, others confirm, only Cavallo with his tambourine and the young female friend had remained in the chapel with Matteo. When he finally exited, one witness remarks later, it seemed without doubt that he had found relief.

In the meantime, I accompany Evelina and her family into the church and we move to the same row of seats as each year. At the end of the service, Evelina and her daughter-in-law go up to the altar to take communion. Then we move on, as in previous years, to the niche where the bust of St Peter stands, before circling the pews to the other side wing to see the statue of the saviour himself: St Paul. His papier maché figure is imposingly spotlighted from below. Elevated on a pedestal above the ground, it stands among flowers and 40 Seeking St Paul behind neat rows of electric lights, each lit by a devotee’s prayer and a coin or two tinkling into the wooden box of offerings. St Paul’s robes are a striking red and green. One arm is poised across his chest, while his weight rests lightly on his left sandalled foot, accentuating the long, silver sword he is carrying like a walking stick. By his feet, on either side, two cherubs hover in space: one carries an open book, the other a green serpent stretching through the air. The apostle’s gaze is framed by his bearded face and crowned by rays of gold. A number of devotees stretch across the line of lights to touch his gown, his feet, his body, securing his blessing through direct contact. Sometimes a paper handkerchief is used and then safely tucked away into a pocket or handbag. St Paul’s followers are numerous and it seems that most citizens of Galatina come to see him at least once during the festival days. Others arrive from elsewhere. For many the tarantula is nowhere in the picture. For Evelina’s family, meanwhile, the spider is present and the reason behind their prayers and the lighting of yet another small lamp or more at St Paul’s feet. Eventually, at a relaxed pace, we leave the church and cross the main square to the local Eros Bar for a coffee. A few sips of strong caffeine mark the end of this year’s visit. Evelina’s may not be a ritual of music and dance, but it is nevertheless a pilgrimage with ritualized phases: the passage to Galatina by car; a visit to the chapel of St Paul; attendance at the early morning service; a quick drink in the nearest bar; and, finally, the return journey home. As we say goodbye, a young man (years later I discover he is from Ostuni, near Brindisi, and also doing research on tarantism) approaches Evelina together with a friend, asking whether they could say goodbye to her. They shake her hand and kiss her cheeks. Later our paths cross, and both ask, a little worried, if it had been inopportune of them to greet Evelina. It didn’t seem so to me, yet, inevitably, their gesture creates a mark, an aura attributed to Evelina by way of their move, reminiscent of those seeking contact with St Paul’s statue to guarantee his blessing. She is one of the very few still propelled to Galatina in the midst of crises and, as such, stands as a bridge between the tarantate of history and present circumstances in which the tarantate have gained new fame. I wonder what significance this tiny, elderly lady holds in the eyes of these two young men. I never did find out, as they leave quickly, almost timidly, but I imagine she may represent a living memorial to the rituals that once 41 Dances with Spiders marked the territory of the Salento and are now retrospectively spectacularized (if not glorified), as well as a source of hope for those going through crises themselves. Evelina and her family have left and I find myself jolted back to a different present. Once again my gaze extends to a wide angle, taking in what is happening all around the square. I wander across the square to a bar next to the chapel. Downstairs there is a small group of people I had met earlier: Fernando, Michela, Fabio, Enza. The conversation swerves to Matteo’s case, as we struggle to confront this incident with the existing categories in our minds. Was his behaviour acceptable or completely out of place? Was it real or put on? My immediate feeling was that his behaviour was one of imitation and manipulation, highly desiring of attention. Condemning his actions, I realized I was rejecting him for precisely the reasons for which the tarantate have been accused for centuries: for putting on a show while asking for a cure — an apparent paradox that is anything but new. Already in 1771, the English traveller Burney was convinced that tarantism was ‘an imposition practised by the people of Apulia to gain money: that not only the cure but the malady itself is a fraud’ (Burney 1771: 313). By the year 2001, this notion of fraud or fiction has not lost its pertinence. On the contrary, it appears more acute than ever, turning a spotlight on the link between performance and therapy: is the ‘show’ part of the cure? Or is it the best way of avoiding the steps and changes required for recovery to take place and essentially maladaptive? My sense is that both are possible. Later in the day, watching Ada dance would allow me to reflect further on this. In the meantime, in the Galatina bar, people’s views differ. Fernando is adamant: ‘Matteo is a tarantato. In my opinion, what happened today has only, once again, verified prejudices towards tarantism. The tarantate in the past, too, were ‘faking’, in the sense of finding an alternative route of cathartic escape, and, perhaps, also conscious of this. In the end, each one of us here is a tarantato for some reason or another. "What happened this morning," Enza disagrees, "is different from what happened in the past, to the tarantate. For them, the moment of trance was important. This morning, there was none of that."

"I wanted to throw Matteo out of the chapel," Fabio responds vehemently. "I felt that his behavior was disrespectful towards the tarantate. In the past, they had no choice. It was the only way of getting better. It was the only way out that peasant culture presented. But Matteo doesn't know anything about this culture. Don't get me wrong. He's a friend, I'm fond of him, and I don't like to see him suffer, but I don't agree with what happened this morning. It's a personal issue. It has nothing to do with tarantism!"

Relationship, work, and health problems are mentioned as triggers for Matteo's presence in Galatina. Disjunctures appear to mark all major webs of his life, and we may wonder to what extent his problems were also related to the fact that the display of his crisis could not be enacted in his home, in the presence of key people in his life.

A little while later, I come across Cavallo and others talking just outside the chapel. Cavallo is one of the stars of this morning's show, yet right now, clearly, this isn't a suit he is too keen to wear. "What really bothered me," he points out, "were all the people there. It's not like I feel at ease doing this kind of thing. There is also the woman from Scorrano who comes to ask me to play for her. But I never have. I just give her a tape." He is referring to one of the few other elderly tarantate who apparently still performed rituals at Galatina in the 1990s.

Months later, I meet Cavallo on the streets of Lecce, and he mentions that, since playing for Matteo, he has gained prestige as a musician in the eyes of some. Although he himself does not seem to live this experience unambiguously, others have invested it with their own meanings: he was elected, he was seen as capable of intervening, he had, perhaps, had a glimpse of another reality, that of tarantism, glorified now that it was apparently, and with the exception of a few cases, out of reach. Crisis and celebrity seem to feed each other. Being catapulted into playing for someone in crisis has boosted Cavallo's celebrity, almost independently of his own will.

Clearly, the notion of tarantism is used to reflect many different realities. At first glance, show business, fashion, and fun appear to have replaced issues of personal crisis. At the same time, they may also serve to deflect these. Beyond the open, public, and academic discourses on the tarantula's dance, there are other private, more silent discourses founded largely on direct, visceral experiences of the tarantula's music and dance.

A key question that arose for me, however, on this morning of 29 June 2001, was whether Matteo and Evelina really wanted to get better. Were they ready to make the changes required to overcome what was making them suffer? Or were their actions in effect reinforcing the status quo of what was making them suffer? My feeling was that the powerful myth of the tarantula (considering particularly its revitalized fame) can and could work both ways: as a way of accessing alternative and potentially curative experiences and perspectives on reality with the assistance of others, as well as a way of demanding change from others so as not to put oneself in jeopardy of change. In this sense, ‘putting on a show’ may act either to confront or to conceal crises. Dances on Screen: Invention versus Intention

The tarantate were attributed various degrees of celebrity or notoriety throughout history: they were well-known and their rituals attracted attention. The critiques of Matteo appear to mirror this historical paradox of being both revered and castigated. A look at two performances captured on film — one performed with the prime aim of healing in 1959 and the other staged for a television series in 2001 — and the contexts in which they are taken and shown reveal key issues regarding the authenticity of enactments and the centrality of intentions in the performative process.

Maria’s 1959 Domestic Ritual: a Historical Performance

A small, crowded room sets the scene. It is lit up by two flickering candles and by the rays of the sun falling from a door frame and tiny window. An unmade bed leans against one wall, tipping to the ground on one side, as if two of its legs have been amputated to allow its occupant to roll effortlessly onto the floor. A small altar with religious images framed by flowers hangs from the wall and on the bedside table next to a flask of water stands a picture of St Peter and Paul. A red cloth masks the chimney, with a crucifix on its mantelpiece. The floor is cleared, except for a few chairs and benches on the edge, seating observers and the musicians, including recently deceased violinist Luigi Stifani, a guitarist and an accordion and tambourine player. A white sheet is spread across the ground, delimiting the ritual perimeter. In one corner stands a basket with offerings of money and paper icons depicting St Peter and Paul. Within the sheet’s contours, a young woman lies prostrate. She must be in her late twenties. Her dress and belt are white, and her ruffled skirt reveals long, white underwear, frilled at the ends. She is barefoot and her hair falls over her face and shoulders in tousled strains. Underneath, her 44 Seeking St Paul expression is harsh and immobile, punctuated by eyes that open and close in response to the pizzica beats reverberating through the room.

These are images of the dance of Maria of Nardd, rendered famous among the tarantate by Ernesto De Martino’s book La terra del rimorso (1961a), the most in-depth and well-known study on tarantism to date. The film La terapia coreutico-musicale del tarantismo (Carpitella 1960) shows her dance on 24 June 1959 (De Martino 2005: 38-46), and is, to my knowledge, the first cinematographic document of these rituals, despite the many mutations already affecting this tradition as socio-economic and religious pressures were leading to its demise. Maria’s dance, as captured in Carpitella’s film, is one of the only domestic rituals not staged for the camera documented on celluloid. Ever since, with a few exceptions, photographers and camera teams have had to rely on reproductions: staged rituals performed by tarantate, or substitute actors, paid to do so.'3 Forty-two years later, for the festival of St Peter and Paul on 30 June 2001, this original footage is projected onto a massive screen hoisted in front of the baroque facade of Galatina’s main church on the San Pietro piazza. A spotlighted stage flanks the canvas sheet across which black and white figures move: shots of Maria’s ritual and others of the tarantate performing their crises on the very pavement now packed with the film’s standing audience. A strange disjuncture appears: moments of the past, hovering ghostlike a few metres above the ground, continuing to place a spell on those looking on, now safe to wear whatever colour they please, with a remote-control option to switch off a performance that the Church fought to extinguish for centuries. It is a screened, carefully canned version of tarantism, available in easily digestible portions, and subsequently washed (and danced) down to the beat of the pizzica and other Salentine music, as various local bands perform on stage [see Fig. 8.1]. Meanwhile, the ritual filmed by Carpitella (1960) continues on screen, and I elaborate it here with details from De Martino’s (De Martino 2005: 38–44) written accounts of the very same ritual:

Four men in light summer clothes and sandals play the violin, tambourine, guitar, and accordion. Their faces are marked by fatigue, the effect of playing from dawn to dusk, with nothing but brief breaks. Their notes bombard the distraught-looking woman lying lethargically on the floor without reacting to the melodies proposed. Then, triggered by a new piece, she begins to move, taking up the rhythm. Her feet tap and her head moves rapidly from side to side. She shuffles across the floor on her shoulders, increasing the momentum. Knees arched, she propels herself backwards on alternate heels, circling the entire ritual perimeter with her arms stretched out or folded on her chest. At one point, she tries to thread her body through the legs of a wicker chair, which tumbles over. She follows, rolling over and over, moving across the floor. She wrenches herself forward on her stomach, seeking the proximity of the instruments, as if hungry to absorb, almost touch, every note. The violinist kneels down in response to her approach. His bow moves close to her ear and propels her onto her knees with her hands crouched in front of her, chest tipping rhythmically from side to side, embodying mutual interactions of ‘call and response.’

Abruptly, the tarantata springs to her feet and runs in circles, never losing the rhythm. Her moves include those of the pizzica, some danced on the spot, while a handkerchief, clasped between both hands, marks others. Her feet hit the ground rapidly, over and over again: stamping, crushing, destroying. Without warning, a newcomer appears at the door, dressed in a bright red and yellow striped pullover. The young tarantata becomes agitated and wavers visibly. The intruder is chased away with violent accusations, but the invisible chord between dancer and musicians has snapped. The tarantata remains perturbed, as if inebriated and fails to respond to the rhythm the musicians strike up again. Quickly, coloured ribbons are sought in remedy, as colours, like sounds and movements, are part of the ritual remedy kit. Different ribbons are thrown towards the young woman. She ignores them at first. Then one provokes her attention. She grabs the strip of fabric, fixes it with her gaze and shreds it to pieces with her teeth. Only then does she gradually pick up the musical rhythm again and the ritual framework is retrieved. Eventually, the rounds danced by the young tarantata diminish in circumference. She twirls in a pirouette, loses the rhythm and collapses. Prepared arms bolster her fall and gently lower her head onto a cushion. A cover is draped over her resting limbs. The musicians stop playing and wipe off their sweat. Water and food are brought for refreshment, but the pause is only brief. The dance must go on. Only late in the evening does the music stop as a man bursts into the house, angrily dispelling the crowd. He is the employer of the young dancer and urgently anticipates her return to work. It is he who has anticipated the money (to be worked off by the tarantata later on) to pay the musicians. For the time being, treatment is rescheduled for the following day. The next morning, the first musical chords stretch the tarantata's body into an arc: her spine flexes into a bridge resting on her strained neck and heels. Within a few seconds, she drops onto her back and rolls off the bed onto the ground. Numerous dance cycles are repeated. A short break is taken at noon, and only in the early afternoon, winks between experienced bystanders confirm the first signs that recovery is close. The afflicted had eaten a little earlier. She keeps on emitting short, shrill screams. Her dance phases are shorter now and show a greater variety of steps. Then, finally, she breaks off in mid-cycle, signals to the musicians to stop playing, and steadfastly walks to her bed. Relief spreads through the room. Just to be sure this is for real, a last tune is played, dedicated to St Paul. The young tarantata remains insensitive to the music, and, grateful for her recovery, everyone present kneels in prayer. Later that day, she dances once more at Galatina, in the chapel of St Paul. It was he, she confirms, who has saved her yet again, whispering in dialect into her ears: 'I grant you grace.'

The life of the tarantata Maria, as recounted by De Martino (2005: 38-46), is marked early by the spider's bite: her father dies when she is young; at eighteen, she falls in love with a man whose family disapproves of her, and, rejected in this way, she first succumbs to the tarantula. She is compelled to dance and eventually persuaded, in spite of St Paul's demands to join her in mystical union, to marry another man who is often ill and out of work. Nevertheless, St Paul tules as her spiritual spouse, and her annual afflictions allow her to participate in the celebrations of his feast day. At the time of writing, I am told, Maria continues to pay her respects at Galatina.'" Ada's 2001 Dance on TV: a Contemporary Performance

In the afternoon of 29 June 2001, as I drive to see Ada, I have no doubts that her performance for the cameras of the Canale 5 television crew will merely reinforce the gaping chasm widely perceived between past and present spider dances. However, this prognosis also turns out to be too simplistic. At Ada's house, in the south-west Salento, the film crew, musicians, and family members are ready to set off when I arrive. In the car, Ada begins to talk:

You can't imagine how much I dreamt this afternoon. This morning I was quite well after coming back from Galatina, but sleeping now after lunch, I went through lots of things. I discharged myself with my dreams. I dreamt of a dead person, Amadeo De Rosa. He died two years ago, and every year we organize a series of musical events in his memory. It was he who inspired us young people to start with the pizzica. He was there. And then I dreamt that I was dancing the pizzica and being lifted off the ground. I was literally floating. It might be significant, now that I have to dance.!*


Once again, a fine thread of meaning is evoked to link experiences and events. This occasion is not new to Ada. She has performed the tarantate's dance often, but it is the first time she is dancing with the intention of having a final go. This date represents a symbolic stepping stone, a desired turn in a dramatic vein of events and experiences running through her adult life, surfacing soon after her marriage and the birth of her first child, and often leaving her abandoned to crises. Now she is in her early forties, the mother of two children, a physiotherapist and fitness trainer by profession, and, through an association founded with her husband, engaged in promoting cultural events in her hometown. She is a radiant woman with striking black hair and delicate facial features. Learning to dance the pizzica, she stresses, has changed her life in many ways. Above all, it has allowed her to connect with her emotions and sensuality. This, she emphasizes, is why she sees herself as a modern tarantata. In subtle interpretative stitches, she has woven the costume of the tarantate into the fabric of her personal life, connecting her own story with the precedent of other women in crisis in the region in which she was born, a precedent made accessible not only through the stories she has grown up with and sought out from elderly generations, but also through the documentaries and numerous publications booming in parallel to the tarantula's music and dance in recent years.

Another car has joined us, and we come to a halt on the top of a ridge that drops down to the Ionian coast, providing a splendid view of the port of Gallipoli and the surrounding coastline. The late afternoon countryside stretching to the sea is a hazy olive-silver. A few steps below the natural granite terraces where the cars are parked, there is a small church set into the rock: a cave furnished with pews, an altar, and a cross at the entrance. Ironically, like the tarantate, Ada was to perform near a chapel. The filmset is prepared. Microphones and light exposures are tested, while Ada changes into a long white gown with frilled cotton trousers and touches up her make-up. Barbara, a young woman and passionate dancer from her hometown, gives her a hand and then hugs her tightly, noticing how emotional she has become. Ada's eyes are filled to the brim. She comes up to me, saying: "Dammi un bacio" (Give me a kiss), acknowledging what was going on inside her, making Barbara and me aware of this intimate space, somehow pulling us in.

The musicians begin to warm up. There are five of them now, with four tambourines and an accordion. They are all men, members of various local music groups. None of them is specifically dressed for the occasion, their sandals, cotton trousers, and T-shirts being their usual summer attire. Ada and her mother, petite in a flowery dress, prepare the ritual space on an even stone surface. They remove small pebbles and twigs and then unfold a large white sheet, with a lace edge, over a slight padding of mats taken from the cars around. The sheet is spread with ritual objects, reminders of tarantism's syncretism with Catholicism, while at the same time, perhaps, mirroring Ada's individual preferences: an image of St Paul, coloured ribbons, a red scarf, a string of bells. Then all is set. Ada's expression is one of concentration and anguish. She stands a few metres from the ritual sheet, in between her mother and Barbara, now dressed all in black for the occasion, one arm hooked into each of theirs. The music starts. Slowly, extremely slowly, the group of three women moves towards the ritual space. Ada's soles drag heavily across the ground, and her head tips to one side as she abandons herself to the performance. The musicians play in line, with their backs to the magnificent coastal setting. Their manner appears automatic, detached. Ada collapses onto the sheet, still supported by her two female assistants. She lies face down on the ground, hardly moving at first. A mop of hair hides her face. Close up, through my own camera lens, the scene is a color version of black and white photos of Maria of Nardo's dance. Slowly, she begins to stir in heavy, listless motions. Then her rhythm picks up, she rolls over and over, gets to her feet, moves close to the musicians with her head between her hands and two tambourines, dances and then collapses onto the hard ground. Her mother remains close by at all times, occasionally adjusting the sheet as it shrivels up and out of place. Two cameras move around Ada, in between her and the musicians, like hungry mouths and overextended gazes, lustful where she is listless. Never, however, is she interrupted or told what to do. No more than fifteen minutes pass in all. In between, I have my own (camera) crisis, perhaps indicative of my own degree of participation: in a hectic attempt to replace my used-up film, I open the camera without rewinding the completed roll, tearing out the ribbon of ruined pictures as a last resort to capture at least some images of the final part of the performance. Various others are standing and sitting around the scene. Three women on a late afternoon stroll up the hill have moved close to watch. Then the music stops. Ada sits up. She has an air of immense vulnerability, of gaping emptiness about her. Everyone tends to themselves, their instruments, the cameras, and Ada is left to her own resources without any notes or the attentive camera gaze to sustain her. Barbara zooms in to embrace her. Ada stretches to wrap her arms around the younger woman, as if clasping on to a life-belt, something to support her as she resurfaces, as she comes out of her role to face reality beyond the performance. Finally, after a few moments, she gets to her feet slowly and then moves around kissing everyone present in turn, musicians and attendants, thanking each one.

Just a few minutes later, Ada is back in front of the camera, under a tree close to the cave, for an interview of some twenty minutes. When everything is finally packed up to go, the camera team from Canale 5 appears content. They are making a series, entitled 'Gentes', on popular traditions of Italy and Europe, which is to be screened nationwide in autumn 2001. Ada jokes light-heartedly in the car, telling how she had been asked to end the interview with a warning: 'State attenti alla tarantola!' (Beware of the tarantula!) Driving back to Lecce that night, I am struck by the strong emotions Ada's performance evoked not only in her but also in me, seeing that I knew some of her story. One of the musicians I talked to at a later stage, meanwhile, remarked how disappointed he had been by the whole event, as it was too staged, too artificial. Once again the fine link between invention and intention surfaces, suggesting that faking or acting-as-if, so easily dismissed as fraud, may (or may not) have a pertinent influence on everyday reality. Ada used the setting invented for the TV crew with the intention of fulfilling her personal objective of closing a phase in her own life. Few others knew. Yet the cameras documented this moment, eventually letting the whole nation witness it. Ada's motivation was deeply meaningful on a personal level, independently of what it might mean or how it might appear to others. Her engagement went beyond that of putting on a show for Canale 5, making it both staged and not-staged at the same time. Meanwhile, the events and discussions of 29 June 2001 left me feeling as if I’d been on an inter-looping highway system of tarantula tracks, on which Evelina’s, Matteo’s, and Ada’s crises 50 Seeking St Paul intersected. The life stories and pilgrimages of three generations criss-crossed at Galatina, in one tiny chapel with a crumbling altar, together with those of many others who, like me, found themselves witnessing and participating with strong sentiments and animated discussions. The double-sided link between crises and celebrity emerged. Depending on the intention behind any performance, it may encompass both the curative support of others, who acknowledge the reality of issues and experiences faced by the afflicted individual, and the manipulative potential of exploiting others’ attention to perpetuate and reinforce situations of affliction. The next chapter’s look at the tarantula’s appeal throughout history provides further evidence. 51 Dances with Spiders Notes 1. 10. ll. 12.

"'Santu Paulu meu de le tarante, pizziche le caruse tutte quante, Santu Paulu meu de Galatina, famme na grazia a mie e a tutte quante.' This is one of the most popular songs in the repertoire of Salentine musicians today. The Italian words Evelina and her family use are i guai (literally translated as 'the troubles' or 'the difficulties'). Giancarlo Vallone (2004) quotes Congedo (1903) to suggest that the healing qualities of this well may be ascribed to healing spit, lo sputo risanatore, and that the owners of the house where St Peter and Paul apparently resided in Galatina were said to cure poisonous bites with their spit. Such treatments of poisonous bites with spit were also applied by the sanpaolari and others (see Chapter 6, "Tarantula Alternatives: Choosing Treatment Options'). These references to the use of liquids in healing practices may also be linked to the relevance of rain, urine and poisons in case studies of tarantism, as well as discussions on 'fluids of healing' in medical anthropology more generally. See Hsu and Low (2007). These accounts of rituals performed in the chapel of St Paul at Galatina in the 1990s are variously disputed or confirmed. What follows is a description of snapshots from this footage. Salentine festivals are characterized by elaborate street illuminations composed of coloured light-bulb designs, known as luminarie, creating a festive atmosphere and leaving streets bright as daylight even at night-time. Galatina, 29 June 1997. Evelina's relation to the tarantula is mediated by the figure of St Paul and her pilgrimage in his honour rather than music or dance. Nevertheless, I present her situation here, as she is the only tarantata who still openly manifests her affliction at Galatina. Moreover, her annual pilgrimage constitutes a performative event shaping her story and is indicative of a larger context of entanglements within which the tarantula is seen to intervene. Galatina, 29 June 1997. Ibid. 52 13. 14. 15. 19. 20. Seeking St Paul It remains unclear as to what the earliest audio-visual registrations of tarantism are. In 1959, De Martino and his team took photos, as well as film and sound recordings of the tarantate in the Salento. Franco Pinna’s photographs have been published in Pinna (2002) and in La terra del rimorso (De Martino 1961a), the first edition of which was accompanied by a registration of recordings made inside the chapel of St Paul in Galatina. Diego Carpitella’s footage was reproduced in the documentary La terapia coreutico-musicale del tarantismo (1960). This was later included in Gianfranco Mingozzi’s film Sulla terra del rimorso (1982), which was reproduced in video format in 2002 and in DVD format in 2007 (Nardo: Besa) and sold together with the book La taranta (Mingozzi 2002), containing the complete film script. Other pictures by photographers Franco Pinna, Arturo Zavattini and Ando Gilardi appear in the book I viaggi nel Sud di Ernesto De Martino (Gallini and Faeta 1999). Earlier sound recordings were registered by Alan Lomax and Diego Carpitella in 1954 (Brunetto 1995: 139-47), and reproduced on the CD Italian Treasury: Puglia: The Salento, edited by Goffredo Plastino (2002, Alan Lomax Collection). For further musical sources, see also Agamennone (2005), Attanasi (2007) and Chiriatti et al. (2007).

The tarantate were said to weave themselves through chairs in imitation of the spider weaving its web. These interactions bring to mind relationships between dancers and musicians in many West African and sub-Saharan African musical traditions (Chernoff 1979), as well as those described by Deidre Sklar (2001) in her account of dance performances during festivities in honour of the Virgin of Guadaloupe. The tarantate were typically said to perform this movement, also described as a ‘hysteric arc’.

Maurizio Nocera, April 2006, referring to June 2005. Interestingly, Ada’s dream relates to descriptions of trance dancing elsewhere, such as among the Temiar of Malaysia: trance dancers speak of ‘soaring above the forest canopy and circling the mountain tops’ (Roseman 1993: 162) while dancing. Various publishers — Aramiré, Besa, Capone, to name just a few — specialize in publications regarding the tarantula’s music and dance. This tender moment of ‘resurfacing’ is described in connection with trance dances elsewhere. Edward Schieffelin (1996: 77) speaks of how, ‘coughing and gasping’, a Kaluli medium in Papua New Guinea ‘returned to the living’. Roseman (1993: 162) tells of how other participants help Malaysian Temiar dancers who have fainted back onto their feet, and by ‘supporting them around the waist ... begin to dance them back to consciousness’, to their ‘true heart’ and ‘true eyes’, thereby choreographing ‘themes of community support and interdependence’ (ibid.: 165).

Origins and History of Tarantism

Once upon a time, Satan compelled a malicious woman to harm the Virgin Mary of Finisterrae. This woman captured a number of tarantulas and, knowing they were poisonous, placed them in the alms caskets of the Madonna's church. Henceforth, all who came to leave a coin or two in devotion were treacherously bitten in their hands. Fear and anguish spread among the faithful and, suspecting witchcraft, many began to abandon the Madonna's shrine. The Virgin Mary, in turn, spoke to the spiders: 'You were born without malice, but an evil woman taught you to act in an immoral way. Now you will do the same for punishment and everyone will be afraid of you. No longer will you be spiders bringing gain. Instead, you will bring death.' By virtue of her powers, the Virgin directed the rays of the ferocious July sun onto the tarantulas and the atrocious heat drove them to madness. They poisoned each other, contorted themselves in agony, fled into the woods and then took revenge against the evil woman by developing a preference to bite women. Through their poisonous bite, they transferred their own misfortune, the agony of convulsions and madness, onto their victims.

Thus goes the legend of Sanarica, a small town not far from Santa Maria di Leuca on the southernmost tip of the Salento, also known as Finisterrae: end of the earth (Bronzini 1976: 136). This story places Satan at the origins of tarantism. One woman falls for his powers and the tarantula spiders become her tool. One curse is offset by another and the spiders, ever since, dance to the Madonna's tune. The tarantulas are depicted as no more than playing cards in a classic match of good against evil. They are props for the two-sided roles of tyrants and victims, symbolically imbued with the power of whomever they come to represent. They are cards in the hands of others, and yet with a sting (and valency) of their own, played out in reaction to an original sin, the original pact with Satan on which their own doom depends: the original sin of a woman, for which all other women must pay.

Christian imagery is blatant in this game, reminiscent of another downfall and another temptation, represented by the powerful symbols of an apple and a snake. The legend of Finisterrae wraps tarantism into Christian mythology. Its roots are equated with Satan. The tarantate seem to be placed into Eve's shoes and, in this way, a complex ritual — with probable pagan foundations — is cut and filed to fit any golden frame on a Christian church wall.

A look at the possible origins and the widely documented histories of tarantism provides a perfect illustration of how understandings of cause and effect in the context of affliction and cure, as well as forms of intervention considered appropriate, are inevitably located historically and culturally. 'By writing on tarantism,' writes Martha Baldwin (1997: 185), 'the physician could advocate his own philosophical allegiance and demonstrate its ability to account for new medical phenomena. Rather than being concerned with treating ailing patients, the early modern physician was eager instead to explain the forces of nature at work in the world.'

Tarantism has been (and continues to be) decoded in numerous ways. What seventeenth-century Apulians consider a radical treatment against the tarantula's poison was dispelled as deception by an English traveller of the same era (Burney 1771). What a twenty-first-century woman may live as a turning point in her life is presented on television to the rest of her nation as the spectacularized reproduction of a long-dead ritual tradition. 

A link to the tarantula spider, continuously reweaving its own interpretative web, appears to be the only constant fixture in this game. A look back in time reveals diverse explanations of tarantism and, most of all, the historical specificity of each. Moreover, the often indistinguishable real and invented past inevitably colours the present. In the modern Salento, views about how things are believed to have been are flashed as trump cards of how things should, ideally, be.

Possible Origins: Searching for Tarantism's Roots

The precise roots of tarantism remain a mystery. A 1426 document written by the Venetian doctor Sante Ardoini, and printed in the Sertum papale de venenis series, is most commonly cited as the first literary evidence of tarantism. This text describes the spider's victims as subject to a severe state of melancholy and a compulsive impulse to dance. It also refers to earlier texts that mention afflictions by the tarantula in the Mediterranean area without, however, making any reference to music or dance. Goffredo Malaterra (1724), for instance, tells how Norman soldiers bitten by spiders during the 1043 siege of Palermo were treated with hot compresses.

George Mora (1963: 419) challenged the historical primacy of Ardoini's account, arguing that a 1362 edition of the same De venenis series, attributed to Guglielmo De Marra, constitutes 'the oldest document dealing with the musical exorcism of people supposedly bitten by the tarantula ... The concept is expressed in it — somewhat obscurely — that the melodic bite of the arachnoid makes possible the re-evocation of the bite in musical terms' (Thorndike 1934: 526-34). Gabriele Mina's (2000) extensive research has since confirmed this.

The origins of tarantism have been sought in different times and places. Ernesto De Martino (2005: 215) relegates the emergence of this ritual practice to the period between the ninth and fourteenth centuries, drawing on historical evidence to show how tarantism developed out of a continuum of adaptations required for survival. The actual danger of spider poisoning was widely reported in Apulia. At the same time, its shores were not only subject to Islamic invasions, but also a stopover point for the crusaders on their way to the Holy Land.

The designated period up to the fourteenth century marks the time span from the height of Islam's expansion to the Occident's eventual counter-reaction. According to De Martino, tarantism arose out of the dual need to deal with actual spider epidemics and changing socio-political and religious conditions. The experience of spider poisoning provided a model to deal with social crises, such as those arising out of religious conflicts plaguing Apulia, as the symptoms of the tarantate closely resembled those of actual spider bites.

Despite the obscure origins of tarantism, the mythic tarantula itself had actual, zoological ancestors, notwithstanding disputes about which spider type was to blame. Although this explanation does not provide any indication as to why music rather than any other treatment was used, this link to a naturalistic cause, supported by a vast collection of medical literature, is likely to be one reason why tarantism has persisted into the present century despite the Church's persecution of non-Christian beliefs (Sigerist 1948: 112-14; Rouget 1986: 162; Bartholomew 1994: 288; Di Mitri 1995: 226). Ethnomusicologist Gilbert Rouget (1986______ The bite of the tarantula, whose effects coincided so extraordinarily closely with the signs that herald the onset of possession, provided a providential alibi. Women who gave themselves up to these practices were no longer sinners but unfortunate victims of the tarantula. Other precedents of tarantism have been sought in the European dancing manias, St Vitus’s or St John’s dance, widespread in Germany and the Netherlands in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries (Hecker 1865: 143-91). Like tarantism, these manias appeared to be seasonally determined; they found their victims among all kinds of social and professional classes, and involved a strong aversion to certain colours, especially red. However, this link is placed in jeopardy by the fact that no mention whatsoever is made of a poisonous bite or spider. There are few documents available about the music used, but its application appears to have varied considerably from that of tarantism: St Vitus’s or St John’s dancers are, for instance, described as having been at the mercy of their convulsions independently of music.

Meanwhile, more ancient parallels to tarantism have been drawn with the Dionysian, Corybante and Orphic cults of Greek origin, all of which were characterized by the cathartic use of dance and music (De Martino 1961a; Salvatore 1989; Lapassade 1994; Di Mitri 1996). The fact that Apulia was part of the Magna Graecia in the fifth and fourth centuries BC and so heavily exposed to Greek influence is drawn upon as evidence. This period, however, is extremely remote in time, even if we locate the first records of tarantism in the ninth century CE as De Martino suggests. Marius Schneider (1948) retreats even further back in history to propose that tarantism has its origins in the medicinal rites of megalithic civilizations. Along similar but bolder lines, Rosario Jurlaro (1980) roots the tarantula’s ritual in ancient propitiatory rites. Dancers, he proposes, mimed the wild reactions of animals bitten by a horsefly and music was used to replace the horsefly’s buzzing drone.

With all these varying explanations, it is valuable to remember, as historian Peregrine Horden (2000) cautions in his study on music and medicine, that the notion of continuity is always highly seductive. It may conceal a variety of diverse phenomena, whose apparent continuity may well be the result of numerous small discontinuities. ‘Rather than search the mists of time, we should reckon with the possibility that new healing cults, tarantism included, can develop quickly; unconnected elements can quite suddenly coalesce’ (ibid: 253). Unrelated elements may spontaneously combine to create cults or consolidate traditions, which are then — for a variety of contemporary purposes — retrospectively linked to preceding ones on the basis of common characteristics.

The same reservations were expressed by the eighteenth-century traveller Henry Swinburne, who suggested that an accident may well have led to the ‘discovery’ of the tarantula’s bite for the purposes of tarantism rituals (1783: 393). The above qualms apply equally to ideas locating the origins of tarantism in the Salento itself. Proof for these claims is generally based on archaeological findings of recent decades, including the 1970 discovery of Palaeolithic cave paintings in the Grotta dei Cervi of Porto Badisco, near Otranto (Graziosi 1996). This find gave rise to hypotheses that initiation practices of early pagan cults were held here and diverse rock paintings are seen to be linked to the symbolism of tarantism (Tolledi 1998: 8). This applies specifically to one anthropomorphic figure known as il dio che danza (the dancing god) [59]. Dances with Spiders or lo stregone danzante (the dancing wizard). Other, more abstract designs were identified, in similar vein, as spider webs or tambourines (Giannuzzi 1996). It remains impossible to draw precise conclusions about the connection between these cave paintings and tarantism, and, although I would be careful about accepting these links, it does appear significant that, unblemished by this fact, the dancing god — just like the tarantula spider — has become a blockbuster icon in the contemporary world of the tarantula's music and dance [see Figs 7.1 and 7.2].

Etymological considerations provide other clues about the beginnings of tarantism. Most commonly the term 'tarantism' is linked to the town of Taranto, tucked into the Gulf of Taranto in the Ionian Sea (Basile 2000). To the Greeks, this ancient city was known as Taras or Tarassos and, later, under the Romans, it was called Tarantum. The town's name is linked to the term 'tarantism' and is associated with the Greek word for agitation, tarassia (Jurlaro 1980: 57). Yet others see a connection between the term tarantism and the word terrantola, referring to creatures living in and off the ground (Hecker 1865: 165; Katner 1956: 12).

Finally, legends, such as the story from Sanarica, posit potential explanations for the origins of tarantism. Greek mythology is also a frequently cited source. The tarantate are seen to 'unwittingly reincarnate the pursued heroines of Greek stories: Io, the woman-cow, pursued by the divine bite of Hera's horsefly; Phaedra stung by love; Arachne driven to suicide by Athena, her rival in weaving; Erigone, Icarus's daughter, who hanged herself from a tree, setting off an epidemic of hangings among young girls' (Cixous and Clément 1986: 20). Arachne's story is perhaps the most frequently quoted, although music and dance do not feature in this account.

One version tells how the young Arachne had embroidered an enormous tapestry depicting the stories of the gods. She displayed this work in public and, receiving numerous compliments, became guilty of arrogance and presumption. When Athena heard this, she went to see for herself and, struck with rage, tore the work to pieces. Arachne escaped to the forest, but Athena followed and found her suspended from a rope, dead. Athena brought Arachne's body back to life, transformed into that of a spider, which immediately began to weave its web. 'Weave, little one,' Athena sighed, 'from now on you will do this for a living, without glory. No longer will you be able to boast and defy the gods.'

Historical Interpretations: Explaining the Tarantula's Cult
Over the centuries, tarantism has gripped the imagination of scholars throughout Europe, some informed by the tales and accounts of others, some adventurous enough to go and see for themselves. Two key points of view fired a fierce debate about the actual or mythical character of the tarantula's bite: one musical (considering the effects of music on the human organism) and one medical (focused on the character and causes of the symptoms involved). The Jesuit priest Athanasius Kircher (1641, 1673) was one of the main proponents of the musical perspective of the seventeenth-century Renaissance and humanist periods. His writings, based on the accounts of two informant priests from Lecce and Taranto, documented popular beliefs on tarantism, magic, magnetism, and the therapeutic powers of music. His interpretation revived classical ideas on the correspondence between bodily humours, states of health and illness, and musical melodies seen to influence these. Epifanio Ferdinando (1621) and Giorgio Baglivi (1696) were key advocates of a medical explanation of tarantism. Their ideas were based on naturalistic and positivist foundations, reducing tarantism to a medical condition of two types: a biological reaction to a toxic bite or a psychological disorder. Ferdinando, a native of the Salento familiar with cases of tarantism, dispelled explanations of the magical powers of music and, taking a physiological approach, argued instead that music facilitated dancing and perspiration, thereby expelling toxins via the skin’s surface (Portulano Scoditti 1999). Baglivi, a university professor in Rome who received his information from his adoptive father in Lecce, meanwhile, concentrated on the fact that many tarantate were never actually bitten by a real spider. He coined the term "carnevaletti delle donne" (women’s small carnivals) to describe those who simulated the symptoms of the tarantula’s bite in order to let their hair down and celebrate.

Such a view of tarantism emerged from many pre-nineteenth-century English texts (Burney 1771; Turnbull 1771; Swinburne 1783) and was voiced again on 29 June 2001 as a reaction to Matteo’s dance in Galatina. This confrontation between musical and medical views was catalysed by related debates in the fields of magic and science (Tomlinson 1994; Di Mitri 2006). In the eighteenth century, this conflict became particularly evident when tarantism received two blows leading to its gradual disintegration: one came with the advent of the Enlightenment, the other from the Catholic Church. The Neapolitan medical school institutionalized Cartesian scepticism, and tarantism was increasingly discounted as a mere superstition and the tarantate viewed as psychologically disturbed individuals, as the work of Francesco Serao (1742) revealed. He was a physician from Naples, with personal experiences of tarantism and extensive correspondence on this subject with Apulian informants, viewing tarantism both as a form of corruption characterizing Apulia’s lower classes and as a pathological condition. Its cause, he argued, was not to be found in the tarantula spider, but rather in the melancholic disposition of Apulia’s inhabitants themselves.

Catholicism brought a second blow. Attempts to control the non-Christian ritual of tarantism were best demonstrated by the coercion of mythical and biblical symbolism, as the image of the tarantula became conflated with that of St Paul. In the years following the construction of St Paul’s chapel in the mid-eighteenth century in Galatina, ecclesiastical authorities played a major role in driving tarantism indoors and underground. Meanwhile, in the eighteenth century, conflicts continued between the popular myth of the tarantula and more scientifically founded interpretations of tarantism (Convegno 1999). The ideas of the Neapolitan medical school were criticized and developed by various scholars, increasingly recognizing the cultural character of the tarantula’s bite (Valetta 1706; Caputo 1741; Cirillo 1771). Nevertheless, resistance to these views persisted into the nineteenth century. It was Giuseppe Chiaia (1887) who most openly expressed a strongly anticlerical stance, seeking to prove the validity of popular beliefs on tarantism by reviving Kircher's ideas. At the same time, 62 Webs through Time nineteenth- and early twentieth-century medical literature staunchly continued to reduce tarantism to spider poisoning or psychological illness (Carusi 1848; De Masi 1874; Campelli 1878; Kobert 1901). A detailed survey by Apulian doctor Francesco De Raho (1908) followed this line of enquiry. With reference to experiments on guinea pigs, De Raho concluded that the spider bite alone was not sufficient to cause the violent symptoms observed in the tarantate. Instead, he diagnosed a minor form of hysteria.

The twentieth century brought a gradual awareness of the cul-de-sac medical research had run into by ignoring the cultural aspects of tarantism. Henry Sigerist (1948), a Swiss-born doctor and one of the 'fathers of modern medical history' (Horden 2000: 22), established tarantism as a neurosis peculiar to Apulia, derived from ancient orgiastic cults and camouflaged as an illness so as to escape the Church's condemnation. Marius Schneider (1948) presented an in-depth symbolic analysis of tarantism as a seasonal and medicinal rite, expressing the cosmological understanding of megalithic peoples. His approach was based on a 'system of mystical correspondences between nature and man, between the elements, astrological signs, the seasons and sounds' (Rouget 1986: 159). Nevertheless, medical assumptions also proved to be resilient. Backman (1952) described dance epidemics such as tarantism as the result of ergot poisoning from grain and bread. Wilhelm Katner (1956) identified sunstroke as the actual pathogenic stimulus, whereas Giordano (1957) applied the category of collective psychosis to the tarantate's affliction.

Only the surface of almost a millennium of studies on tarantism can be touched on here. This vast and rich literature shows how views on tarantism have been subject to continual negotiation. The therapeutic options available to the tarantate directly related to accepted views of this ritual tradition. Its interpretations embodied not only a desire to make sense of the human condition but also an implicit play of power. Cases of tarantism threatened the influence of Christianity and the development of medical science and, as such, both institutions sought to control it through redefinition.

Perhaps not surprisingly, with the turn to the twenty-first century the story of tarantism is being rewritten once again (with more or less success) as more than an antidote to fears of the millennium bug. It serves new purposes for which the flourishing market of recent editions and translations of historical texts on tarantism caters in grand style. Among these, Dorothy Zinn's English translation of De Martino's monumental work is one of the more recent (2005).

De Martino's View: a Key Point of Reference
'Have you read De Martino? Have you studied his book La terra del rimorso? More often than not, this was the first question people in the Salento asked when I talked about my research. The word 'tarantism' seems to trigger, first and foremost, the name of this well-known Italian scholar and the title of his famous publication defining the tarantate's ritual as a form of musical, choreographic and chromatic exorcism. It is as if tarantism, now apparently long extinct, continues to exist on almost four hundred pages, densely packed with a rich description and interpretation of this healing ritual. For an anthropologist looking for personal stories and first-hand experiences, it becomes a frustrating white screen on which shadows dance, as paraphrased and often reductive versions of De Martino’s black and white script dominate popular views of the tarantula’s dance. It is impossible to consider tarantism today without taking note of this important study, suggestive of the influence of anthropological work on other contemporary movements (such as the writing of Mircea Eliade, Michael Harner and Carlos Castaneda on ‘Neo-shamanism’), or the historical documentation of tarantism rituals in Spain and the United States subsequent to the translation of a book on this subject by Giorgio Baglivi (Horden 2003: 193).

In the summer months of 1959, Ernesto De Martino and his team of researchers undertook the first in-depth field study of tarantism.® Their research involved detailed interviews with twenty-one tarantate: sixteen women and five men between the ages of thirteen and seventy-six. The team observed both domestic dance rituals and pilgrimages to the chapel of St Paul in Galatina. Although the duration of this fieldwork did not exceed three weeks (20 June — 10 July), De Martino was able to build on contacts established in the early post-war period when he was posted to Bari and Lecce as commissioner of the Socialist Federation (Panico 1983: 140).

De Martino uncovered the power relations within which tarantism existed in the mid-twentieth century. His focus on tarantism as a cultural phenomenon questioned psychologically determined interpretations, unveiling the personal crises of the tarantate as symptomatic of larger conflicts on a social level. De Martino drew on the work of the politician and philosopher Antonio Gramsci to depict the conflict between the hegemonic order, the ‘capitalist form of domination through ideas rather than through the use of force’ (Saunders 1984: 455), and the subaltern, ‘subordinate, proletarian and rural proletarian’ (ibid.) classes, to which the majority of the tarantate belonged. In this sense, La terra del rimorso was ideologically motivated by De Martino’s belief in ‘the “historicization” of the subaltern world as a prophylactic against ... exploitation’ (ibid.: 456).

This study was, moreover, embedded within a larger intellectual context, in which De Martino became a founding figure of Italian ethnology (although he saw himself primarily as a historian of religion), influenced by philosophical and political currents of post-war Italy, and specifically the ideas of Benedetto Croce and Antonio Gramsci, (Gallini 1982; Lorenzetti 1982; Saunders 1984). De Martino’s contribution to studies on southern Italy was fundamental in revealing that alleviating the enormous differences between southern and northern Italy required not only economic engagement, but also initiatives promoting a rebirth of the South on a cultural level. La terra del rimorso was a prime example. It proposed a new approach to southern Italy’s situation. The magico-religious perspective of its protagonists was examined not as an evolutionary relic of primitive thinking, but as a culturally specific response to harsh living conditions. De Martino proposed a psychoanalytically tinged interpretation viewed within a historical and socio-economic framework. 

Tarantism was defined as a ‘religion of remorse’, allowing for the payment of debts contracted on an existential level. The tarantula was employed as a symbol for eliciting traumatic experiences of the past, many of these linked to the recurring themes of forbidden love, unfulfilled desires, and repressed emotions. The ritual of tarantism became a means for reliving and healing individual crises threatening to explode without control. It served as a channel of expression and resolution according to a historically proven and socially acknowledged model. Tarantism, according to De Martino, was irreducible to any form of spider poisoning. The tarantula was a mythical spider, an ideological complex autonomous in its symbolism as it explained the symptoms of the tarantate even in the absence of an actual bite. Few of De Martino’s interviewees had, in fact, suffered from a real spider bite. All, however, appeared to suffer from a ‘crisis of presence’ at the time of their initial affliction: a sense of the self as unreal and unrelated to present circumstances, implying a loss of referents in the surrounding world, often in the face of socio-economic and natural calamities (De Martino 1956, 1960, 1975; Pandolfi 1990). Disaster struck and fuses blew, snapping the relational threads that linked a healthy individual to her or his body, community, and environment. It was here that the tarantula intervened. Through the injection of its poison, De Martino explains, the mystic spider transferred its attributes to its victim. Many became melancholic, others aggressive or highly erotic in their behavior. On average, three or four days of dancing, especially to the rhythmic sounds of the pizzica tarantata, provided the only way out. The rhythmic order of sounds, argues De Martino, not only released tensions into movements, but also provided ‘a very elementary cultural order to be preferentially relied upon when a great existential catastrophe loomed’ (2005: 94). Overall, research on tarantism following La terra del rimorso (De Martino 196la) has built on this rich contribution without challenging it extensively. Nevertheless, various critiques have been voiced. Some demanded further contextualization of the socio-economic and political situation of southern Italy in the 1950s (Cassin 1962: 133; Lorenzetti 1982: 28-31) and of the relationship between those participating in the ideology of tarantism and those discounting it as a superstition (Lorenzetti 1982: 28-31). Historians challenged De Martino’s search for tarantism’s origins in Greek Dionysian cults (Lapassade 1994; Di Mitri 1996; Horden 2000) and added to or questioned his historical sources (Turchini 1987; Salvatore 2000; Vallone 2004; Di Mitri 2006). Others pointed out that the mythico-ritualistic complex of tarantism was not considered in relation to the larger context of traditional curative practices (Coppa 1996: 31) and, by dismissing the psychopathological approach as inherently reductive, De Martino failed to recognize that psychiatry was increasingly broadening its parameters to include sociocultural variables (Anon. 1967: 347).

De Martino and his team were generally welcomed into the houses of the tarantate. Many participants engaged in interviews, hoping that the medically qualified researchers would find alternative forms of relief for their misery. The publication of La terra del rimorso brought crowds of curious visitors to the Salento. In June every year, the town of Galatina was swamped with film crews and photographers. For many journalists and researchers, the Salento became an exotic location harboring pagan relics, which needed to be documented at all costs prior to extinction.

Many condemned the tarantate’s performances as tourist enterprises staged purely for collecting money. At the same time, many benefited from the image Galatina gained as a pilgrimage site. Every year, masses of visitors spent their lire at local hotels, shops, and market stalls (Panico 1983: 55-91). They also increasingly met with the tarantate’s resistance to be interviewed or filmed (Montinaro 1976: 72).

In the wake of La terra del rimorso, research on tarantism can, for the sake of convenience, be subdivided into three general themes: socio-economic, medical, and anthropological, depending on the key focus taken. Studies on the socio-economic context of tarantism tended both to elaborate on aspects neglected by De Martino and to document and analyze tarantism’s transformations in subsequent years. Medically inclined research refined the psychologically reductive analyses criticized by De Martino. Tarantism was inserted into a history of medicine and compared to other therapeutic systems that challenged the incompatibility of biologically and socially determined interpretations, although some psychologically reductive studies persisted.

Most anthropological studies were characterized by a comparative approach. In particular, studies in psychological anthropology have been central in weaving tarantism into a broader fabric of healing rites interpreted in terms of spirit possession and altered states of consciousness. This section presents a chronological synthesis and selection of research based on both textual and cinematographic sources, showing that these three fields are neither mutually exclusive nor exhaustive. Moreover, the studies considered are limited to the Salento and to tarantism as understood in its ancient, ritual sense.

No reference is made at this point to studies on the contemporary revitalization of the tarantula's music and dance. Studies considered here as socio-economic were often of high ethnographic import, providing valuable descriptions of the general living conditions of the tarantate. Perhaps the most famous and insightful of these was anthropologist Annabella Rossi's book Lettere da una tarantata, Letters from a tarantata (1970), based on her correspondence with a tarantata in the Salento over a six-year period from 1959 to 1965. These letters recurrently touched on the harshness of existing living conditions based on agricultural labor, the anxieties linked to being a woman in tight-knit family circles, and the hopes and prayers invested in religious figures appealed to for well-being. The tarantata who dictated these letters suffered from epileptic fits from an early age and identified the cause for these in two different maladies — one attributed to St Paul and the other to St Donatus — which she distinguished according to whether she felt the urge to dance or not: only St Paul required her to do so. The publication of these letters remains a unique testimony of a tarantata’s life conveyed in her own voice, without escaping the dilemmas of representation: inevitably, these letters were edited and existed in relation to Rossi’s own letters.

Writing a few years later, Brizio Montinaro (1976) described tarantism as a rusty tool of the past, still deeply rooted among parts of the Salentine community. He suggested that the option of tarantism may have stood in the way of potentially urgent medical intervention, after witnessing how a young man, subsequently diagnosed with a brain tumor, was brought to St Paul’s chapel in Galatina. This view of tarantism as a two-sided sword was further exposed in a valuable article by Miriam Castiglione and Luciana Stocchi (1977). Their Marxist-inspired study took a close look at the lives of the tarantate in relation to those who did not share their belief system. It focused particularly on the ecclesiastical and socio-political context, as well as the condition of women, in the 1970s Salento.

The domestic exploitation of female labor, seen within a framework of capitalist development, rural depopulation, and emigration, revealed how many women were left to rely on limited family and neighborhood contacts, as well as the mass media, to overcome situations of extreme social isolation. At the same time, the religious ideology inherent in the insertion of Pauline theology into tarantism rituals perpetuated the exploitation of women as reproducers of the existing labor force and as substitutes for insufficient social services. The Christian influence on tarantism was unveiled as fostering the causes of the tarantate’s misery, despite the temporary relief conceded by pilgrimages to Galatina.

In the early 1980s, the documentary film Morso d'amore (Miscuglio et al. 1981) threw into relief changes in both the socio-economic context and the performance techniques of tarantism. The film-makers documented a case of self-instigated therapy: images of a tarantata rocking from side to side on her bed, singing to herself, invoking the presence of St Paul and the tarantula. No musicians were involved, and only one other participant sat by the side of her bed to ensure that she did not come to any harm. This woman was bitten on her first day back at work in the fields of the Salento after years of factory labor (and better working conditions) in Switzerland. She told the camera that her periods had ceased from this day onwards and returned only when she finally received St Paul’s grace, the very year she became the protagonist of Morso d'amore. We may dismiss this link as a mere coincidence or question what impact the camera team may have had on her life. Was its presence enough to render her misery public, visible to the eyes of others, and hence imaginable, acceptable, and possible to process? A comparison to Ada’s performance for the Canale 5 cameras, twenty years later, inevitably comes to mind. Both told their story in verbal and corporal form, sustained by the gaze of others, human eyes, and camera lenses, acknowledging and recording it in tangible form. As their fate was aired and made public, legitimate, so to speak, potential sentiments of shame, embarrassment, or guilt are likely to have lost their charge, becoming redundant, suggesting a step towards recovery. Historically, too, tarantism rituals were characterized by their public nature. This case was, moreover, not the only one to involve a returning emigrant. Just one year later, Gianfranco Mingozzi's film "Sulla terra del rimorso" (1982) documented a similar case of a tarantato who was bitten by a spider. This event took place in the Salento, where the tarantato had settled after years of working abroad. It is significant that many people who passionately brought about the revitalization of the pizzica in the 1990s had spent some time working or studying in northern Italy, France, Switzerland, Germany, or elsewhere before returning home to the Salento.

Medical perspectives on tarantism variedly engaged the views of ethnopsychiatry, the history of medicine, psychoanalysis, medical anthropology, toxicology, and music therapy. Ethnopsychiatric work on tarantism brought into relief problems of defining psychopathologies, as the cause of the tarantate's afflictions was sought in both biological and social terms. Psychiatrist Giovanni Jervis (1961, 1962) argued that biologically defined symptoms of psychosis and schizophrenia could be detected in some tarantate, but nevertheless, tarantism had to be seen as an ideological institution: as a culturally specific instrument of explanation, used to define and alleviate symptoms irreducible to any one interpretative schema.

George Mora (1963) addressed these issues by considering tarantism in relation to the diagnosis of psychopathologies in ancient Greek culture and contemporary psychotherapy. Piero Coppa (1996: 29-33), referring to De Martino (1961a), as well as to Risso and Béker's study (1964) on psychopathologies among South Italian migrant workers in Switzerland, emphasized the danger of stigmatizing individuals by using out-of-context terminology.

Research on the link between actual spider bites and tarantism has been scarce. Eric Carlson and Meredith Simpson's study (1971) of a nineteenth-century case in America provided one exception: it told of a young woman from Rhode Island bitten by a tarantula for whom the only effective treatment proved to be music and dancing. In this case, the ritual of tarantism may well have been unknown to the young female victim, and it is unclear what other factors may have come into play. Historian Peregrine Horden (2000: 251) suggested that a translation of Giorgio Baglivi's (1696) book, printed in the New York Magazine of 1797, and 'the physician's unwitting power of suggestion' may have had a prominent role in this choice of treatment.

More recently, in 1996, a case of spider poisoning was registered in the Salento and carefully documented by the doctors involved (Colonna et al. 1997, 2000). It revealed a close analogy between the symptoms of actual spider poisoning and those of the tarantate. Although insufficient case studies of actual spider bites exist in the Salento to be able to draw well-founded parallels, it was inevitably noted that the symptoms of this young patient subsided after three to four days, the average period of dancing required for the ritual of tarantism (Chiriatti 1997b).

Psychoanalytical studies of tarantism focused on the sexual symbolism inherent in these rituals. Psychiatrist Dario Caggia (1984) made a unique reference to a tarantata subjected to psychoanalysis. Unfortunately, few, if any, insights were given about this treatment; instead, symbolic references to Greek myths were drawn upon to provide an interpretative context. A provocative, although little developed, stance on the relation between tarantism and sexuality was taken by Luigi Chiriatti and Georges Lapassade (1985) in the context of Salentine performance traditions more generally, considering music-making and dancing as a means of socially evoking, expressing, and controlling individual erotic impulses. Angelo Turchini's (1987) work on tarantism focused on the use of therapeutic elements such as music, songs, and conjurations, as well as the role of healing figures like sanpaolari and capo-attarantati. Turchini's interpretative approach equated tarantism with linguistic alchemy, facilitated by the use of non-verbal media. Meanwhile, Jean Russell's (1979) medical history of tarantism defined it as a form of hysteria particular to the Mediterranean context.

Tarantism has been prized as an early European example of music therapy, but simultaneously dismissed as an obstacle to the professional recognition of arts therapies. Various studies considering the relationship between music and medicine in historical and cross-cultural contexts have touched on the tradition of tarantism. Kiimmel (1977) deliberately refused to take tarantism and related dancing mania into account, considering them inappropriate to the context of humoral medicine.

Medical anthropology has emphasized the importance of indigenous illness contexts, categories, and meanings. Robert Bartholomew (1994) contested the widespread classification of tarantism as a form of mass psychogenic illness, arguing that it may involve normal, rational people with unfamiliar conduct codes, worldviews, and political agendas that differ significantly from those of Western-trained investigators.

Vittorio Lanternari (1995, 2000) considered tarantism with reference to religious healing rituals, arguing that these were not directed at combating clinically definable states of psychophysical illness, but rather worked towards overcoming experiences of suffering linked to psychosomatic syndromes. Lanternari's work suggested that symptoms of tarantism persisted despite the decline of the tradition, and underlined the risk of categorizing and treating certain human conditions as forms of illness when these may be inherently auto-therapeutic.

A comparative approach has also characterized anthropological studies, developing De Martino's (2005: 177-86) references to ethnographic, folkloric, and historical parallels of tarantism. Ioan Lewis (1971) defined tarantism as a form of rebellion and possession determined by social marginality, bringing into play relations of power and gender. Tarantism was presented as an aggressive strategy for the politically impotent, predominantly women and occasionally men, constrained to live in socially oppressive circumstances. Entry into this protest cult, an integral part of the therapeutic process, was achieved by succumbing to the mythical tarantula's illness. Although personal situations may not be radically remedied, Lewis argued, relief was found in a "religious idiom, which men can condone as a 72 Webs through Time divinely sanctioned therapy" (1971: 92).

Along similar lines, in his cross-cultural study on the role of music in triggering states of trance, Gilbert Rouget (1986) argued that tarantism was a means for the public expression of hysteria, facilitating recovery through bodily imitation with the source of affliction. Rouget, moreover, emphasized that tarantism was not a form of exorcism, "not a conflictual relation with the deity that is involved, but the partaking of an alliance" (1986: 164): the spider and that which it symbolized were appeased rather than expelled. For this reason, the diverse performative ways of identifying and coming to terms with the spider were crucial.

Georges Lapassade's (1994, 1996a, b, 2001) research, meanwhile, has aimed at retrieving the meaning of trance rituals as a human resource for use in modern contexts. Inserting tarantism into this line of research, he emphasized its affinity with Corybante dances as opposed to Dionysian rituals, describing the experience of performers in trance rituals as based on the explosion of an ordinary state of consciousness resulting from the rhythmic synchrony established between musicians and performers.

A reading of these studies provokes critiques associated with the choice of terms used to refer to subjective experiences and notions of consciousness. It raises questions about the wide range of definitions applied to so-called altered states, about what is seen to induce these and how they are experienced and explained in culturally specific terms. Moreover, these issues bring into play difficulties of establishing criteria of ethnographic and/or biomedical authenticity and genuineness, which may not only overlap but also include various levels and ways of talking about these terms (Hamayon 1995; Becker 2004).

In the Salento, these problems are magnified, as many — both performers and researchers — uncritically use the Italian terms trance and stati alterati or modificati di coscienza to describe experiences of music-making or dancing, thereby enhancing risks of covering up culturally and individually specific forms of expression with standardized labels. Such reflections have led Damian Walter (2000: 112-13) to propose an alternative, without, however, escaping the hazards of generalization: "In preference to terms such as trance, ecstasy and altered or alternate states of consciousness ... the notion of an altered state of awareness ... gives 73 Dances with Spiders support to the idea that in a culturally-recognized 'trance' state — however defined — the subject learns to identify and give precedence to different visual, aural, somatic, and mental criteria, without necessarily implying that he or she becomes dissociated from his or her immediate surroundings and without prioritizing etic categories concerned with the truth or falsity of what is believed to be taking place."

With regard to the anthropology of performance, little research on tarantism is available. Luigi Santoro (1982, 1987) has approached tarantism through his own experience of theatre. Likewise, Michela Almiento (1990) set out to discuss Joseph Moreno’s ideas on psychodrama in relation to the tarantate’s rituals, but did not pursue this perspective beyond the confines of her master's thesis. Some significant contributions to historical and contemporary interpretations of tarantism were provided in two volumes of conference papers published as a result of the international conference Quarant'anni dopo De Martino (Forty years after De Martino) in October 1998 (Di Mitri 2000). Experiences and accounts of the world of tarantism in the last few decades have, moreover, been published in various recent books by Giorgio Di Lecce (1994), Luigi Chiriatti (1995) and Maurizio Nocera (2005) and are also portrayed in Edoardo Winspeare’s documentary San Paolo e la tarantola (1989).!* These studies document the persistence of tarantism on the margins of contemporary life and public health care in the 1980s and 1990s despite constant declarations of its extinction. This paradox appears central to the multiple and changing manifestations of contemporary tarantism. 74 Webs through Time Notes 1. 10. ll. 12. 13. 14. Ernesto De Martino (2005: 214—15) cites this account from Malaterra (1724). According to Jean Russell (1979: 405), Ardoini also refers to earlier writers, such as Avicenna, Rhazes, Gilbert the Englishman, Albucasis and others, who wrote about the cure of the tarantula’s bite. For a discussion of similarities and differences between tarantism and St Vitus’s and St John’s dances, see also Katner (1956: 77-82) and De Martino (2005: 217-22). For a discussion of the symbolic links between ancient Greek cults and tarantism, see De Martino (2005: 187-211) and Salvatore (1989: 217-45). Lapassade (1994: 10) focuses on tarantism’s similarities to the Corybante rites and Di Mitri (1996: 11-28) has emphasized the Orphic connection to tarantism. See also Horden (2003) on issues of historical continuity and discontinuity with respect to music therapy in the Mediterranean more generally. See Ovid's Metamorphoses (1957), Book VI. Pierpaolo De Giorgi (1999: 176) draws an analogy to the legend of Sanarica by positing a link between the evil woman (Arachne) and the Virgin (Athena). For references to the history of tarantism, see Sigerist (1948: 96-116); Katner (1956: 5-25); Mora (1963: 417-39); Turchini (1987); Chiriatti (1995: 31-46); Baldwin (1997: 163-91); Convegno (1999); Gentilcore (2000); De Martino (2005: 187-244); Di Mitri (2006). For reprints of these historical texts, see Liidtke (2000b: 318-27). The team members included Giovanni Jervis (psychiatrist); Letizia Jervis-Comba (psychologist); Diego Carpitella (ethnomusicologist); Amalia Signorelli D’Ayala (social anthropologist); and Vittoria De Palma (social assistant). For research on tarantism in Spain and Campania, see Leén Sanz (2000, 2008) and Rossi (1991) respectively; for studies on the related phenomenon of the argia in Sardinia, see Gallini (1967, 1988). See Nacci (2001, 2______ Winspeare subsequently went on to produce two further fictional films linked to the tarantula's music and dance: Pizzicata (1994), a wartime love story involving a case of tarantism, and Sangue Vivo (2000), the story of two brothers involved in smuggling and drugs, inspired by the true story of Salentine tambourine player Pino Zimba. 75

Part II The Spider's Cult Today

In the contemporary Salento, the living webs of old and new tarantati intersect, the first frail, dismissed and practically abandoned, the second neon-bright and vibrant. Part II is an ethnographic journey following the tarantula's tracks across both types of web.

'Curing Myths and Fictive Cures', looks at old-time silver-threaded webs of the world of tarantism. It juxtaposes the views of believers and sceptics, bringing spiders alive and killing them off as they speak. Novel expressions of the tarantula's dance reveal new web designs, as Chapter 4, 'Ads and Antidotes', confirms. From backstage circles of musicians and dancers to satellite-broadcast mega-concerts, the tarantula today weaves its web across the globe and broader spatial orbits. As a multi-purpose toolkit, music and dance have become a potent logo of Salentine identity, serving both to accentuate conflict and to bring about a sense of community. They present a choice, a very visible and audible one, between taking opposition or joining forces and the manifold options in between.

Whereas historically music was the only antidote for the tarantate, the same notes function today as tourist ads and fun fair invites. Chapter 5, 'Sensing Identities and Well-being', proceeds to consider personal accounts, showing how the spotlights on today's buzz around the tarantula's music and dance can serve to blind us to the sociocultural implications of contemporary afflictions and to re-appropriated discourses on healing and well-being.

There is a Salento that believes in the tambourine, in music, and there is a Salento that does not believe. Today, tarantism is this. Galatina, 23 June 1999! In its ancient, curative sense, tarantism has become extinct. Public rituals of music and dance, once widespread throughout the Salentine peninsula, Apulia and beyond, no longer exist. This fact is well-known and open to little doubt. And yet the belief system within which this ritual dance was wrapped has not dissolved into time immemorial. A minority of believers and a majority of sceptics reside side by side in the Salento today. This was sharply brought home to me one afternoon in August 1999 when I talked to two elderly gentlemen in the south-west of the Salento. One, a victim of the tarantula, had been at the mercy of the spider's whims for three consecutive years in the 1960s. The other, a fervent scholar of tarantism, was convinced that this ritual tradition was nothing but pretence, theatre and fiction. These two perspectives, indicative of the tensions between believers and sceptics more generally, continue to clash as they have done for centuries.

It is 11 August 1999 and the five o'clock afternoon heat is stifling in the kitchen of Francesco Greco's apartment. We sit around a large table above which a ceiling fan is stirring the humid air. My brain is numb from the heat and sweat runs down my legs, with a cotton skirt creating sauna conditions. It takes every bit of concentration to hold onto the thread of questions prepared in my mind for this interview, at risk of being swept away by the centrifugal force of the rotating blades above our heads. I have come with two personal contacts, Vittorio Marras and Bengasi Fai, thanks to whom this meeting was arranged. We sit down at the long kitchen table with Francesco. His wife Cinzia and a young woman and child settle down on a sofa nearby. They form a backdrop to the scene, with Francesco's wife taking an active, almost sentinel-like part in the conversation. I ask how everything started.

Francesco: I don't remember the year. It was some twenty years ago. Karen: And was it a spider? Francesco: I can't tell you that it was a spider. It's also possible that it was a snake or a scorpion. Karen: Did you feel the bite? Francesco: Yes, I felt it. I was working where the grain was being ground, and I felt something sting me, but didn't really take notice of it. I continued to work. At the moment of the bite, you don't feel anything. Then, after a day or two, I began to feel unwell and vomited. The vomit was yellow, like the poison that this animal was carrying.

Karen: And what did you feel? Francesco: My body felt completely abandoned, tired and very heavy. You couldn't even take a cup into your hands. I now pick up a quintal, but then not even a cup. It wasn't clear what it was or what this affliction depended on. The doctors didn't find anything. They didn't find a poison internally. We went to see major specialists, but they never found anything. They told me to have an injection and gave me one, but there was nothing to do, because it was that problem, that illness which the saint gave me. There are no medicines that can cure you. And they don't find anything wrong, because we are healthy. As persons we are completely healthy.

Karen: But you weren't well. Francesco: I wasn't well at all. The doctors call us mad. When you speak about certain things, about these illnesses, the doctors say: 'Nothing of this is true!' The doctors don't believe. Our own family doctor says that we're staging a show for people. That's why those other people came to play. After a day, two days, or even a week — there are people who danced for a week and even two weeks — you received the saint's grace. Now some of the doctors believe, not all of them, but some. It's because now they have begun to study these things, the new doctors.

And how did you know what the affliction was? Those who played the music had come across many others with this illness. The doctors didn't believe in this illness, but my family, my mother, my father, the other people said: 'It must be the tarantula! It must be the tarantula!' Word got round that I wasn't well. In this state, we don't want to go outside and are always in bed, feeling abandoned like that. And the people asked: 'How come?' If someone in the village isn't well, word gets round immediately. And people said: 'It must be the tarantula.' I had an aunt, my mother's sister, who played the tambourine. She came round one day, on her own, without telling me or anyone else. She came secretly and brought the tambourine and started to play, just the tambourine, on her own. When I heard the tambourine, I started... And that's when my aunt said: "It's the tarantula!" She had seen hundreds of these cases, so when she saw me in this condition, she knew. The next day, my aunt called the musicians. There were three. I didn't know anything about this, as I was in bed, feeling completely abandoned. They came to my mother's house and prepared the room. They covered the floor because when we fall, we can hit a chair or the wall. The musicians came around 11:30 a.m. and played for ten to fifteen minutes. The music made me react, jump up, and dance. I got out of bed and went to the next room, dancing. There were certain colors that bothered me, as the animal chooses the color. At Galatina, we could strip someone of their jacket or vest because we didn't like the color. One woman remained naked in the middle of the street. If the animal was yellow, it couldn't bear seeing yellow or red. We were the same. We always looked for this color.

The instruments: tambourine, diatonic accordion, and violin. Not an accordion, but a diatonic accordion, because the accordion doesn't give the same sound. It was important that it was a diatonic accordion, because if someone took up the accordion, the music wasn't the same. With the tambourine, it's the same. If someone just plays, you don't feel anything. I can tell if it's played by someone who is an expert, who plays the beat of that music, of that illness. You can tell if someone is competent in those things.

They played the sound of the tarantula, of that animal. Even today, they play that sound. I like that music, and I buy it for myself, but after a while, I turn it off. It's the only music I really like because of the grace that I received. But I immediately sweat, because I still feel a little bit of this event from thirty years ago. They played for one to two hours, depending on what the saint said. There has to be a person that commands us, and it may be that it is this saint. You see an image. While we dance, we see a person in front of us. But we don't know who this person is. We see a shadow. It's he who commands you. He tells you what you have to do and what you don't have to do. In my sister's case, it was a snake. But with her, it took just one year. For me, it took three to four years. After one or two days, you were really in a bad state, and then there was this vision, this person that said, "You don't have to dance anymore. Enough!" Did others perceive this vision? No, no one. Some people were told by the saint to go around the village to collect offerings. One year, my sister said she needed one hundred or two hundred thousand lire and we were ready to give them to her to take to the saint, but my sister said, "No." She had to collect these as offerings. She had to go down the streets to collect this money. My mother said we had this money to give, but the saint didn't accept. Previously, you heard a lot about these things, and people believed in these things. More than one gave a thousand lire, five hundred lire, and the sum of money collected was enough to go to Galatina and offer to the saint. The priest then took the money, or someone else took it. Once 82 Cinzia: Francesco: Karen: Francesco: Karen: Francesco: Curing Myths and Fictive Cures my sister had collected this money and gone to Galatina, she was all well again, completely fine. Then the last year that I did this, after two, three days always in these conditions, this vision said that the following day was the day of St Peter and Paul. We generally went the day before. I went to do my duty, but he sent me away. The saint, this shadow, said to me: ‘You shouldn’t have come today. You have to come back. You have to come tomorrow.’ I had to turn back, to go back home, in a bad state, to wake up at four in the morning and to return on foot. My brother, my father, my mother wanted to take me by car. But he said: ‘No, I won't accept.’ I had to go on foot and left on my own. I'll never forget the last year that he was really ill, in 1967. Of course we were worried at home. I followed him secretly by car, to see in case he wasn't well, but I just wasn’t able to see him anywhere. Who knows which road he took. They didn’t see me. But I was on the road. It’s not that I took another road. I took the normal road to Galatina, the principal road. And they say that they didn’t see me. I took one hour to get to Galatina and close to the church my family saw me. It’s possible that they passed by me and didn’t see me. When I arrived, I went to the small church, because you have to go first to the small church and then to the large church. I had to move on my knees from the chapel to the large church. It’s about a hundred metres distant. The altar was all laid out with people all around and I don’t know how I found myself there, but I found myself on the statue of St Paul. On the statue? I found myself on the statue of St Paul in the church. On top? On top. I don’t know how I got there, how I climbed up onto the statue. Then the police arrived and other people. They thought I was mad, because the saint carries a golden angel and they thought that I’d gone up there to steal the gold. I arrived on top of the saint and then came down by myself. The priests condemned me, but I didn’t hear anything, I didn’t see anything. I didn’t even see the police or the people inside the church. The people in Galatina don’t believe in these things. They don’t believe, because at Galatina St Peter and Paul have protected their territory, saying that here these things should not exist. In the whole province this happens, but not in Galatina. In most parts, there were one or two per village. I met many of these people. Most of them are dead now. Among the young, 83 Dances with Spiders Karen: Francesco: Karen: Francesco: Cinzia: Karen: Francesco: Karen: Francesco: few have remained. I have remained alone with these things. But in the church you still find these people, old ones, aged eighty or so, and they still do these tricks.’ These people still dance. In the church, you need to close the door, because, you know, a man wears trousers, but a woman doesn’t and there are people who don’t believe in these things and they come to look, to laugh, to joke. Also, at the back of this church, there was a cistern with water inside and it was full of snakes. There was a bucket with which you brought up the water. Those of us who suffered from this affliction drank, but no other person did. When the water came up in the bucket, those serpents, and scorpions — I don’t know which animals they were, because you didn’t see them — disappeared inside the bucket and just water came out. Not everyone could drink this water, but we drank it without worries. And what about the music? There were people who played music inside the church. The musicians who played were brought by the family from one’s own village. And what effect did the music have? You felt stronger. You felt things the force of which even we didn’t know how to explain. You saw serpents. You saw people thread themselves through chairs, without even noticing. I'd never manage now, but then I did. And I was always big as I am now. But, it wasn’t me. It was all based on this animal that did all of these things. There was no control on their part. They can’t perceive why they did it or how they managed to do it. The point is that they don’t even remember. And this shadow, did it appear when the affliction began? First you had the affliction and you danced to this music. Then, when you were feeling tired, you asked for grace from this saint because you just couldn’t take it any more, because you felt just too tired. You asked for the saint’s grace and he told you what to do, depending on the penance that you had to fulfil, depending on the effect of this poison, of this animal. And why was it St Paul? St Paul is our protector. It was he who directed me. He is the person in the vision that we have. It’s just that we don’t know who it is. We imagine that it is this saint. And we speak with him. You don’t hear anything. I spoke with myself, and the saint. There was no one else who could hear. I could even speak in a loud voice, but the people around couldn’t hear anything.

Before, had you ever thought about this saint? No, to be honest, I never went to visit St Peter and Paul. When I was young, I went to St Pantaleon, because my father took me to the festival. He was a devotee of St Pantaleon. I never thought about these saints. Afterwards, yes. Before, in fact, at times I'd use the saints’ names in blasphemy. Nowadays, if I hear someone who speaks badly of St Paul, I immediately get furious. I feel uneasy, because they are referring to this saint. For me this saint is a confidential thing, and, if others don’t show proper respect for him, I get very angry. I have been fortunate with this saint. For those of us who have this illness, who have been bitten by this illness, we have all been saved. I believe in this saint, because he is a saint that has made me well. Thank God, he granted me health.

Were you there at St Peter and Paul's? Yes. (turning towards me): So you were there in the chapel. We were coming out and you arrived and sat down. In fact, I said: ‘That’s someone who's interested, let’s go.’ I said: ‘Please, hurry up, let’s get out of here,’ that’s what I said, “There’s someone from the RAI,' when here there are people who aren't well.’ ... You sat down on the small bench near to the wall. And I said: ‘Let's go. Let’s go.’ (Her emotional tone encourages me to come to an end, despite Francesco's invitation to ask as many questions as we liked.)

One last question, when you received grace, how did you feel? Well. Normal. I left the church, went to the bar and had a coffee, as if nothing had happened. For three years, I was unwell. Throughout the year, I was fine until this period arrived. But since I have received this final grace, following my visit on foot to Galatina, I have found myself well. But I still go to the church every year to do my duty, and as soon as I arrive near the small church, I feel emotional because I think everything might come back once again. Francesco continues to speak long after I have switched off my tape recorder. My companions and I stand in his kitchen, in his doorway, and then outside his house, next to the car, gripped by his accounts, unable to leave. The memories triggered by our visit pour forth. His speech is passionate. It holds us, preventing us from turning on the car ignition, inhibiting us from bidding him farewell. It is as if this tale is seeking to keep our attention so as to be spun on, so as not to be suspended or abandoned in the air. It is a long while before we eventually depart, and I wonder what repercussions our visit has had on Francesco's life and that of his family. It seemed as if our coming had stirred deep waters, yet again recalling emotions of crises brought on by the tarantula. I can't help but wonder what events had led to Francesco's affliction, what human relations created the backdrop to his crises, and how others involved might have presented his case. I never did find out.

In spite of this obvious partiality, Francesco's account is that of a believer: although he was no longer subject to the tarantula's sting, the return of its symptoms was always, potentially, imminent. This conviction does not belong to Francesco alone, although the tarantate persisting today are a tiny minority. Others confirm their existence, although accounts of their well-being vary. In 1998, Luigi Chiriatti, well-known for his research on popular music and Salentine traditions, confirmed the following during a seminar at the University of Lecce: 'There are still some fifteen tarantate that I know in the Salento today who are suffering from the symptoms of tarantism. Some continue to perform rituals in the privacy of their homes. None, however, directly and openly admit that they are tarantate.'

On the same day, Salentine writer Maurizio Nocera explained: 'There are still some tarantate who are "performing" in their homes today. Until the day before yesterday, Christina performed the rituals you see in the film Morso d'amore.'2 Now she is in hospital because she is not well ... You will find that most of these individuals do not talk.' By 2006, Nocera estimated that there were no more than five or six tarantate still alive.3 Meanwhile, social anthropologist Stephen Bennetts (2006) writes: 'According to one Salentine authority, the last episode of tarantism took place in 1993, and the last living practitioner died in 2000.' Clearly, there is much room for speculation.

Personally, I have met no more than five (ex)tarantate during my time in the Salento and I am unable to confirm the persistence of any rituals involving music and dance. However, like Francesco and Evelina, a number of tarantate continue their pilgrimages to Galatina in commemoration of St Paul in June every year. It is here that public performances of tarantism were still observed in the early 1990s (Almiento 1990; Di Lecce 1994). These accounts are variously disputed and sometimes dismissed as nothing but show, as researchers' attempts at seeking credit and recognition. Personally, I have no proof for the date of the most recent performance at Galatina. However, in my interviews4 various unconnected accounts of these rituals in the early 1990s confirm one another.5 However this may be, this site too appears to be increasingly abandoned, perhaps replaced, and certainly reinvented, as Matteo's dance in June 2001 suggests. Luigi Santoro (1982: 75), professor of theatre history at the University of Lecce, meanwhile, hints at the fact that ritual pilgrimages have been displaced to other sites in the Salentine countryside: Michelina ... told me that the following year she would no longer come to Galatina; like the other tarantate, she too would go to ... If you want to come — she had added — come alone. Each year we count ourselves to see who has remained and who has died ... But don’t bring anybody else, otherwise the black tarantula will take revenge and eat us all. On 29 June 2007, a young researcher from Ostuni suggests the same as we chat in the chapel of St Paul. To my knowledge, these hints have not been followed up or mentioned in writing elsewhere, although another landmark, St Paul’s grotto, just outside the town of Giurdignano, sees St Paul and the tarantula spider venerated side by side.

St Paul’s Grotto: a Contested Site

For most of the year, this grotto is bare except for moss and fern growing inside its moist ecosphere [see Figs 3.2 and 3.3]. The months of May and June bring change, as the crypt interior fills up with red-glowing candles, bouquets of wheat, potted plants, and fresh wild flowers. By the time St Paul’s feast day arrives, much of the cavern floor is covered with offerings. On 29 June 1998, I attended a service here [see Fig. 3.1]. By seven o'clock in the evening, a crowd of about seventy people has flocked around St Paul’s grotto. It is surrounded by fields of sunflowers and lies some hundred metres beyond the periphery of the town of Giurdignano on the convex curve of a tarred country road.

Painted on the faded walls inside the cavern are two human figures and a spider web: it is here that St Paul dwells side by side with the tarantula. The spider’s image has been scraped out of the stone wall, leaving only a scar hinting at its presence at the centre of the painted web. It was, I have been variously told, picked out by a tarantata. St Paul's face, too, is largely effaced, and one side wall holds the smudged outline of other figures. The paintings, according to local views in Giurdignano, go back to Byzantine times, when a monk is said to have resided in this cell and first decorated the walls. Art historian Linda Safran, who works on the medieval Salento, however, asserts that there are no traces of Byzantine paintings here. Stylistic grounds suggest that these frescoes do not pre-date the nineteenth century. Moreover, the grotto in its present form is unlikely to be a hermit’s cell, given the presence of medieval tombs immediately above.!”

Historian Gino Di Mitri (2000: 96) writes that the paintings have been redone several times, while a builder and painter from Giurdignano, whom I interviewed in 1999, confirmed that he had been commissioned to renovate these murals some thirty years ago. Apparently, it was his idea to include the tarantula in its web, although I was unable to elicit his motivation for doing so.'* I have not been able to verify this fact through other records, but, unless found to be untrue, it suggests that the spider was brought to life here only some four decades ago.

The grotto is topped by one of the many stone monuments — of medieval origin, according to University of Lecce archaeologist Paul Arthur (2004) — dotting the Salentine landscape: a menhir, tipping slightly to one side, catching the unsuspecting eye likely to miss the excavated hollow below. Many hypotheses account for the presence of such stones widespread in the Salento: they may have served astronomical functions as ancient sundials or marked ritual sites, boundaries, crossroads, or in more mystical terms, intersecting ley lines. To yet others, they designated abodes of the devil, explaining past efforts of the church to destroy and erode these stone pillars or to Christianize them through the incision of a cross. In 2006, a sign with information about the Giurdignano grotto officially marked this site as a tourist destination. During the 1998 service, this menhir hovers above the crowd together with a loudspeaker. A table covered in white holds a Bible and religious utensils. The village priest gives his sermon and the congregation actively participates in prayers and hymns, voices mixing with the sound of birds and mopeds or tractors passing at a distance. Only this once every year did the Christian Church agree to honour a site possibly rooted in a pre-Christian past. What is more, this was to be the last time, following the decisions of Church authorities. Most of the open-air congregation is elderly and from the village of Giurdignano itself. The most senior members have taken their place at the centre of the crowd. Several black-clad women stand at the opening of the grotto at road level with their faces carved in deep and solemn wrinkles. A number of older men have positioned themselves alongside the obelisk. One leans against the ancient stone: a picture of resilience. I recognize two or three of the younger faces; I had seen them at the chapel of Galatina that same morning. There is also Fernando. He moves around the crowd of people taking pictures from various angles. His telephoto lens stands out like the loudspeakers, time-markers in a set that could have belonged to other decades and centuries if it weren't for the clothes people are wearing and a tractor waiting to pass along the narrow road blocked by the congregation. The service concludes with the distribution of pane benedetto, blessed bread, traditionally made from the first grain threshed every year. Then the congregation gradually flows back into town. Some linger behind, and one last devotee arrives accompanied by her family members. She deposits a personal offering inside the cavern and bends her brow over the grotto opening until she is face to face with St Paul. Her lips move in prayer. She too has lived with the tarantula's sting, I am told by her family members. Now she has received St Paul's grace and yet, every year, she continues to pay her respects. A year later, in June 1999, Giurdignano has a new village priest and no mass is held at this site. Just a small service consoles those for whom it holds meaning. The priest's decision, I am told by two elderly ladies who, like many of Giurdignano's inhabitants, continue to pay their respects, is based on 'higher orders' concerned about the fact that this landmark is no longer consecrated. However, even in June 2005, there are still over twenty-five candles, plant pots and flowers underneath the painted spider web. Maurizio Nocera hints at another motive behind the new priest's arrangements, linked to the strong presence of (ex)tarantate at this occasion: ‘He realizes that he is blessing the devil, the spider, with all those signore there.” It is unclear, however, whether anyone has danced here in honour of the tarantula and St Paul. Various elderly and young people denied this fact or said that they did not know, while researcher Luigi Chiriatti implies that this site has resounded with the beat of tambourines: ‘In the night ... sounds of hides and copper-plates and cries howled at the moon, and dances, Filomena, bride of St Paul' (1996: 12). 

Who may have danced and for what reason remain a mystery. What is clear is that difficult-to-verify allusions abound. These are voiced not only by 89 Dances with Spiders those who have been directly involved with the tarantula's bite, but also by researchers with or without first-hand experience of tarantism. Like travel writers in the past, those who inscribe accounts of the tarantate on paper today play a vital role in perpetuating the clash between believers and sceptics, dropping information that is at times uncontextualized, sometimes obscure because unfounded or so as not to reveal the identity of those involved, and very often cross-fertilized by hearsay.

Just as St Paul's site brings to the fore tensions between believers and sceptics, an episode of Latrodectus poisoning recorded in the late 1990s, evoked heated debates for and against the tarantula. Spider Poisoning: a Contested Case

In 1996, an actual case of spider poisoning was recorded near the town of Otranto. It brought to a peak the discourses that make up a vibrant part of what constitutes tarantism, in its curative sense, today. Five doctors from the Cardinale G. Panico Hospital of Tricase treated the young man bitten on 4 July 1996 and wrote their official report (Colonna et al. 1997: 49-50, 2000: 171-79). The poison found its way into the body of the young male victim via a sting on the left foot. Ignored at first as an unwarranted itch, with no trace of a possible instigator, insect or thorn, ten minutes passed: the silence before the storm. Then the venom hit. Violent cramps in the left leg forced the young man's body to a halt, compelling him to take a closer look at the two lesions on his foot. Another ten minutes, and the venom fiercely contracted his stomach muscles. Others accompanied him to a first-aid centre. Analgesics helped to loosen the poison's grip, enabling the victim to be taken to the surgical unit of the Scorrano hospital. Surgery was ruled out and the intensive care unit of the Tricase hospital became the next stop in this race against the toxin.

A tiny, triangular lesion, no more than three millimetres broad and marked by three holes, identified the poison's port of entry. By this stage, the venom had knotted the patient's stomach muscles and left limb into agony. Tests were administered and symptomatic therapy initiated: analgesics, muscle relaxants, antihistamines and diuretics prescribed to defy the poison. A day later, the patient was still extremely anxious, trembling, perspiring heavily and his urine had turned black. Another twenty-four hours passed before any considerable improvement was noted, recovery appeared secured, the venom on its way out, and the 90 Curing Myths and Fictive Cures patient, finally, safe. A few days later, the young man was released from hospital.

From a clinical point of view, this case was resolved on the sixth day, when the patient was discharged. From an anthropological point of view, the story had only just begun. Repercussions of this bite revealed major discrepancies marking perceptions of tarantism in the contemporary Salento.?3 The medics involved confirmed that this case was exceptional in that it led to the only documentation of a contemporary case of spider poisoning based on laboratory tests available in the Salento today. However, this clinical report gives no hint of the perplexity this case caused for the medics in the intensive care unit of the Tricase hospital, or of the ethnographically specific consequences, which locate it within the Salento. In their conversations with Luigi Chiriatti (1997b: 58-59) and myself (in March 1998), the doctors involved relate how this case presented them with a diagnostic puzzle accentuated by the following factors: firstly, the patient was suspected of snake poisoning, but the administration of an anti-viper serum had to be carefully assessed as it is not without potential allergic side effects; secondly, the location of the bite mark on the patient's left foot dispelled the hypothesis of snake poisoning, as it was unlikely that a serpent would have been able to enter the patient's boot. Moreover, the crushed shell of a snail was found inside this boot, suggesting that a smaller insect inhabiting the shell was responsible for the bite; and, thirdly, none of the doctors involved had ever come across a case of spider poisoning before, nor were they familiar with the symptoms involved. Later enquiries among their colleagues in the Salento suggested that no instance of spider poisoning had been reported in the last fifty years or so. Initially, no link was drawn to the tarantula: it was simply one of many suspects under investigation.

The patient was consulted and extensive laboratory tests were undertaken to test all possible hypotheses. Literature on spider poisoning was reviewed as the tarantula became a key suspect. Interestingly, this included De Martino’s book La terra del rimorso (1961a), which turned out to provide essential clues: the descriptions of the tarantate’s symptoms were found to correspond precisely to those of the patient. The Centro Veleni di Milano, a Milan-based unit specializing in the analysis of poisons, then tested the patient’s blood sample and confirmed the tarantula’s culpability.

Apparently, according to the doctors’ account, the patient himself drew no links with the tarantula. Only when interviewed at a later stage did he reveal that his father and aunt had immediately suspected the spider (Chiriatti 1997b: 56). Not only his family, but also other elderly people who came to know of his case insisted that he go to Galatina. He was repeatedly warned that, if a tarantula had been responsible for the bite, he would have to dance the following year. He himself staunchly discounted tarantism as nothing but popular belief, although other members of his family had previously been bitten by the tarantula (ibid.: 56-57). Apparently, he never did dance.

Media headlines, however, maximized the sensational: ‘After thirty years of silence, it has struck again. The “tarantula” has returned to make its voice — and its poisonous bite — heard in the fields of the Salento' (Delle Donne 1996: 9). Moreover, a conference entitled ‘Il tarantismo fra mito e realta’ (Tarantism between Myth and Reality) was organized in September 1996 to bring together researchers from both the medical and the social sciences in order to discuss this case. Links to tarantism were stressed (Chiriatti 1997b: 59): the period of recovery corresponded to the average length of tarantism rituals (three days); the bite was registered in an area identified as a mythic and elective site of the tarantula because of the relatively large number of tarantate still known to live there today; and La terra del rimorso (De Martino 1961a) was used as a diagnostic tool. Others criticized such correlations as reductively conflating tarantism with spider poisoning (Rivera 1996). Clearly, researchers play a key role in constructing, moulding and reinventing perceptions of tarantism today. They too may be the targets of the tarantula’s modern skeptics. This skepticism was expressed with particular vehemence in another conversation I had on the very day in early August 1999 that I spoke to Francesco, who had experienced the tarantula’s curse. Tarantism as Fiction: Debates Against the Tarantula

Having finally said goodbye to Francesco and his family, my companion Bengasi, who had kindly arranged the meeting, urges me to speak to another fellow citizen: a gentleman about the age of Francesco who has been studying tarantism for many years out of personal interest. Our friend Vittorio has to leave us. I wouldn’t mind leaving either, feeling more than saturated with the information from the previous interview and roasted from the heat. But it seems a chance not to be missed: an interview offered on a silver platter, so to speak, and, moreover, I sense there is another view Bengasi wants me to hear, as he has taken the trouble to arrange this without any prompting on my part.

As a result, we arrive at the studio of Paolo Zacchino, a high-ceilinged space, which I recall through tired senses as a combination of office workspace and theatre prop collection. We sit facing each other on three chairs placed just inside the large, garage-like entrance opening onto the street. Paolo begins to speak in a solemn and emphatic voice:

second meeting
They have built castles in the air around tarantism. Tarantism, in our parts, is a complete invention. There is nothing that is true. It is all false.
Bengasi: There's a castle falling now, for this young lady!
Paolo: The castle must fall because ... some scholars have taken on information about tarantism always based on the view of people who were directly involved or had family members who were ... but scientifically — I will explain why, and then a scholar who has done research on this topic should answer me — the phenomenon of tarantism was born out of needs linked to the family. There may be controversies within the family. Note that almost always a teenage girl was involved. Why is it that the sting of the tarantula always affected a teenage girl? Was it because of sexual needs? Principally it was because of divergences that occurred in the families. And then the tarantula — scholars call her the dancing tarantula — is said to bite only in the summer period, during the wheat harvest, during the tobacco harvest. Now why don't the scholars explain this to me? Let's take the example of wheat. It wasn’t the women who went to reap the wheat, it was the older people and they were the ones to have direct contact with the grain, but note that these elderly people were never bitten. First, as to the tobacco harvest, entire families were involved in harvesting. But why did the tarantula bite only the young women? Did this tarantula have a sixth sense and go in search of a particular hand or a particular foot of a young woman to bite? There has been a lot of speculation about tarantism. And then, the other aspect is that tarantism is spoken about only with regard to Nardo and Galatina. Why doesn’t anyone speak about Galatone, Copertino, Leverano, Veglie, Salice?

"But these phenomena don't exist. So I am convinced, very convinced — and scholars will have to demonstrate otherwise — about the family issue. And nobody knows how it was born. How were the various traditions born? Something happened and then assumed larger dimensions. Often there was no real bite, often the tarantata wasn't actually bitten by a spider. No, the tarantula has nothing to do with it. It may be an illness relieved through music. It may be a need ... Today, if someone has convulsions, etc., there is the hospital. But, yesterday, when they had these moments of illness, these things ... well, what do you say, has she been bitten by the tarantula? Let's see ... I took part at one of these dances of a tarantata and am still left with the impression of pretence. It was behind my house and complete pretence. This person danced for an hour, for half an hour, etc.; people came and threw one hundred lire or two hundred lire onto the blanket, and when they finished playing and she was tired — it's logical that after dancing she was tired — maybe she's calmed herself, maybe she's healed; and when the people have gone away she collects all of the money and puts it away. But why pretend to suffer to make money? To make money or to convince a parent who didn't want to give their daughter in marriage to Tizio, Caio, Sempronio,"" to convince the parents that her cure could be a husband, so this one danced until her mother said: ‘Let's go to St Paul, it's necessary to go to Galatina, for this young girl a husband is needed,' and so they were convinced. It's important to look at the customs of the families, how it was possible to use this phenomenon for personal means. It's important now to go from one part to the other and to see how they coincide. I think it's necessary to reconcile everything: I don't believe ... I believe ... like you hear about Padre Pio, who performs lots of miracles.7* I take many situations into careful consideration and these lead me to not believe. The Church doesn't believe in these miracles. But what about the tarantate who jump up onto the altar, even though they entered the chapel without strength, carried in the arms of others? In a word, a young woman! Wouldn't you manage to jump onto the altar? But also the old people ... 94 Paolo: Bengasi: Paolo: Curing Myths and Fictive Cures No, there weren't any old people. There were some women who reached the age of forty, but they are the kind of women who put themselves in front of a cart and pull it for you. To jump onto the altar ... for a young woman who is emancipated, isn't difficult. It's just like with the unlikely story of when they pass through the chairs ... So what happened with the phenomenon of the chairs? There was someone who, as there was a chair on the ground, slipped through it. Contorting themselves they could pas: then the others recounted: ‘Madonna! She passed through the chair!’ But it's not true that she passed through it. It's not possible. It's absurd. But word spread, that she passed through the chair ... They also came to interview me, those from the RAI, but then I was disappointed that they didn't take my view into account. They help themselves to create spectacles, broadcasting any kind of rubbish. Then they spit on what you say ... what you hear, you should say! It's not like you always find what you want ... Now I don't know what your research is aimed at, but I would study all of this more thoroughly, but scientifically and not by hearsay, because there is lots of hearsay." If you interview a person who has been directly involved, they can't say, "No, it's not true!" having already been involved in interviews and newspapers. They tell you, "Yes, it's true! I've been miraculously healed. I went to Galatina, to St Paul, I went through this or that, etc." They will most definitely tell you this, if there still are any. But, most definitely, there will also be people who know the life of the family, the various reasons, and so you need to make this comparison: in other words, this one is telling me this in one way, and this one in another way.

When I went to Galatina, I was participating in theatre shows. What I saw in Galatina were theatrical acts, there was nothing true, all this movement that they did, all these scenes, you saw a normal person, tired, that shows immediately, but that's it, there's no illness, no bite, nothing; it's all pretence, it's all staged, it's all a show. They were up to all sorts of mischief; as you said, they climbed onto the altar. Now it's all forbidden, but you saw those who climbed onto the altar, and it's not like the one who didn't manage to walk climbed up. The young girls climbed up, the young women, etc., who had, perhaps, even rehearsed at home, climbing onto a table or a bench.

As my companion Bengasi and I drive away, having said goodbye to Paolo, I can't help but feel as if I had just walked out of a classroom. Paolo had made every effort to debunk all myths and miracles associated with the tarantula. He had reiterated various points as proof against any direct cause-and-effect link between the actual threat of spider poisoning and the crises of the tarantate. However, whereas De Martino interpreted these facts as culturally specific responses to suffering, Paolo dismissed everything as pretence. His view highlights the potential power play and manipulation for personal means that may underlie cases of tarantism, but his stance also entails the risk of rejecting this entire phenomenon on the basis of its symptoms (dispelled as inventions). However, a look at others' sceptical responses shows how the notion of invention comes into play to varying degrees for both believers and sceptics.7?

Some of the elderly farming community in the Salento continue to equate tarantism with spider poisoning. "The soil has become cold because of the pesticides, which have killed all the spiders. That is why there are no longer any tarantate," one elderly farmer told me. The (apparent?) eradication of the spider provides a straightforward explanation for the extinction of tarantism. For many, tarantism is a cause of amusement or embarrassment. "Today we laugh about it!" For some, tarantism was never more than a fable. "Ah, the tarantate — but that's a legend — I don't believe in them!" A few, moreover, do not know about tarantism. The subject was taboo in some families. A young female student at the University of Lecce confirmed that she had never heard about tarantism until it was discussed in a university course she attended. For others, belief in tarantism is irreconcilable with Christian or biomedical logic. On the morning of St Paul's festival, I spoke at length with a newspaper vendor in Galatina: "I don't believe in it," he argued, "because I follow the Church. The Church and medicine don't admit these things." This point was also brought home to me during a conversation with a middle-aged woman in a small town near Tricase: "Tarantism is a thing of the devil." The only doctor is our Lord!" For some, tarantism may have had its validity in the past, but is clearly outdated today, as Antonio Antonacci (1988: 1), a priest from Galatina, stresses: "As regards the problem of the 'tarantate,' there are people who have remained fixated, like a broken clock, in a remote past ... Tarantolism is a distant reminiscence. And, it is known that people also want to see themselves in this 'reminiscence,' as if to project themselves with gratification into a past of fears and difficulties ... the subtle denigration of the South, also in this field, is inexhaustible."

Curing Myths and Fictive Cures

When asked to speak about this phenomenon for the purposes of my research, Antonacci explained his unwillingness to do so on the basis of the fact that he considered tarantism to have been a falsehood. A retired secondary-school teacher and relative of a deceased tarantata, meanwhile, argues that the violent and traumatic roots of tarantism leave the afflicted without trust or self-esteem and with feelings of not being worthy of joy or pleasure, leading to vicious cycles of suffering, which could have been avoided with psychiatric and pharmaceutical treatment: "It's a form of self-punishment. The afflicted punish themselves by excluding themselves, because they feel excluded. This leads to a vicious circle, because this behaviour of self-exclusion easily becomes a source of embarrassment for others, who then begin to deliberately exclude these individuals too."

Yet others point to the conceptual changes modern health care has brought with it. A psychologist at a psychiatric centre in Lecce expands on this: "In the past, someone was either mad or a tarantata. The concepts of depression, burnout or nervous breakdown didn't exist. All were classified as 'mad'. The diversification of medical concepts has contributed to the end of tarantism." Music therapist Rita Cappello, meanwhile, adds: "It is very likely that symptoms of tarantism persist today under a new name, but using tarantism today instead of music therapy would be like teaching a child to learn to count on its fingers without ever giving it access to a computer."

Diverging views coexist in the Salento today, revealing various levels of belief in the historical validity or reality of tarantism. It is widely dismissed as invention or fiction, providing good reasons not to link symptoms of tarantism to contemporary disturbances. And yet the views voiced by health-care practitioners suggest that although the tarantate may no longer exist, their symptoms persist, cloaked in new terminology. The tarantula spider may have been eradicated from Salentine soil and the beliefs of its younger generations, but experiences of affliction comparable to those of the tarantate have not been eradicated with an equally reassuring certainty. Show business, as the next chapter reveals, helps to distract attention from this fact, nominating the tarantula, instead, first and foremost as an emblem of local identity.


The group Mascarimiri sings about this in their song 'Pizzica RAT' on their album Triciu (Romano 2006): 'Santu Paulu de Giurdignanu con il primo pane tra la mano' (St. Paul of Giurdignano with the first bread in his hand). I thank Linda Safran for providing me with photos of the grotto from this year, Galatina, 28 June 1999. For a collection of interviews on this case, see Chiriatti (1997b: 45-84). Giorgio Di Lecce, Lecce, 23 October 1998, confirmed this after speaking to the young man two years later. The towns listed belong to an area south-west and west of Lecce [see Fig. 0.2]. One hundred lire would be approximately 5 cents, using the conversion rate of 1,936.27 lire to one euro from 1 January 2002. "Tom, Dick, and Harry" refers to any ordinary person. Padre Pio (1887-1968) of San Giovanni Rotondo, Apulia, whose icons, statues, and devotees are widespread in Apulia, was sanctified on 16 June 2002. These views are taken from field notes based on interviews in various towns throughout the Salento, written in the period from June 1997 to August 1999.

In the Salento, we have the sun and the beautiful sea, and with the tambourine, people dance and play. But this "ethnic music" has become like a postcard of a fake Salento of nights and tarantulas. I am "ethnic" but infuriated because the tambourine mustn't become like a ring through the nose. Applaud the politicians, who invent the festivals and so everything seems to go well. And so I say: Heavy blows with sounds and songs, Heavy blows for all and without mercy. I am an infuriated "ethnic" and one thing I have to say, If we don't speak now, tell me when we should speak.!
Roberto Raheli, Album Mazzate Pesanti, 2004

The group Aramiré takes a verbally militant approach, as the lyrics of their song 'Mazzate Pesanti' (Heavy Blows), performed to the pizzica's beats, shows. Roberto Raheli, director of the group and author of this song, speaks out strongly against the commercialization and exploitation of the music, dance and territory of the Salento.

The inside cover photo of this album shows an equally evocative and all too common scene in the Salento: a rubbish dump of abandoned washing machines, stoves and fridges on the outskirts of a village marked by a flag post sign reading 'Divieto di scarico' (No Waste Dumping). A ban acting as a magnet. Raheli spotlights further contradictions:

For me, discourses need to be more complete, regarding the Salento as a whole without isolating questions of music and dance. It's no good 101 Dances with Spiders attracting tourists to festivals and other events if the beaches remain dirty. It's no good speaking of diversifying events throughout the seasons if then all major events are programmed in August. It's no good spending heaps of money on mega-concerts if the traditional stone walls all around the Salento are falling down.?

The tarantula's music and dance have become a free-for-all device, abounding in inconsistencies and bringing to the fore key issues — questions of authenticity, invented traditions and identity, in particular — associated with the so-called 'revival' or revitalization of musical traditions more generally (Hobsbawn and Ranger 1983; Grenier and Guilbault 1990; Livingston 1999; Sant Cassia 2000). This is not without friction, as Paolo Apolito (2000), lecturer in social anthropology at the University of Salerno, brilliantly discusses.

Whereas only a decade or two ago tarantism was a source of shame, fostering conceptions of Salentines and Apulians as poor and ignorant, this has been reversed today. 'This time it is the Apulians, in particular a cultural group, which is urbanized, critical and post-modern, who claim tarantism as a positive, noble and profound sign of their history and identity' (ibid.: 139). Surfing this wave, De Martino's book La terra del rimorso (1961a) 'often not read and not understood, has become a strong source of interest, concentrated, just like an emblem, a banner, of local identity' (Apolito 2000: 139). In this context, the tarantula has become 'a symbol that stands for itself' (Wagner 1986), with a certain autonomy in relation to its users, showing how the invention of meaning involves an unrelenting process of transformation.

Whereas in the past the tarantula's ritual was part of a cultural complex deeply rooted within everyday life, these links were cleanly cut by the 1990s, and tarantism appears to be no more and no less than a free-floating spot or slogan, as aptly labelled by Apolito (2000: 141): 'Tarantism is not an essence which is in some way configurable and identifiable. Instead it involves all that can be said about it.' As a manifold tool, applicable to multiple purposes, the tarantula is as ubiquitous as ever. A look at four specific initiatives that have brought the spider back to fame, locally, nationally and internationally, illustrates this. First, experimental techno-pizzica jam sessions provide examples of attempts by intellectuals and musicians to adapt the tarantula’s music and dance to contemporary music trends. The festival of San Rocco presents a second key initiative and a mecca for pizzica fans from all over the Salento, Apulia, Italy, and elsewhere, vibrating to the pizzica's rhythms from dusk to dawn on the night of 15 August each year. Thirdly, the annual 'Night of the Tarantula' concert held in August has become the diva of summer celebrations, taking the spider on tour worldwide. Finally, this large-scale event is offset by a low-key local initiative, La Sagra dei Curli, the Festival of the Spinning Top, representative of less formal, more intimate get-togethers. The pizzica's beat is the dynamo behind all of these occasions.

Taranta-muffin, Techno-pizzica, Tarantavirus: Hybridizing the Pizzica

One heated, omnipresent discourse regards the contamination of Salentine music. Some deliberately incite processes of hybridization, whereas others seek to record and reproduce 'the old ways' as much as possible. French academic Georges Lapassade (1994) is among those with an active interest in so-called hybrid musical forms and their relation to discourses on identity. Lapassade has suggested that musicians such as those of the Salentine rap group Sud Sound System can be defined as today's tarantati. This group coined the term 'taranta-muffin' to refer to a mix of Jamaican reggae and their own musical heritage, knitting together rhythms with 'local' and 'global' connections, integrating the 'foreign' and 'familiar'.

Where musical creativity reaches out to engulf influences from elsewhere, Lapassade has drawn historical connections to stress that contemporary performances of the pizzica provide essential symbols of group identity and a key to Salentine culture as such. With this in mind, Lapassade lists potential points of contact between the performances by the Sud Sound System and the rituals of the tarantate: first, in line with traditional tarantism songs, the young rap group insists on using the Leccese dialect, emphasizing its territorial origins. Second, this group's concerts may be viewed as ritualistic on the basis of the extensive involvement of the audience. A 'rotating microphone' may mark these occasions. It is passed between performers and spectators, allowing participants to contribute improvised lines. Third, certain pieces by the Sud Sound System, such as 'Afro ragga taranta jazz' on the LP Comu na Petra (1996), explicitly contain pizzica rhythms.

These connections cannot, however, make up for the deep discrepancies between historical rituals of tarantism and contemporary performances of the Sud Sound System. Interestingly, the musicians themselves initially opposed being categorized as nuovi or new tarantati, objecting to associations with a cult weighed down with prejudices, but subsequently, with the new pizzica craze, began to promote this image themselves. Meanwhile, academics Lapassade and Piero Fumarola actively promoted other experiments of 'contaminating' traditional Salentine music, including the techno-pizzica (Maggiorelli 1996).? During the 1997 Venice carnival, to which a number of Salentine groups were invited, an initial 'jam session' was organized with the Sud Sound System and Gli Ucci, a group of anziani (elderly) well respected for their musical skills and renditions of the tarantula's music in its 'traditional' sense (Durante 2005: 60-61). Since then, similar events in Lecce and elsewhere have explored the potential of this musical cocktail. Daniele Durante (1999: 174) draws attention to similarities between past rituals and such techno-pizzica events: Whoever enters this musical atmosphere loses control of inhibitory restraints and looks to the music as a vector to reach ‘other’ dimensions in which to forget, discharge, digest or eliminate the poisons and tensions of daily life ... To interrupt this sonorous flow almost brings about a physical unease in the dancers, comparable to that of the tarantate at one time, and to ravers today ... A further analogy with the therapeutic orchestra is represented in the pursuit of the instrumentalists to excite+ the tarantula by taking turns in approaching the ear of the tarantata with their instruments. In our case, this was possible through the use of the microphone. Taking turns to distance ourselves or come close both with the tambourine and with our voices, we had the impression of penetrating the bodies of the dancers. Many dancers, in fact, placed themselves close to the loudspeakers, knowing well that, when very strong sound waves are emitted, it is no longer the ear that hears, but the body. Inevitably, such comparisons require careful and_ critical consideration. However, although the techno-pizzica has been scorned by some, it is a good example of how the active and deliberate involvement of intellectuals in the promotion of research linked to the tarantula’s music and dance is fundamental to contemporary discourses on tarantism.”

The 1970s saw initial attempts, led by young intellectuals and musicians, at recording the traditional music of the Salento as performed by elderly members of society. Often these endeavours met 104 Ads and Antidotes with resistance, as they evoked memories of a past tinged with suffering and anguish, often looked back on with embarrassment. Many did not want to remember (Chiriatti 1998). Despite the ardent efforts of a few passionate individuals, it was not until the 1990s that Salentine music took off in grand style. By the year 2000, some fifty groups had sprouted out of the ground, while more established groups, with success in Italy and elsewhere, numbered a dozen or so.°

Dance ethnologist Giuseppe Gala (2002b: 48) identifies the reasons for the pizzica’s boom in the 1990s not only in intrinsic factors (the impacts of the spider’s seductive myth and the tambourine’s rhythmic repetition) but also in external ones, including choices other than drug addiction; research and cinematography on tarantism; the fashion of world music and ‘ethnic things’; the influence of esoteric, New Age philosophies and of popular figures in the Italian popular music scene (such as Eugenio Bennato, Teresa De Sio, Daniele Sepe and the group Nuova Compagnia di Canto Popolare), as well as generational fashions more generally.

A member of the discussion forum on the website www.pizzicata.it takes up this point: The success of the pizzica is certainly in part a fashionable and commercial phenomenon, but in my opinion it also represents a response to globalization, currently wanting to force us all to listen to the same music, to eat the same things (perhaps at McDonald's), to think in the same way, not to speak of war. With the recovery of popular music, traditions and local identities in general, many are looking for a way to fill a vacuum of values they feel inside... This is a phenomenon that is happening in the whole world and it is positive if it doesn't lead to the construction of new fences: a community can have a strong identity but it is important that it is a community that is open to the outside. After all, many of our traditions were born from a mixture of cultures that have influenced our land. Similarly, the late Giorgio Di Lecce, director of the group Arakne Mediterranea and lecturer in the history of dance at the University of Lecce, explained: "In my opinion, it is because a generation has passed. Those of today no longer have points of reference as the generation before did. The young people today are in need of roots. They are looking for points of reference." The notion of terra, of earth or native land (translated here in the sense of roots or origins), is evoked to speak about a lack of coordinates in everyday life. Di Lecce takes up a common discourse associating modernity with the challenges and hardships of being 'rootless', despite the incomparably improved socio-economic conditions of younger generations in comparison with their predecessors.

The pizzica's burst of popularity has also created a source of intense rivalry and back-stabbing regarding questions of origins, music execution and ownership. Many insist on having been the first to revitalize this music, claiming their right to others' acknowledgement, if not to copyrights. Rather than considering the efforts of various individuals and groups in creating the momentum and popularity that the pizzica currently enjoys, energy, words, time and money are, often indirectly, invested in fighting for 'first place' — despite equally insistent claims regarding the ancient and medieval precedents of this music and dance.

Depending on the perspective taken, various names are pinpointed as key catalysts behind the pizzica's recent revitalization, although overall it is probably fair to say that momentum picked up over the years through the engagement and dedication of the many who spurred on this movement through both enthusiasm and competition.

In 2007, the CD Tarantavirus was brought out in conjunction with the events calendar quiSalento, presenting the combined musical talents of two Salentine stars: Uccio Aloisi, retired farmer in his eighties and charismatic singer and tambourine player of the group Gli Ucci (Raheli et al. 2004), and Cesare dell'Anna, talented trumpet player in his forties, known for his performances inspired by Balkan music. "Tarantavirus — the impoverished spider" is a disc of passage, from the ancient to the modern, from the "old" to the young, it is a representation of the meridian spirit through a "technological" lens, a natural "contamination" of ancient instigations with new technologies, new desires and new dances.

Tarantavirus is one of hundreds of CDs on the burgeoning market of the tarantula's music and dance. Efforts to revitalize this music and dance, of which the Festival of San Rocco is a key example, have become inextricably intertwined with their commercialization. The Festival of San Rocco: Revitalizing and Commercializing Traditions

I still remember as if it was yesterday that incredible shove he gave me, perhaps with the elbow, which pushed me into the centre of the circle; I raise my eyes, and find myself face to face with a gypsy; he is large with dark skin and his fiery eyes are fixed on me; his body moves lightly in spite of its massive structure... wake up! phew... with incredible potency he skims my face... with no time to reflect, I dodge; my adrenaline rises to never imagined levels, I'm afraid, my eyes search for my preceptor; he plays, his squinting eyes focused on nothing; careful! Lamberto Probo, a member of the group Officina Zoé, describes his first experience with the scherma dance in a passage from the book. The text discusses the festival of San Rocco, which takes place in Torrepaduli, a small town in the south-western cape. The festival has grown in popularity over the past two decades, with people of all ages participating in the tambourine playing and dancing.

The text also mentions the efforts to revitalize traditional Salentine celebrations, which were eroded during the post-war period due to factors such as large-scale emigration and modernization. These efforts led to the resurrection of the festival of San Rocco, as well as other similar festivals throughout Europe.

In 2005, the author visited Torrepaduli, finding the town center and piazza packed with people. The atmosphere was heavy with a sense of chaos and disregard, although excessive drunkenness or aggression was absent. The circles of musicians held back throngs of onlookers and carved out spaces for dancers to move. These circles formed spontaneously, with participants joining in and dropping out, determining whether circles lasted or simply dissolved. Some continue for hours, with spectators engaging and animating the performances, and creating a stark contrast to the confusion elsewhere around the festival. Where rules are respected, seduction and playful competition reign. Despite this success in attracting crowds today, many of those who never deserted this festival and worked to revitalize it are unhappy about the current situation. ‘It’s nothing but chaos’ is the most common criticism, initiating fiery discussions between traditionalists and modernists (Metafune 2002).

Giovanni Pellegrino (2002) draws up a balance sheet twenty years after the initial return to San Rocco, isolating two main problems: the ‘acoustic pollution’ of market stalls, with loudspeakers booming over the sound of the tambourines played live, and the increasing presence of ‘invasive’ drums and African rhythms. ‘With every respect for other cultures and their fans,’ Pellegrino (2002) appeases his readers, ‘I believe ... that we’re speaking about the most classical meeting of Salentine tambourines and the rhythms of the pizzica and of nothing else.’

By 2005, leaflets of the manifesto Proteggiamo Torrepaduli, Let’s Protect Torrepaduli, aimed at safeguarding this festival, present four clear demands: respect for the devotees of San Rocco; a zone in front of St Rocco’s sanctuary reserved for ‘traditional circles’ without drums; no beginners participating in circles; and, no more than one couple appearing in a circle at one time. The subtitle, ‘Awareness Campaign for the Recovery and Protection of One of the Last Traditional Salentine Festivals’, raises questions about how traditional a revitalized festival can be and, more importantly, what purposes its apparent traditional qualities may serve.

Where continuity is ruptured, as Hobsbawn (1983: 13) points out, reference to the past often disguises other motives, hidden agendas, ‘exercises in social engineering’, if not overt discrimination. Commercial factors are often the first to be highlighted, as the pizzica with its mystical roots in the Salento has helped place this area in a prime position on European tourist maps. Although widespread efforts have sought to make the tarantula’s music and dance accessible on a large scale at the Festival of San Rocco, these endeavours increasingly clash with accusations of and interests in commercialization.

Desires to make this festival appealing to everyone are questioned, as certain participants, such as the punkabbestia, challenge social norms and expectations. Despite calls for the traditional and authentic, San Rocco presents fertile soil for the invention of tradition, as women dance the scherma and the pizzica is danced to African drums. As these drums are marginalized and the tambourine prioritized, notions of ‘contamination’ or ‘hybridization’ are once again defied. These tensions equally mark the mega-concert of the Night of the Tarantula, the spider's first and foremost spot [see Fig. 4.2].

La Notte della Taranta: a Music and Media Spectacle
On 27 August 2005, by 10 p.m. the eighth edition of La Notte della Taranta, the Night of the Tarantula, is in full swing. Some have nicknamed it la notte fatale, the fatal night (Santoro 2005b). I have just arrived at Melpignano, having skirted the long queue of cars waiting to turn off the Lecce-Maglie motorway to find a parking spot, on a friend's motorbike. The well-loved elderly singer Uccio Aloisi and his band are up on stage, their faces projected onto various screens suspended from the ex-cloister walls next to the grand stage, surrounded by an estimated throng of some eighty thousand listeners (Maruccio 2005). The atmosphere is lively and light-hearted. This is obviously the place to be if you want to listen to Salentine music in concert grandeur, enjoy a warm summer night get-together, or care to be seen where the action is. Street vendors selling food and ‘ethnic’ jewellery make the most of this night. Wine, T-shirts, and shoes with the spider logo of this 2005 version are also on sale: a first-time marketing stunt to promote local products in tandem with this occasion (Anon. 2005). People dance, chat, and hang out, packed like sardines closer to the stage, and standing or sitting in more dispersed groups on the edges. Backstage, meanwhile, there are snacks and drinks for free for those who have the status or connections for an entry pass.

A large number of the Salento's current centre-left government, including its president Giovanni Pellegrino, are here. Other significant politicians have not missed this occasion either. Among them are Massimo D'Alema, leader of the national party Democratici di Sinistra, as well as Nichi Vendola, member of the left-wing party Rifondazione Comunista and current president of the region of Apulia.

On stage, well-known Italian stars—Francesco De Gregori, Giovanna Marini, Piero Peli, and Sonia Bergamasco, to name some of the most famous—take turns behind the microphone with Salentine performers: seventy singers and musicians making up the Orchestra Popolare la Notte della Taranta, directed by Ambrogio Sparagna, doing this job for a second year round. Newspapers, meanwhile, have announced the participation of a Chinese television troupe (Presicce 2005), as well as initiatives towards inserting this night into the Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani (Indennitate 2005; Vendola 2005). The spider is back in action, many times magnified by the media, and thousands are dancing to its tune.

This highly controversial jewel of Salentine cultural policymakers was inaugurated in 1998. On the evening of 24 August 1998, eleven Salentine music groups performed their musical repertoires in nine different villages of the Grecia Salentina, a region south of the Salentine capital of Lecce, in which Griko or Greek dialects are still spoken by a small minority.'° By 11.30 p.m., musicians and spectators converged on the centrally located town of Melpignano, where a final concert including all participants was staged. This spectacle had been rehearsed for three days preceding the event under the direction of Neapolitan musician Daniele Sepe. Crowds in the hundreds tightly packed the main town square, where a large stage was floodlit in bright colours. Performers of all ages sang, danced, and played in an as yet unprecedented collaborative effort. The crowd participated frenetically. 110 Ads and Antidotes Circles of tambourine players and dancers formed, broke up, and re-formed below the stage amidst a flash of cameras and enthusiastic applause, until the concert was officially concluded with an announcement by Maurizio Agamennone, ethnomusicologist on the scientific committee of this event: ‘See you all at the Night of the Tarantula '99!’ His invite signalled the pizzica’s step into the limelight of what has become a major annual festival within the world music scene. Promoted by the Istituto Diego Carpitella, inaugurated in 1998 to document and encourage research on local traditions (Santoro 2005a: 93), this night, bringing together so many of the Salento's pizzica enthusiasts, was for many a great success. For others, the pleasure evoked did not outweigh underlying dilemmas. A heated debate about the link between tradition and modernity in Salentine music emerged in the local papers subsequent to the first occasion.

Opinions appeared to be divided into two main camps. One side spoke of the need for an active confrontation of the Salento's musicians with other types of music, in order to elaborate the existing repertoire of Salentine music through 'hybridization' or 'contamination' with other styles (labelled ethnic, techno, New Age, etc.), thereby fostering innovation and diversity in a context within which 'the same songs are continually fried and refried' (V. Santoro 2001). The other side argued that any kind of popular music was inherently subject to a process of 'natural' change, but nevertheless staunchly underlined the importance of not forcing this process. Whereas it was seen as inevitable that certain groups were, for instance, influenced by Balkan music, considering the strong influx of people from these regions to southern Italy in recent years, intellectually imposed projects 'conceived at a table' (Raheli 1998) were strongly disputed.

As in its first year on stage, this event continues to attract enormous crowds, as well as immense criticism. "The syndrome of the tarantula', Gino Di Mitri (2001) writes, 'is transversal, invasive as an enticing pest: it pleases the anti-global supporters of a home-made "buena vista social forum" just as much as right-wing municipalities engaged in (why not?) the popularistic road to tarantism.' In fact, performances of musica popolare such as the pizzica have accompanied the electoral campaigns of both right- and left-wing political candidates over the years. Generally speaking, however, initial inputs leading to the re-appropriation of tarantism and its music are intrinsically related to a left-wing political ideology — still considered the most politically correct in the pizzica milieu — focused on promoting and defending popular culture and local traditions.

Significantly, problems that have shaken up the organization of the Notte della Taranta and the very foundations of the Istituto Carpitella are linked not only to divergent opinions among the scientific and artistic committee, but also to the interests of politicians engaged in this event. As Gino Di Mitri (2001) states: 'What's the target? Visibility in the media, popularity among the pizzica aficionados, publicity and votes!’ Technology and visibility have become major priorities, as has the creation of a Night of the Tarantula Foundation aimed at promoting research and performances in the field of popular music through a permanent Night of the Tarantula Orchestra (Torsello 2007).

Further discussions regard the institutionalization and legislation of popular music and archiving resources (V. Santoro 2005b). Moreover, whereas initially criticisms were voiced about the vast discrepancies in local government expenditure for cultural programmes focused on 'cultivated' rather than 'popular' music, the pizzica has now become a major market label. In the summer of 2003, ex-drummer of the group Police Stewart Copeland was in charge of the Orchestra Popolare la Notte della Taranta, taking it on its first European tour in the summer of 2004, including the capital cities of Athens, Brussels, Paris and Rome. In February 2006, the Venice Carnival concluded with a smaller edition of this show (Barone 2006). Two months later, local and national newspapers hailed the orchestra’s Beijing concert, with fifty thousand paying fans, as a unique promotion for Italy at large (Presicce 2006). One enthusiast proudly states, “For once, I am really proud of my homeland.” Another critic, however, expresses shame and fear that the degradation of this vicenda has reached a point of no return. Critics argue that the money used for this event could have promoted various local initiatives, while politicians and cultural managers plan the next stops for the Night of the Tarantula musicians: Jordan and the Football World Cup Championships in Germany (Indennitate 2006).

In 2007, the Night of the Tarantula celebrated its tenth anniversary, focusing on integrating other music traditions from the Mediterranean basin and promoting female voices (Quarta 2007a). Prior to the grand night, two weeks of concerts brought various Salentine music groups on stage in fifteen municipalities of the Grecia Salentina, as well as the towns of Otranto and Andrano (Quarta 2007b: 77). La Notte della Taranta has, in many ways, come to epitomize the contemporary revitalization of the pizzica.

Warnings abound. Dinko Fabris (2005) wrote in the national newspaper La Repubblica, “Dance and sing, but please leave the poor tarantulas be, who, besides, should be a protected species.” Roberto Raheli is more adamant: “The Night of the Tarantula arrives in the very delicate context of the re-appropriation of almost lost songs, like an elephant in a crystal factory.” Some people have always boycotted the event, making their act of absence a statement in itself.

A snapshot of another summer night in 1998 provides a glimpse of another festivity, much more intimate and small-scale. This event involved the tarantula's music and the improvised re-enactment of elements of the tarantate's rituals by one of the female participants, Tanya Pagliara, who explicitly declares herself to be a (modern) tarantata.

La Sagra dei Curli, the Festival of the Spinning Top, is dedicated to the late Antonio Verri, a much-loved Salentine poet and writer. It is 1 August 1998, a Saturday in Vignacastrisi, a small town south of Otranto. Tanya, in her early thirties, arrived with me. She is an artist, and two of her recent exhibitions revolved around the tarantula. Other paintings took shape at popular music concerts. Her paintings are brightly colored and depict the Salento's natural landscape, spiders and serpents, the tambourine, and a young woman. Tanya declared that she was 'bitten' in this period and became obsessed with everything that had to do with tarantism. Her tambourine, given to her as a gift by a musician, is inscribed with the words, per Tanya, la tarantata (for Tanya, the tarantata). In her life, she tells me, everything seemed to be going wrong. ‘I’m run down,’ she says. ‘Does it show?’ It is 9 p.m. when we arrive at Vignacastrisi, and the town is quiet. Only the central square, bathed in yellow street lights, shows sporadic activity. The bar is open, and a group of men sit on pletic chairs, chatting in the night-time shadows of a few large trees. Cars and mopeds wait by the pavement. Occasionally others drive by, cutting into the bubble of male conversations. We park next to the town hall, and a bustle of sound and movement takes us through an archway into a courtyard, where a white spotlight illuminates a rectangular space filled with some seventy chairs. A number of people intermingle, and the air is filled with anticipation. The program of the last but one of five festival days has yet to start. Tonight, the Antonio Verri Award will be announced, its aim being to stimulate grass-roots creations in the fields of poetry, music, and theatre.

A further hour passes. A table is set up in one corner and laid with food: bowls of freshly cut tomatoes drenched in basil and frise, the local dried bread. Two barrels of wine and water flank the table legs. Small groups gather, sit, talk, come and go. A cement staircase leads around two sides of the courtyard to the first floor, where two photographic exhibitions are displayed. There are pictures of the tarantate at Galatina and others of the serpari of San Domenico in the province of L'Aquila, Abruzzo, with processions of saintly statues and humans draped with snakes. There are also publications on sale and to give away: a collection of poems presented at previous events of this kind; short stories folded on single leaflets; and a booklet of photocopied texts and images.

By 10 p.m., a respectable crowd has assembled, and a few introductory words turn one end of the courtyard into a stage. There is Annalii Sabetta, small, energetic, in a white summer dress, presenting the various performers. Tanya and her female partner are among these. In summer dresses, with painted faces, the two lay out what they identify as a magic circle. Masks, made from natural fibers, and candles mark its perimeter. Their performance evokes a mystical world, inhabited by winds and entranced beings embodied in colors, symbols, actions, and songs. It is inspired, Tanya tells me later, by her recent visits to local caves.

The audience, moving about freely, bridges all generations and participates keenly, looking on, chatting, commenting, and applauding at the end. There are locals enjoying the evening for its out-of-the-ordinary entertainment. There are others who have come for the pizzica. Many are 'regulars' in the world of the sibilo lungo, the 'deep murmur,' coined and identified by Antonio Verri as emanating, since time immemorial, from 'the close and profound link that exists between Salentines and their land ... that interior force which you can feel among our people, that close link with the land, which manifests itself in the grand phenomena of devotion towards our saints, our village festivals and towards the pizzica' (Presicce 1999: 11).

We may wonder, however, to what extent this perceived connectedness to the land and the pizzica may be generally acknowledged among Salentines or is rather a notion predominant largely among the younger and left-wing population. The performances continue. Poetry readings alternate with short theatrical sketches and end with the declaration of the prize-winners. Tanya interrupts occasionally with theatrical gestures and elaborates on the female announcer’s comments: ‘Do you know Annalii? She is a tarantata like me. I... I know her.’ Remarks such as these solicit friendly amusement and feedback from the crowd. Eventually, the invited band Terra de Menzu begins to play. Only a few notes from the guitar, tambourine, flute and harmonica move the first dancers onto the floor. From the seats and side-wings others clap and sing along. Slow pieces of music alternate with faster ones. Tanya dances in the crowd and enthusiastically tries to draw others onto the floor.

The fifth song is slow. The male vocalist plays with the lyrics. His gestures jokingly refer to Tanya, who is sitting next to him. The audience responds with good-hearted laughter and Tanya reacts by sensuously moving her bare shins up his leg. The sixth piece is a pizzica. It cuts into and changes the atmosphere, propelling Tanya and others onto their feet, into its rhythm. Tanya lets out a shrill scream, throws herself onto her knees, flings her head from side to side with the tambourine’s beat and imitates the tarantate’s cry: ‘A-hi!’ Others move around and past her. She is neither ignored nor given exclusive attention as she stretches out on the ground and rolls over and over, colliding with the dancing feet of others, fingers tapping the pavement, further cries straining her vocal chords. Eventually she sits up, stands and merges with the other dancers.

Dances with Spiders
The pizzica continues for over five minutes until the vocalist’s sweat-covered face contorts in a grimace. He warns the other musicians and stops playing. The bleeding skin of his thumb has left blood streaks on his tambourine. Shortly afterwards the group bid farewell. Some spectators leave, too. Others remain. Chairs are moved aside to make more room. One person strikes up the chords of a song and others join in until another piece is proposed, at times interrupting the first, as musicians and audience mingle. Tanya dances, sings and plays tirelessly, communicating in grand gestures with a male singer as they improvise verses to the melody of a well-known song. By 2 a.m. the remaining participants gather around a female singer whose striking voice rings around the courtyard. At this point, Tanya and I leave. Driving home, she remarks how liberating it had been to imitate the tarantate’s ritual: she feels better now.

La Sagra dei Curli presents an example of an event far from the spotlight of television cameras and media coverage. The tarantula’s music and dance are engaged with to commemorate Antonio Verri and to celebrate a sense of community among his friends and fans, while endeavouring to put Verri’s vision of spurring on creativity into practice, independently of predominating political tendencies or financial subsidies. It thus presents a major contrast to large-scale events in the public eye. Although unique in its objective, it may be seen as representative of many such community or home-based initiatives hosting the tarantula’s music and dance, which may be recorded only in local newspapers or on home-made videos, if at all.

Clearly, just as the past ritual form of the pizzica was used not only to heal the tarantula’s victims but also appropriated for manipulation and to achieve other, less explicit ends, so today the tarantula’s music and dance present a double-edged sword. It is a means of advertising and merchandising the Salento — using rhetorics of musical antidotes to modern ills as a publicity scoop — without consideration of its natural and cultural heritage. At the same time, it presents not only a potential source of celebrating identities within and beyond the Salento, but also a key to developing this area according to culturally sensitive and environmentally sustainable parameters. A look at the experiences of participants, such as those of the modern tarantata Tanya, reveals how the tarantula's music and dance are still, or again, being linked to experiences of recovering well-being.


Ads and Antidotes 'IL sibilo lungo translates literally as "the long 's' sound", a sibilant. Although "murmur" does not capture this phoneme, it attempts to render the deep, mythic echo and murmur of the land'. This notion emerges from the following much-quoted lines of Antonio Verri: 'It changes, it will change much, the face of the land, of gathered humanity, of entire towns ... what will never change is the idea of dialoguing with the earth that humanity has established from time immemorial, the long breath, 'the deep murmur' which can be heard only in the early morning, while looking out over the vast fields, while standing next to the silver trees, the silent sentinels.' (in Del Giudice 2005: 264)

Dances with Spiders Fig. 5.1 Ada Metafune and her mother Sabina Romano dancing the pizzica, Parabita, July 2001 (photo: Karen Liidtke).

Chapter 5 Sensing Identities and Well-being: Personal Motivations and Experiences To be true to oneself is, in the end, the only thread that links us to our individual father's house. 

Would tarantism, with its heavy baggage of inherent crises and suffering, make it to the headlines today if it were too close to the bone, if it were attributed more than a soap opera feel? The answer of a middle-aged woman, native to Galatina, is clear: ‘Today this tradition has lost itself. It was more than a tradition; it was anguish. We experienced it above all as anguish. But today you don’t feel that any more. I find it interesting as something that identifies us as Salentines. But I wouldn’t take up anything other than the dance for today’s purposes.’

Nowadays, it appears most people in the Salento would defend this view. According to its new terms and new outfit as a source of local pride and identity, tarantism can resurface even within officially religious and political contexts. Very few speak openly about the crises cutting into their lives today and how they relate these to their engagement with the pizzica and other Salentine music. Every performance is, however, cross-cut by the personal biography of each participant, and every stage, no matter how publicized or intimate, is set within a complex web of intentions and choices. The current media hype leaves little, if any, space or attention for the personal dimensions behind this buzz, some explicit, others tucked away in the wings.

A number of Salentines, however, like Tanya, who danced at the Sagra dei Curli in 1998, link their experiences of the pizzica to sensations of enhanced well-being. A consideration of the individual motivations and experiences of performers engaging in the tarantula’s music and dance today reveals how memories, autobiographies and perceptions of the self may be evoked, reshaped and reconstituted in this way.

The group Alla Bua, perhaps more than any other, has linked its performances to discourses on well-being. Their focus on the healing power of the tarantula’s music, although emphasized less in recent years, sets the scene for the accounts of two women, Tanya Pagliara and Ada Metafune, whose lives have been transformed through their engagement with the tarantula.

The Alla Bua: Music for Healing

On 24 April 1998, I see the Alla Bua on stage, in action. On this occasion, what at first seems a technical disaster brings home to me aspects of what these musicians define as the potential of their music. It is Friday evening; the group is up on an elevated stage in a large tent-like sports hall in the town of Taurisano in the south-west Salento. The floor before them is packed with teenagers dancing to their fast and frenzied rhythms. Then, suddenly, the electric fuses blow and, as the amplifiers go out, the music jumps to a different volume and tonality, ringing, for a moment, through the dark, until dim emergency lights reset the scene. The atmosphere has changed and the musicians have moved forward from behind their now-useless, microphones. They step off the stage without interrupting their playing and begin to circle the dance floor. Then they halt in a semicircle and suddenly turn round. All at once, a young female participant finds herself trapped in a ring of pounding instruments. She remains frozen, standing as she had before, with her arms folded protectively across her chest. The musicians play fiercely, letting their instruments address her, their eyes making no contact with hers. She laughs back, embarrassed, at others joking about the trap she is in. A moment later, one of her legs starts to move to the beats that are bombarding her, and her arms slip open, dropping to her side. After no more than a minute or two, the musicians turn away and move on around the dance space. Freed from their clasp, the young woman joins the crowd of dancers. Later she tells me:

I had been feeling angry, after an argument with a friend, and was standing on my own, trapped in my anger and closed stance. The musicians took me by surprise. Their music provoked an itch to dance, to get rid of the iron grip of this contained rage excluding me from dancing. By standing round me, physically cutting me off from the dance floor, this sense of confinement was duplicated, externalized. At the same time, the music encouraged a reaction and, like an invitation, drew me out of my frozen state. In fact, as soon as the musicians moved away, I joined in the dancing without a second thought, my anger pushed backstage by the desire to dance, to be part of the fun.

When I relate this occasion to the lead singer and tambourine player of the group Alla Bua, at a later date, he replies:

Our music has a certain force. It is a force. A successful performance starts off slowly and then gradually we try to charge the music more and more, always more, increasing the rhythm. A strong sense of flying is evoked. Sometimes it rises up directly from the feet. You feel the music physically. When I feel this sensation, in that moment, I’m happy, I’m content. It is something that gives me immense pleasure, because I know then that if I am feeling these vibrations, these sensations, the others are feeling them too. However, when I don’t feel this sensation — this music that takes off by itself — I feel discontented, I feel down. But, to us, it almost always happens!

Even though we aren’t musicians. I don't know music. I've studied it by myself, but I don’t know how to play an instrument. I know how to play the tambourine, but it doesn’t have particular chords, ours at least. It’s not based on notes, but on tonality and vibrations. To trust in your own force, potency and spirituality means succumbing with this force and spirituality to everything that you don’t know on a theoretical and practical level as far as music is concerned.

The three group members I spoke to were all in their mid to late forties at the time. Two of them grew up with the pizzica. Playing this music, they argue, has always been an important part of their lives and their identity. The third is a psychologist who is originally from the Salento but spent many years of his childhood and student life in other parts of Italy before settling back in the Salento.

123 Dances with Spiders Inevitably, the outlook and aim of this group has been influenced by his various insights into the curative uses of music in other cultural and therapeutic contexts. ‘Their way of understanding and playing music aims to involve the spectator in a frenetic and liberating dance which helps to cure “modern ills”: stress, tension, anxiety, depression, etc.’ (Anon. 2002). Such is the presentation of the Alla Bua in a summer events calendar. Assumptions linking the pizzica and well-being merge with others expressed in the group’s first 2003 music video (Alla Bua 2003): this portrays ritual re-enactments of transparently dressed teenage tarantate responding, with pouting lips and swaying hips, to the insistent drumming and piercing gaze of male musicians. Highly charged erotic images speak for themselves, showing how modern life reverberates both to the beat of industrial and commercial demands and to images of femininity and masculinity as portrayed in fashion magazines and TV spots. Nevertheless, concert settings are often uncritically attributed to healing potential, and the pizzica is seen to maintain therapeutic powers capable of addressing contemporary afflictions. ‘They say that we play “hard pizzica”!’ affirms the Alla Bua lead singer. ‘It’s because of the intense and fast manner in which we play.’ ‘The rhythms today are different,’ the group’s guitarist explains further: That is why we express this music differently. They tell us that we play ‘pizzica rock’. Why? Because this attracts the young people. Clearly, it is also a personal form of expression, our way of interpreting the pizzica. But, at the same time, we've noticed that this form is closer to the music of teenagers today, who also live in more accelerated terms. In my opinion, it is this that makes this music a form of therapy, because it links the ancient — our musical tradition, which entails certain values — with faster rhythms, which are those of today. It reunites our traditions and origins with how we live today. It gives the young teenagers a sense of continuity, while they live in a schizophrenic manner, with extreme generational and cultural gaps. They immediately throw themselves into these frenetic rhythms, not knowing what their origins are. But musically and rhythmically they live these rhythms as resonances inside themselves, whether in a conscious or unconscious manner.”

Sensing Identities and Well-being

All three musicians confirm that they see a link between the music they are playing and its impact on well-being. One of them expands on this:

Yes, because it does us good as well. For us, too, the same method as for the tarantate can be used. It’s the same. Music is important because it’s like an outstretched hand. The rhythm is like a hand that helps you get up when you don't feel well, when you're ill, when you can’t walk properly; it repairs you. Music summons up energy, it calls upon the spirit or, rather, I’d use the word blood; it calls upon the blood, just like a magnet. This is the message we try to communicate. It’s very simple. We invite everyone to communicate, because we feel the need for this energy to circulate, to be able to feel it within our spirits, in order to feel well.

This link between music and well-being is also seen to be expressed in the group’s name: The name Alla Bua may be seen to mean ‘other cure’. The name may have many meanings. We called ourselves the Alla Bua initially because we often played in a tavern, where a group of old men, when singing, always repeated these words as a refrain between the verses of whatever song they were singing. It never came to my mind to ask them why. However, first of all, what is the meaning of la bua? It means fracture, confusion, and abrasion, something that has hurt you. Meanwhile, our music can have a therapeutic effect. There is therefore this sense of fracture, and at the same time the notion of healing.

Like the Alla Bua musicians, two modern tarantate describe the impacts of the tarantula’s music and dance, as promoting well-being. Tanya’s Story: Dancing Colours

I first met Tanya, who re-enacted elements of the tarantate’s rituals at the Sagra dei Curli in August 1998, when she was in her early thirties. At the time, she was studying to complete her university degree in sociology and actively following her vocation as a painter, while living with her mother in a village just outside Lecce. Her life story is marked by disjunctures: her parents were separated and she spent various periods of residence between Italy and France, where her father lived. When I meet Tanya again in February 2008, she confirms that her need for the tarantula’s music and dance, animating the creation of her paintings [see Figs 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3], 125 Dances with Spiders was directly linked to a love story that could not be expressed or lived due to the circumstances within which it emerged. She associates this with the time of her initial bite. On 27 January 1998, during a visit to her home near Lecce, Tanya first told me the following:

We were painting in the open, on the beach, with music at a high volume. It was a type of techno situation. There were lots of young people, playing the djembe and tambourines. There was absolute liberty. The heat was terrible. I was barefoot all day long. We were living in direct contact with nature, always hearing those primordial, archaic rhythms, dum, dum, dum. And I felt this bite, the bite of this earth. At the time, I accessed a magic world of my own. In retrospect, a year on, I have tried to rationalize it all. I think that something was moved inside me, repressed memories, all of the culture I received when young, the fear of the tarantula. Seeing and visualizing this phobia in something else, in an artistic product, unchained this reaction in me. But also a love story, because guilt followed, remorse, the figure of the Salentine woman with everything she entails. There was this fear of being bitten by a spider since I was small, then the fact of not believing in anything when I was older, and then the experience of entering into this absurd dimension. I believed in the tarantula. I felt possessed, but possessed in a strange way, because there was a lucid part of me that didn’t believe in anything.

It all began two years ago when I decided to follow a university course in the sociology of religions. I went sporadically and with little interest. However, hearing and speaking about tarantism, about altered states of consciousness, about Castaneda, and seeing videos about these topics, inspired me to find out whether there was someone who was expressing these things artistically: a tarantolated painter. I met him, a painter from Gallipoli, who feels the bite of this earth. He has read a lot of Castaneda and, in an artistic manner, expresses the feel of this land and the bite of the Salentine earth. His favourite subjects are tarantulas or crabs, things that bite. He says that he speaks with the snakes and has always felt this call, this strange bite. I suspected that it had to do with phenomena of trances linked to images: seeing the painting of the other artist, I entered into this dimension. He maintains that the inducing factor was the loud music played all day long under the burning sun and the hard work that made us access these images, this other dimension of consciousness. There are many factors. I can’t tell you what it was exactly. I followed the tambourine players, all of the groups. For an entire year, I did performances with them. I wasn’t in a lucid state, although there was a lucid part of me which knew that I had to follow that road, to get out of this, to become rational again, 126 Sensing Identities and Well-being because I was living only off colours and sounds. All day long I was fixed on hearing the tambourines. I passed from psychedelic art to this typically Salentine thing, even though I don’t feel Salentine. I have lived here, in France, in Sardinia. Maybe it was the influence the university course had on me regarding tarantism and altered states of consciousness. I associated these with the type of painting I was doing before, the psychedelic art of the discos. Previously, I had never painted typically Salentine subjects. This must have been the input. I told myself, you can do it, but only by tarantulating yourself, as a tarantolata. I'm not sure if I liked it or not, because many of those things happened to me which you cannot talk about, which cannot be said in words. I became part of a magic game. I decided to leave, to go to Paris, to stay there for three months to try and liberate myself, and when I returned I decided to create l'areu pintu, to work in a group, as therapy, to get out of this dimension. I looked for other artists who had something of me. We went into the countryside, to abandoned farmhouses. We didn't eat. We listened only to the tambourines. There was a strange contact between the seven members of our group. We didn't communicate. We understood each other in our own way and we created our pictures in this primordial state.

Before continuing, Tanya takes me to a back room where she has stored her paintings. There are over twenty animated by a spider in some part or other of the frame. The colours are bright, oils mixed with earth and other natural fibres, and some of the canvases stretch up to a metre or two in length and breadth. One by one, Tanya holds up her pictures and speaks about what inspired her to create each one:

This picture shows an olive tree that is spitting out a tambourine. It is the sensation of the tarantula: an ugly olive tree that is vomiting a tambourine, a vortex that turns and turns. I made this while I was in a trance. There's lots of movement. It's rhythmical. They told me that I was dancing while painting. But the idea didn't come to me. My consciousness was completely annihilated. I was concentrating on those sounds of the tambourines. I didn't feel anything. I opened my eyes and saw this image. It had materialized itself. I didn't conceive it beforehand. It exploded in my head on its own and I discharged it, onto the earth. And I got out of that dimension.

It was a real therapy in the end to collaborate with the others. I gave a part of myself. I encouraged the others to live in the way that I was living. I entered into a dimension of myself and the others. I — us — God. That is not I — God. But, we — God. I — us — God. Among all artists there is this predominance of thinking: 'I against the others' or 'I am my own God.' Instead, being together we created an 'I- <127> Dances with Spiders individual-but-group'. We tried to understand what was meant by this ballo all'arcu pintu, this dance of the arcu pintu, which is often referred to with respect to the tarantate. That is, to dance a colour, what does it mean? This is what we experienced in the end. We felt the arcu pintu inside ourselves, as a visualization. It's something that cannot be said in words. You feel, see and touch the sounds and colours. It is a different dimension of awareness, where sound and colours become mixed and quasi-materialized.

Later, when I recovered, I enquired about the meaning of the term arcu pintu. I wanted to understand what these colours of tarantism were. Why did the women see all the colours, wanting to dance all the colours, all the emotions? What I was told, although these things are never certain, is that arcu pintu is derived from the arcu dellu pintu, which refers to weaving in colours, like the spider. A woman weaves her cloth with specific colours, with specific emotions, maybe the particular emotion that has made her ill. For some, arcu pintu implied something mystic linked to Salentine magic, something that the spirits have, to hide treasures, mischievous spirits who play with destiny; for others, this term referred to architecture, to a painted arch; for yet others, it implied the rainbow, seven frequencies, seven colours. This is what the old people told me. For the young people it doesn't mean anything. For me it relates to everything, like a keyword. From the moment that you enter into this world of the tarantate, etc., you find yourself thinking as a believer, as a Catholic, as a superstitious person. Then you think, no, it's not possible. There is something strange, time flows differently, the circle always repeats itself, an absurd circle repeats itself, strange encounters, for instance, or knowing in advance where a person is, meeting a number of people all interested in the same things at a single site. It's something that can't be said in words. For a believer it is a saint, destiny, the tarantula. I believe that it is a strong suggestion, which induces this dimension where space and time change and consequently you live in another way. The contact between people, space, time and the others changes, and then these quasi-mystical things happen. It is mysticism, even though mysticism is different. Others also see me as someone mystical, magical, but I don't feel that way. Every time somebody experiences modified states of consciousness, they begin to speak in mystical terms. For that reason I've also been taken for a kind of saint. It annoys me, because it's not like that.

Tanya struggles to describe what she has lived. Her account underlines the difficulty of conveying subjective experiences in words. Metaphors and symbols help, but their multivalency inevitably invites diverging interpretations and misunderstandings. Like Ada and Matteo on 29 June 2001 in Galatina and the tarantate in the past, Tanya weaves meaningful links between apparent coincidences. She draws, moreover, not only on the phenomenon of tarantism, but also on anthropological, sociological and New Age literature, grasping the notions of magic, mysticism, trance and altered states of consciousness in an attempt to express what she has experienced.

She goes on: In our group, l'arcu pintu, we spoke a lot about our experiences, about altered states of consciousness and about whether art was therapy for us or not. What emerged is that it is a form of therapy, yes, but not alone. There is this desire to recompose our sense of self, which is torn from the existing social system, because no artist recognizes herself in this social system. However, art goes beyond therapy: it is a message, a way of communicating with others and for some it is a way of communicating with God, for others a means of contesting, of upsetting the existing culture, of creating a counter-culture with images. In this sense, it goes beyond therapy, but there is also therapy. Therapy is above all socialization, an alternative way of socializing for artists. We socialized in this way. That was the beautiful thing about l'arcu pintu: we came out of our shells, our worlds, our individualism that is typical of painters. Instead, l'arcu pintu as a group was an alternative group, an alternative way of socializing. There was therapy, because I didn't manage to get out of this state on my own. I wanted to return to normality to communicate with others. In this sense there was therapy, not because I wasn't well in this situation, but because I couldn't survive in it. The alternative would have been to become an artist on the street, that’s all. I knew Edoardo, who had chosen this life of a completely liberated artist, of a savage. It was he who made me understand that, if I continued on this road, I would never become anything. A bohemian artist today would serve no purpose. In fact, he advised me to alternatively enter and leave the social order, to live altered states of consciousness, but also to then find a way of entering the social system again and of creating a role for myself, even if it was a feigned one; not only one role, but several roles, to be able to completely annihilate consciousness, to pursue only my instinct and to express myself only with colours, but then also to be capable of assuming a well-defined role and entering the system. In this sense, 'arcu pintu was therapy, a way of returning to everyday consciousness.

Tanya refers to recovering a greater sense of well-being through forms of socialization and through experiences of reality seen to be different from those of everyday life. She speaks of a sense of fragmentation, an experience of being torn from the system, which she sees as characterizing the existence of artists like herself. The process of re-integration into society is what she identifies as recovery: not because she wasn’t well before, in the period she described herself as ‘bitten’, but because she realized that in today’s society she couldn’t survive in this way. In this sense, recovery required a compromise. It involved finding others with whom she could share an experience of well-being, suspending and eliminating her feelings of being disjointed. It also involved a shift in perspective: Tanya speaks of the need to play roles in order to belong in and fit into the existing social order, even if she may not always condone it. Her self-reflexive attempts to rationalize her experiences linked to the tarantula have made her increasingly conscious of the flexibility of the roles she plays and of their ability to rewrite and transform her sense of self.

When we meet again in 2008, Tanya is still painting, as well as writing about her own experiences in relation to the tarantula. Although the spider may have lost some of its pertinence in her life, it continues to serve as a channel of expression. Meanwhile, Ada’s story too is one of recovery, of retrieving a sense of empowerment and a growing awareness of an identity beyond affliction. Ada’s Story: Retrieving Soundness

Three days after performing the tarantula’s dance for the cameras of Canale 5 on 29 June 2001, the very day she had gone to Galatina and witnessed Matteo and Evelina’s displays of crises, Ada tells me how she had lived this experience: Afterwards, I felt very empty. In the past, I tried to do something to make this go away. I became afraid. Now I confront it with more calmness. That's the way it is. I let the emptiness be. I didn’t do anything to send it away. I listened to it with some sadness. You give a large part of yourself. It’s the same sensation as when you give a very strong workshop. It’s similar. The days afterwards I felt overwhelmed. I have physical bruises because it was very hard on the ground and I hurt myself a little. Today it is different from fifty years ago. The tarantate of the past did it without awareness. They knew they would be better. For someone who knows, the impact is even stronger. This time it was different from the other times. I knew I was going towards something and I knew I would confront it with awareness. In tarantism, a degree of awareness always remains, even if it seems to you that you do not have any dimension of body or soul. For those of us who have lived closure — let's say for me, because I can speak only for myself — it has a profound significance.130

Sensing Identities and Well-being Ada speaks of being overwhelmed by a sense of emptiness and closure, as in some way juxtaposed — or complementary? — to the experience of herself as without limits, without body or soul, while re-enacting the tarantate’s ritual. The clarity and calm with which she now speaks have emerged from her story marked by periods of crises. She had first told me about these two years earlier:

I started to dance in my early twenties on the occasions when the pizzica was played. My father was against it. It was not seen as a very respectable thing to do. But I felt the need to dance on every occasion that presented itself. Just like the tarantate in the past. Looking back, I now see how this process of learning to dance changed me. My childhood led me to rationalize everything. My emotions and my body were practically non-existent for me. However, when I began to dance, everything around me disappeared and I instinctively began to communicate with my body. At festivals and concerts, others began to acknowledge me as someone who dances well. I was invited to work with a performance group. On stage, I had to learn to open myself to the audience. Before I had always felt embarrassed about my body. I wanted to be taller and slimmer. I had tried to hide my breasts. The birth of my first child left me completely disintegrated. I did psychoanalysis for a while and stopped again. But, I continued to dance. I'd forget about everything around. It was a way of presenting myself as I was. It helped me to gain security about my body and to express my feelings. With the pizzica pizzica, you can live out all of your sensuality. It is you who direct the dance, subtly, even though it is the man who circles around you. Learning the scherma was a final step for me. It is all about defining and defending your territory. It forced me to bring out the aggression which I'd always hidden before. Through dancing, I not only regained access to my emotions but also to an energy which we have inside and which is part of something larger, something global. I don’t think that such a force, brought alive when you dance, can be accidental. There must be an underlying layer that nourishes it. Although for a long time I avoided the Church, I now believe in a spirituality that is universal, that doesn’t classify faiths.'°

Dancing on public occasions and to live music allowed Ada to acknowledge her own body and her emotions, as she says [see Fig. 5.1]. While her father and elderly villagers had discouraged her from dancing and communicating in this way, she experienced others admiring and appreciating her talent at concerts of the tarantula’s music and dance. Moreover, experiences of dancing were influential in transforming her initial resistance towards the Catholic Church into an openness towards a sacred dimension, which she now sees as inherent in nature and reality at large. In 2001, Ada spoke to me again about the pizzica in her life: You know, it’s simply that it doesn’t end here. Now I’m more aware of what happens but I still always have to try not to live in a split state. It's a continuous journey. And I have little time to myself. For me, today, emptiness is really the key. Even today I often find myself rationalizing everything, to cut myself off from the head downwards. And it's not always easy to reunite that which I am. Even today I often ask myself: who am I? Everything started a bit with my marriage. I was twenty-nine. It was perfect. But I didn't feel anything. Nothing. For two years afterwards, I kept myself under control. Then some psychosomatic symptoms started. My head was spinning. I felt unwell. But the doctors didn't find physical reasons to explain my affliction.!? Then, when my son was born, everything exploded. Until that point, I had everything under control. But it was as if everything was already going towards this culmination. Today, ten years later, | am calmer. With the family, I don't have much time for myself. But the children also help me, because they are very spontaneous. With their reactions they make me reflect about myself. At the beginning I wanted to throw away everything that I'd been, that had been a part of my life. I had to accept parts of myself that I didn't like and I got to know other aspects that I didn't know before.'®

As Ada speaks, her young son becomes increasingly agitated. He asks his mother to help him put in a video and to stop talking so he can follow the sound of the film. 'He doesn't like me to talk about these things,' Ada explains. 'He immediately gets angry.' No doubt it raised red flags of difficult times. Five years later, in April 2006, when I ask Ada whether she would prefer me to use a pseudonym to tell her story, her answer is very clear: 'No, this is who I am.'

Clearly, the accounts of Tanya, Ada and the Alla Bua provide snapshots of intricate biographies, which need to be considered in relation to the lives of others who may or may not see themselves as modern tarantati, in order to examine what patterns may be identified among pizzica enthusiasts more generally. Ada's story, meanwhile, like Tanya's, raises questions about whether she would have experienced the impact of the pizzica as powerfully as she relates had it not been paralleled with the boom of the tarantula's music and dance. How effective, moreover, can the appropriation of the tarantula's symbolism be considering its inherent historical fracture? Even if Tanya found a 132 Sensing Identities and Well-being sense of belonging within her group of artist friends, did this permeate her life more generally? Even if Ada has gained recognition as a dancer both on and off stage — and as one of the few female scherma dancers, if not the only one, performing at Torrepaduli — to what extent has this reconciled her with wider society, within which tarantism has become a free-for-all gadget? And to what degree is the therapeutic rhetoric of the Alla Bua accepted and defended by others — whether musicians or not? Although the experiences and views described here may apply only to a minority of those engaging with the tarantula's music and dance today, what transpires is that, while the 1990s boom of the pizzica may be directly linked to the death of tarantism in its traditional sense, it has nevertheless been re-appropriated by some contemporary performers to promote discourses and experiences of well-being. Just as the tarantate's crises referred to highly varied personal circumstances linked to the inability to cope, so the stories of Tanya and Ada relate diverse experiences of crises, leaving both women incapable of coping with their lives on the basis of the explanatory frameworks available to them. By engaging with the pizzica in their own idiosyncratic ways, but within a context in which this music and dance were gaining popularity on a daily basis, the two women found relief. Ada speaks of coping with emptiness now. Tanya tells of coming to terms with ways of socializing in daily life. These personal accounts demand a look at how meanings, explanatory systems and treatment options were and are negotiated, on a more general level, to identify those under the tarantula's spell.


A similar example of the role of academics and university seminars in the tarantula's contemporary web, both as a source of information and initial instigator -- or metaphorical 'first bite' -- is given by Maurizio Nocera's interview with Tore Greco. When asked about the occasion on which he first felt the spider's presence, Tore responds: 'There is a precise point of reference: the presence of Georges Lapassade in Lecce on the occasion of the seminar 'II ragno del dio che danza' (the spider of the god who dances) at the Salentine university' (Nocera 2005: 45).

This term literally means 'painted arch' and was the name Tanya gave to the group of artists referred to here. Tanya mentions a phenomenon commonly associated with experiences of so-called altered states of consciousness in which cross-sensory impulses are triggered: 'a colour can be heard, a sound can be seen' (Lapassade 1996a: 169). This neurologically based phenomenon, also known as synaesthesia or synethesia, literally meaning 'joining the senses', implies that one type of sensory stimulation elicits the automatic, involuntary stimulation of another. Tanya refers to the late Salentine artist Edoardo De Candia, known for his unconventional lifestyle and choice to partly live in nudity (Massari 1998).

27 January 1998. 2 July 2001. 134 16. 17. 18. Sensing Identities and Well-being 19 August 1999. The account presented here is a summary of Ada's responses to my question about the impact of dancing on her life. Ada, just like the tarantato Francesco Greco, uses the term il mio male to refer to her crises. 25 July 2001. 135 Part III From Ritual to Limelight

Moving on to a comparison of the tarantula's music and dance in historical and contemporary contexts reveals underlying factors influencing self-perceptions, human relations, power issues and visions of reality sabotaging or nourishing well-being. Chapter 6, 'Spider WoMen Transfixed', explores what labels and world views defined and diagnosed the tarantate and what criteria______ This shows how, in the modern Salento, the tarantula's music and dance leave their imprint on forms of deeper-lying suffering existing under new headings today. Chapter 7, 'Tarantula Threads and Showbiz Airs,' is a tightrope walk between past and present performative places, times, props and techniques, balancing out what were and are subtle clues to performative success. The right music, in the sense of appropriate and efficacious, had and has to be found. The aim was and is to facilitate participation. The props were and are communal and entail the potential side effects of manipulation and exploitation. Yet key differences stand out, as Chapter 8, 'SpiderWoMen Transformed,' reveals. In the past, tarantism rituals allowed for the expression of extreme emotional crises. Although this is rarely the case today, the tarantula's music and dance may affect participants' daily lives, fostering a sense of 'magic', rhythmic synchrony, sensuality and well-being through exposure to new experiences and insights, perceived to beneficially influence perceptions of the self, others and the world at large.


The NEO-TARANTATA ... could be concealed inside your sister, cousin, supermarket assistant, dentist's secretary or university colleague. As a remedy to quotidian life, they have decided that there is nothing better than to toss themselves about in the centre of a circle of tambourines or in front of a hi-fi system in public to help them remove the stress of everyday life. We are dealing with girls ... from good families, without any psychological problem or social drama behind them other than the tragedy of having too much free time on their hands. Francesco Patruno (2003)

With his conspicuous sense of humour, Patruno (2003) takes a provocative stance, stressing that the focus on recovering well-being through the tarantula's music and dance brought into relief in this study is highly ambiguous. This view questions whether and to what extent we may compare those transfixed by the tarantula spider in past and present times. In this context, anthropological studies on health and illness have increasingly challenged the contours and assumptions of biomedicine, revealing that 'non-medical healing is empirical in the sense that it is often based on systematic observation and interpretation of symptoms, suffering, cause, effects and response to treatment' (Csordas and Kleinman 1996: 5). The tarantula's ritual too was grounded in experiential knowledge, transmitted, tested, re-evaluated and adapted over many generations. Acknowledgement of such experience-based knowledge relies heavily on a recognition of the body as both objectively and 139 Dances with Spiders subjectively — and therefore also socially and politically — founded. Increasingly, anthropological work on the body and embodiment has revealed the phenomenological, social and political dimensions of the human organism (Scheper-Hughes and Lock 1987), and underlined the need to consider bio-medicine as one culturally specific system of cure, whose basic precepts are fundamentally challenged by anthropological stances: 'Whereas biomedicine, in theory if not always in practice, presupposes a universal, a historical subject, critically interpretative medical anthropologists are confronted with rebellious and “anarchic” bodies — bodies that refuse to conform (or submit) to presumably universal categories and concepts of diseases, distress and medical efficacy' (Lock and Scheper-Hughes 1996: 41—43). As the human organism is engaged on a phenomenological, social and political level, an analysis of healing practices, such as the tarantula’s cult, must include a consideration of the negotiative process that takes place between these various dimensions. How does this process weave threads of meaning and relations that re-anchor the individual in their own body, as well as in the social and natural worlds? Answers begin to emerge if we explore, first, how individuals came and come to be characterized as someone who was ‘bitten by the tarantula’; secondly, what world views and perceptions of affliction and well-being underlie such a definition or diagnosis; and, finally, how treatment options concern choices that were and are available and — just as important — acceptable.

Diagnosing Spiders: Identifying Tarantula Cases

First, I look into the eyes and, if it’s there, the poison can be seen. Secondly, vibrations show whether a person is stirred up or not. Thirdly, you look at the tips of the toes, because the toes don’t remain still. You feel a sense of electrification, different from a nervous attack, which is temporary. If I don’t notice these things, it is pointless to go and play. In this way, Luigi Stifani, musician of the tarantate, identified those under the tarantula’s spell (Chiriatti 1995: 49).

In the past, moments of affliction varied: on rare occasions, a physical bite was actually registered. Alternatively, a spider, or other venomous creature, was encountered, in waking life or in a dream. At times, it was enough to be brushed by the breath, il soffio, of a snake. Moreover, someone may have been ‘infected’ by the contagious influence of others. The physical rhythms of trembling, shaking and convulsions of one tarantata appeared to create a vibrational impact on others. In the absence of a clear cause, meanwhile, cases were identified in a process of auto-diagnosis or with the help of those familiar with the symptoms involved. Without doubt, these criteria depend on experiential know-how. De Martino (2005: 58) adds the intolerance of some tarantate to certain dishes or smells, frequent dreams of serpents or of St Paul, and an overall heightened sensitivity to music.

Moreover, popular opinion characterized the tarantula’s victims as possessed by an ‘irresistible urge to dance’, as musical and chromatic explorations established the tarantula’s involvement. Clearly, an identification of symptoms required a basic agreement between the afflicted and others about what kind of problem was at hand and what kind of treatment was deemed appropriate.

Language gives another avenue of access to how the tarantate perceived and described themselves. While the term tarantism belongs to the jargon of scholars, Salentine people speak of someone who holds the tarantula (tiene la taranta), was stung (é stata pizzicata) or is a tarantata (é una tarantata). They are those, De Martino (2005: 37-38) tells, whom the tarantula fa scazzicare, excites or arouses. Uncontrollable erotic impulses are often referred to in this way.

‘This summer I will become a tarantula!’ a young Salentine musician told me fervently in June 1999, expressing his frustration about never having had a sexual encounter with a woman.! I ask what he means by this. He explains: ‘Qualcosa che mi scazzica!’ (Something that excites me!) Evelina’s grandson uses the same word to describe his grandmother when taken over by crises: ‘Si scazzica!’? ‘Scazzicare also denotes a difficulty in standing up (mi scazzicu, I stand up with difficulty)’, De Martino (2005: 38) specifies, and ‘appears to symbolize the state of inertia, prostration and weariness which, together with a disorderly motor release, makes up the “crisis” moment of tarantism’. Feeling bored (annoiato), injured (leso), 141 Dances with Spiders fractured (spezzato) or broken (rotto) were other ways the tarantate described their afflictions (De Martino 2005: 56–57, 91). One informant talked of her tarantulated grandmother as consistently tense, bearing a weight on her shoulders. Yet others speak of a state of tedium or boredom, un stato di noia. One tarantata reported spiders crawling underneath her pillow at night. Another talked of feeling ants in different parts of the body, while a male tarantato claimed that there was a spider in his right testicle. In May and June, the sensation of having a swarm or ants’ nest, un formicolio (‘pins and needles’), inside this testicle was at its worst, preventing him from having an orgasm. However, eventually the spider "But what about today? Can we speak of a diagnosis, in the sense of identifying criteria characterizing the modern tarantati? Various terms are used in the Salento today (at times seriously, at times jokingly) to forge a link between today’s pizzica fans and the tarantate of yesteryear. People speak of the neo-tarantati, nuovi tarantati, modern tarantati or attarantati. Some distinguish today’s tarantati from the tarantolati of the past, but these definitions are by no means unanimous. Often meanings are conflated, without much thought for underlying epistemological implications.

'I don’t know how to define myself,' music teacher, dancer and self-acclaimed tarantata Maria Antonietta Epifani (1998) wonders. 'Perhaps it’s simply the need to dance; the inability to remain still when I hear a tambourine play.'!° 'I always dance', one skilled singer and dancer adds, 'with all kinds of music: the pizzica, Arabic music, African music. I’m a tarantata: an international tarantata!'! Such an ‘urge to dance’ may inevitably refer to a spectrum of motives and meanings. According to this criterion, most young children are contemporary tarantati as they are generally the first, least inhibited and most persistent dancers at pizzica concerts. In fact, the group Canzoniere Grecanico Salentino dedicated one of its lullabies — with lyrics evoking the tarantula — to 'all the children of the Salento, who are tarantati like ourselves',"

Others subtly differentiate possible affinities with the tarantate of the past.'? Daniele Durante writes: ‘The new “tarantati” are not 143 Dances with Spiders possessed by anything or anyone, but nevertheless are in search of a god (or demon?)’ (1999: 188). The modern tarantati are musicians, artists, dancers and researchers of all ages and walks of life, often with unrelated full-time professions. For some the pizzica and other Salentine music are about amusement, a form of distraction to pass their summer nights following days spent on the beach, or just a passing fashion. For some it is a source of boredom, if not irritation, due to the endless repetition of the same songs. For a few it is more than that: a life philosophy, a message of love, a way of life.

Francesco Patruno (2003), meanwhile, has — on a less serious note — put together a list of categories of fizzica fans, emerging from what he calls ‘the laws of the market that have cleared the piSSica through customs for the general public’.!* For example: The Ubiquo (Ubiquitus Sempervirens Gramignicus): the nightmare par excellence. Ever since the piSSica phenomenon has reached such heights of diffusion, the UBIQUO is omnipresent and implacable. Anybody could be a ubiquitous piSSicophile, from your boss at work, to your neighbour, your newsagent, your friend, who, unexpectedly, from interests in entomology and butterflies coming from the mouth of the Orinoco has discovered that the piSSica pleases women, ergo it’s a way of picking up a girl. Patruno brilliantly shows how the use of the notion of tarantism and associated terms is motivated by many intertwined and contradictory facets: some broadcast via loudspeakers and every imaginable medium of communication, others restricted to closed circles or never even voiced.

'What does the pizzica mean to me?' Giorgio Di Lecce repeats my question to gather his thoughts. 'First, it is a form of self-expression. I am drawn to it because of my love for dance and theatre. Secondly, the pizzica provided a way of returning to my roots and of gaining knowledge of my own people." Thirdly, I found myself playing the tambourine for a tarantata in the chapel of Galatina from 1993 to 1995. Others, too, present the pizzica as a key to their origins, roots, grounding, and identity. Director of the music group I Tamburellisti di Torrepaduli, Pierpaolo De Giorgi, asserts: "Tarantism is about the consciousness of oneself. Tarantism, that's us, ourselves, as Apulia, as the Salento." Another passionate tambourine player reflects: "I'm not really sure why I'm attracted to this music and tarantism. Some things I just do because they feel right. I have always been very aware of the Church, its economic power, and the influence it has on people and I've always tried to support those who are poor and powerless." A sense of empowerment emerges: music as rebellion, as a voice for the voiceless. One Salentine writer speaks of his ambivalent feelings: "I grew up in a small village with my grandmother. There were two tarantate who lived in her house; De Martino wrote about them. At first, I was fascinated by this phenomenon. Then I hated it for many years because I felt that those who were performing were putting on a show to gain attention. Then I became older and began to realize the importance of this tradition." Meanwhile, music may speak for itself: on 14 February 2008, the funeral procession of Pino Zimba, a much-loved tambourine player and leader of the group Zimbaria, was accompanied by the rhythmic pounding of dozens of tambourines. This last passage of his life, too, was guided by the pizzica's beat. His body was laid to rest while the tarantula's music was evoked, linking the living and the dead.

Although performance contexts vary greatly, a continuum of neither exclusive nor exhaustive motives shapes the tarantula's music and dance: first, a small number of performers actively choose to draw on the system of tarantism to alleviate their suffering. They are unlikely to speak euphemistically about tarantism, as the current pizzica fashion occasionally risks doing. Secondly, others participate on stage, screen, canvas, or paper, motivated by a desire to intellectually understand or artistically express past rituals. These participants, although aware of the distress underlying the lives of the tarantate and some nuovi tarantati, generally tend to close an eye to this aspect of suffering and may speak, instead, of tarantism as a feature that makes the Salento and its people unique. Thirdly, a large number of fans, including tourists, have been swept along by the recent boom in local music. With varying degrees of knowledge of the historical and contemporary meanings and experiences of the pizzica, their participation is motivated primarily by a desire for fun, pleasure, and sensual gratification. Fourthly, there are those who find themselves attending a pizzica performance by chance, perhaps oblivious of its past links to tarantism, joining in as they would in any of the many entertainment programmes abounding during the summer season. Finally, some look on the tarantula's music and dance with suspicion and contempt, as one elderly woman explains: "Especially the older women keep a stern face, saying that the devil is near. The older generations, like myself, are very aware of the force of the phenomenon of tarantism." Clearly, today's tarantati are impossible to freeze into one or other fixed frame. Often, self-definitions go hand in hand with definitions imposed by others and vary according to understandings of the tarantula's music and dance. It appears that, where an individual accepts this definition and others acknowledge it, a first step is taken to capturing the spider and its potential to promote well-being or discord: a glimpse of its outline as a shadow puppet made visible in conceptual and verbal form. How this form is then interpreted is tightly linked to broader conceptions of what is seen to make somebody ill or well.

Views on Venom: Interpreting the Spider’s Bite

Inevitably, diagnoses of spider venoms depend on the cultural matrix of the viewer. Seventeenth-century views drew on the classical ideas of Hippocrates, Plato, and Pythagoras and the 'humoral theory of correspondence' to explain the therapeutic potential of music: the four natural elements (earth, water, air, and fire) linked to four bodily humours (blood, lymph, yellow, and black bile) were seen to be rebalanced, in the case of affliction, by four basic corresponding musical modes (Mixolydian, Dorian, Lydian, and Phrygian) (De Martino 2005: 223-36). Medical views of the same period, meanwhile, focused on the expulsion of venoms through perspiration (Katner 1956: 19-22).

Eighteenth-century religious discourses on the metaphysics of evil, instead, identified bodily impurities, such as spider poisoning, as signs of divine intervention: a punishment for sins committed, indications of St Paul's wrath or the devil's interference. Treatment involved seeking out the Apostle Paul and making offerings in exchange for grace, while recovery was equated with repentance and freedom from sin (Turner 1992). Enlightenment views, in the meantime, adopted Descartes's positivist approach, differentiating body and mind, and defining the tarantate's symptoms as psychological disorders, such as epilepsy, hysteria, or schizophrenia (Di Mitri 2006). Treatment subsequently included electric shocks and pharmaceutical drugs.

Each rationalization was boosted by philosophical underpinnings, revealing the relativity of each view and the difficulty, if not impossibility, of pinpointing the multiple dimensions of experience and consciousness the term tarantism served to describe. Importantly, popular belief stated that the tarantate were not ill. There was nothing wrong with them. They were 'normal' people periodically subjected to the tarantula's whims.

Contemporary categorizations of Western medicine, meanwhile, entail risks of pathologizing the tarantate's condition. Robert Bartholomew (1994) contests widespread classifications of tarantism as one type of 'mass psychogenic illness', emphasizing the political advantages of making reference to the myth of the tarantula. A naturalistic explanation functioned to sanction personalistic explanations (Littlewood 1990: 313). In this way, non-Christian rituals could be pursued without risking persecution by the Church and, at the same time, 'revived the fledgling careers of many musicians restricted from performing by Church leaders' (Bartholomew 1994: 288).

Others have classified tarantism as a 'culture-bound syndrome' (Gentilcore 2000; Horden 2000), as an illness 'associated with culturally unique patterns of meaning superimposed on diseases that are universal' (Kleinman 1980: 77). This notion, however, easily serves as a standard label covering up culturally specific forms of expression, and attempts at defining it further (Simons and Hughes 1985) have revealed the danger of reducing it to one of various classical disorders of Western psychiatry, assuming that cultures variously impose meaning on universally identifiable biological conditions. Social anthropologist and psychiatrist Roland Littlewood (1990: 319) stresses that Western neuroses are also 'psychomedical' models of distress. He suggests that the notion of 'disease' has a similar role to that of 'spirit possession' in less medicalized societies; both legitimize distress by removing personal responsibility while compelling others to act. Littlewood adds that it is useful to consider such afflictions as part of a spectrum bridging the two poles of biomedical and sociological paradigms.

Past cases of tarantism tended towards the sociological pole in their diagnosis. Although precise biological causes may have been involved, they seemed to act more as a final drop topping up an already full glass, as their direct relation to the tarantate's symptoms was not always clear. At times, an actual spider bite was recorded (De Martino 2005: 48). One of De Martino's informants was 'bitten' just after an operation in which her ovaries were removed, while another was suffering from an ear infection at the time of her affliction (ibid.: 56, 263).

Sociological paradigms were more easily identifiable in connection with the tarantula: bites generally happened in the summer; mainly women at specific life stages (especially puberty) were afflicted; several cases were often found in one family; tarantism was largely restricted to the region of Apulia; and, lastly, cures seemed to expire after one year (De Martino 2005: 25-27). Initial crises of tarantism commonly coincided with work — collecting peas, cutting vines, picking tobacco — or significant events such as driving over a snake (ibid.: 53), being bewitched by one (ibid.: 62) or inadvertent curses against St Paul (ibid.: 52). Significant coincidences, concurrent with associations with a poisonous animal or the Apostle Paul, were generally established as causative incidents.

The tarantula was drawn upon to embody subjective dynamics, anchoring chaotic individual experience, materialized as poison, within the social and natural environment of the Salento. However, what acts as an explanatory framework now that the spiders are — apparently — gone from the fields? One modern tarantata explains: "The tarantati of today are not ill. Suffering is involved, if you broaden its definition to include any state of unease, but De Martino's model is no longer valid for the new tarantati. I am not poor. I am not from a repressive society. I manage to have good relations with the people around me. And yet music touches me and I need to dance. The tarantati must be seen as depressed or melancholic, and the ritual and music are a way of providing a new consciousness, even if not on a rationally conscious level."

In conclusion, the tarantula has been used as a symbol to embody subjective dynamics and anchor chaotic individual experience within the social and natural environment of the Salento. However, the explanatory framework has evolved over time, and the notion of 'disease' has a similar role to that of 'spirit possession' in less medicalized societies. The tarantati of today are not ill, but they still experience suffering, which can be alleviated through music and dance. In order to accommodate other people's demands, the need to communicate, first and foremost, is not satisfied (now more than ever) ... and the possibility to love and let yourself be loved' (Nacci 2004: 53-58). Maurizio Nocera confirms: Many individuals today actively choose to draw upon the system of tarantism to alleviate their suffering. There are many among the young who suffer in silence, but there are also many who are part of the world of tarantism. Do you know Giuseppe Marra? He frequently dances for three to four hours and, when you ask him why, he'll say that life isn’t worth living.

A deep-seated sensation of distress and a desire for meaning in life are evoked, calling for attention and leading Vittorio Lanternari (1995: 89) to identify a need to consider among the types of 'affliction' affecting the psychophysical organism of man, no longer only those illnesses catalogued in clinical repertoires, but also those 'states of being unwell' with no clinical denomination, that 'obscure affliction,' that indeterminable sense of emptiness, of a loss of points of reference and support, in sum, 'that suffering' which becomes concrete in definite and recognizable 'neuroses' or in particular psychosomatic syndromes.

We may ask to what extent such experiences of lacking roots and points of reference in life may relate to the 'crises of presence' De Martino (1956, 1961a) diagnosed among the tarantate. Such crises involved threatening situations in which individuals were unable to cope. Anthropologist Mariella Pandolfi (1990: 270) writes: To avoid this catastrophic outcome — the 'loss of presence' or failure of subjective identity in individuals and groups — people attempt by their choice of behaviour to manipulate psychic states through activities and practices which allow them to control the emergence of destructive impulses and to calm them, by channelling them into ritual performances, both individual and collective.

Inevitably, the notion of 'crises of presence' groups together a vast gamut of circumstances and experiences and, moreover, risks essentializing conceptions of the notion of presence itself. De Martino himself (in Pandolfi 1990: 255) warns that 'there is no such thing as presence ... an inborn immediacy safe from all risk and incapable of ... history'.

We may query further to what extent social and political causes of affliction identified by De Martino, such as extreme poverty, harsh living conditions, excessive demands of labour, sexual repression or exclusion from public life, particularly of women, apply to the modern tarantati. The impacts of socio-economic development and the introduction of psychiatric care, identified as two key elements that have brought about the end of tarantism, are unlikely to safeguard against new problems that have emerged in the modern context of the Salento: high unemployment figures; large-scale emigration rupturing cultural and family ties; generational differences marking close-knit communities, to name just a few. Many women, moreover, have taken up professional careers, while continuing to bear the brunt of domestic tasks and the duties of caring for children and elderly family members (Goddard 1987, 1996; Goddard et al. 1996). In these contexts, states of deep individual turmoil, reminiscent of De Martino's notion of 'crises of presence', may be triggered by a wide range of factors, including those with primarily biological foundations deflating the body's overall resistance, such as illness, accidents, operations, extreme physical exhaustion or persistent lack of sleep. Deeply emotional experiences such as childbirth or the traumatic loss of close personal relations may equally act as initial stimuli, as may the use of drugs. Such crises can, moreover, also be related to the lack of an explanatory framework, providing containment by pointing to customary problematic behavior and how this may be dealt with. Whereas in the past, the model of tarantism provided a socially acknowledged existential framework, the modern tarantati may create or re-create their own model of this kind, engaging in a process of inscribing meaning, which inevitably risks incoherence and superficiality.

This alerts us to Marianna Torgovnick's (1996: 176) warning about so-called New Age practices: "On the basis of what I have seen, heard and read about the New Age, I believe that many of its participants are trapped in a rather moving contradiction. They adopt rituals and other aspects of cultures that depend fundamentally upon collective, communal experience — and sometimes on voiding or subordinating the autonomous self ... But New Agers almost invariably put these traditions and groups in the service of a thoroughly modern worldview that takes the self as a thing to be owned, cultivated and coddled — the veritable hub of the universe."

Such risks may apply equally, if not in an accentuated form, with the appropriation of the tarantula's music elsewhere, outside the Salento and Italy. There has, for instance, been a strong interest among Italo-American women in dancing the pizzica as a way of connecting with their Italian roots (Ciuffitelli 2005a). The controversial influence of Alessandra Belloni, New York-based percussionist and dancer, comes to mind. Her 'Rhythm is the Cure' workshops involve re-enactments of tarantism rituals and encourage women participants, often of Italian-American background, to self-identify as tarantate. Belloni's work is generally viewed very critically among Salentines.

Similarly, the case of a young Frenchwoman, seen to be a tarantata in need of ritual music by a number of Salentine musicians who played for her in a series of encounters during the 2000 summer, evoked strong criticism, particularly among women, regarding the manipulation of the tradition of tarantism and the musicians involved. Although the tarantula's music and dance are, generally speaking, performed today in contexts that do not re-create a feasible milieu in which those afflicted can rely on the social support of a group to express and process their afflictions, the experiences of Ada, Tanya and others nevertheless present examples of how these performance practices indicated one possible way out, allowing — to various degrees — for a recovery of a sense of balance within the individual and within their larger network of relations.

These examples stress not only the risks involved in re-appropriating perceived healing practices, both in the area of their apparent origins or elsewhere, but also how such processes of re-appropriation inevitably depend on the availability of options seen to be beneficial — and acceptable — to the recovery of well-being. Tarantula Alternatives: Choosing Treatment Options In the Salento, therapeutic options have multiplied. What did people do when they were ill in the past? 'They died!' a woman in her eighties told me, without any thought to my question or emotion to match her response. Illness categories have also proliferated. There are a lot more illnesses today, says another elderly woman. I take only something for my blood pressure. Illnesses in the past were cured with the available means. Coffee was used when someone fainted. Today, even I have coffee every morning.

A comparative look at past and present means of treatment shows that, although facilities have greatly changed and expanded, their application depended on a process of negotiating choices. In earlier decades, hospitals were non-existent or kilometers away. Transport problems and expense stood in the way of consulting medical staff. Psychiatry, in particular, was never an option until some decades ago. Other specialists, including priests, doctors, traditional practitioners known as macare and snake-handling sanpaolari, were resorted to, as tarantism rituals were one alternative in a spectrum of treatment options within broader magico-religious belief systems (De Martino 1960; Gentilcore 1992, 1998).

Historical documents reveal a broad gamut of cures applied to cases of tarantism beyond the use of music and dance. The English traveller George Berkeley (1717) tells how some tarantate were administered a concoction of wine prepared with a fossilized snake-tongue after their third day of dancing. The serparo, or snake-handler, once widespread in Apulia, could offer related treatments. His expertise was in drawing poison out of wounds using conjurations and such verbal incantations (Chiaia 1887; Turchini 1987: 165) as the prayer formula 'To ti esorcizzo da ogni morso' (I exorcize you of every bite), apparently dating back to the ninth or tenth century (Di Mitri 1995: 222). For the tarantate, such formulas were at times combined with the drawing of a cross above the bite mark and the drinking of water from the holy well in Galatina (Caputo 1741: 228). The tarantula's victims may also have consulted a macara, with expertise in magical affairs, to assess whether causes such as the 'evil eye' were at stake. One case from 1627, recorded by the ecclesiastical tribunal, reveals how a woman named Catarina Palazzo treated a tarantata with a conjuration, incense, sacred water, and by touching painful body parts with her prescriptive books (Tamblé 2000: 106). Catholicism provided further options for relief. Exorcist priests were conferred with to identify whether the devil's influence was at hand, and sanctuaries of saints credited with healing powers were visited. In the Salento itself, the case of St Donatus shows that tarantism was only one of various related phenomena that provided a therapeutic option in the face of hardship and suffering. During his lifetime, legend goes, St Donatus cured those possessed by the devil, and epilepsy became known as il male di San Donato, St Donatus's illness, or il morbo sacro, the sacred disease. On his feast day, 7 August, pilgrims still come to his chapel in the town of Montesano Salentino. In 1998, when I attended this festival, hundreds of devotees came to say their prayers and leave offerings of money. Numerous 100,000 lire notes decorated the saint's statue, and one elderly female informant told of inexplicable things she had seen, reminiscent of the 'miraculous' deeds attributed to the tarantate at Galatina: 'In the past, the number of devotees coming here was much greater: everyone afflicted by St Donatus's illness came. You recognized them because they jerked their limbs all over the place. I remember seeing one woman, dressed all in white, dancing on top of the saint's statue. It seems impossible, but I saw it with my own eyes.”?!

Similarly, the opinion of doctors, when available, was sought out by the tarantate, although their symptoms often escaped diagnostic categories. ‘The doctors didn’t find anything wrong with me,’ the tarantato Francesco Greco explained. ‘They say that we are mad and putting on a show, because our bodies are essentially healthy.”

In more recent decades, many tarantate were taken to psychiatric specialists. What options of treatment and support, meanwhile, cater to those who define themselves as nuovi tarantati in relation to experiences of affliction in the contemporary Salento? Biomedical practitioners, especially those working in the fields of psychiatry and psychology, may be a key source of reference, although the stigma associated with mental health care may inhibit many from seeking their help. Ada, who danced for the TV cameras in June 2001, tells of undergoing psychoanalysis but eventually abandoning this while continuing to dance. Other factors will have played their part, but clearly the tarantula’s music and dance provided a perceived benefit not accessible through conventional health care.

Complementary medicine, including music or art therapies, has been a little-known alternative until recently. Now these professions are growing, as art therapy courses, homeopathy schools and other forms of complementary medicine of various types and degrees of professionalism proliferate.

However, widespread public opinion in the Salento tends to remain critical towards complementary medical treatments available, as techniques and explanatory models may be taken from non-Western contexts, rendering them alien to potential clients (Liidtke 2003). Rita Cappello, music therapist at the rehabilitation clinic Casa di Cura ‘Villa Verde’ in Lecce, explains that one of the greatest difficulties she faces with music therapy patients is a resistance to play, expressed in such defensive reactions as: ‘I’m no longer at the age to play around or sing!’?”

Play and artistic expression are rarely recognized as methodologies with therapeutic potential. Clearly, views of treatment options, forged largely by a widespread familiarity with biomedicine, may not correspond with the practices proposed. An extreme example of this emerged in a 1999 music therapy workshop I attended near Lecce. This included the use of an Australian didgeridoo to show how acoustic vibrations directed at different body parts could ‘stimulate specific organs’. One participant later described this event as bringing up associations of satanic reunions.

Such issues as the use of out-of-context practices; the commercial exploitation of what Lanternari (2000: 133) calls ‘multinational religious industries’; or the exaltation of individual development in preference to communal and social welfare are all familiar criticisms levelled at the New Age movement. All of these may act as obstacles to those in search of therapeutic alternatives.

Similar discrepancies in belief and practice may prevent many who live in the Salento today from considering ‘traditional practitioners’ as a therapeutic option. I talked to one such practitioner who treated a variety of ailments, including burns, benign tumours and dislocations, but when asked about tarantism vehemently insisted that these were practices of the devil. Religious healers practicing within the context of Catholicism may be another point of reference, with a small number of priests apparently still performing exorcisms and saints attributed with healing qualities being central in this respect. Votive offerings present another socially condoned option of religious healing practices available to devotees. Nevertheless, rejection of the Catholic Church at large, especially among younger generations, may discourage the modern tarantati from considering this option. It becomes clear that an alternative route to well-being, possibly tucked away within the rave-like, delirious movement of the pizzica, is welcome to many. The pizzica is socially accepted, if not glorified, and, rather than excluding and stigmatizing, draws participants into its circle, into the limelight. Something more than celebrity is at stake, pointing to the need for careful, case-by-case consideration of past and present spider dances.

A first step may be taken by comparing the case of the modern tarantata Ada Metafune with that of Maria of Nardo, a tarantata in the historical sense of the term. Whereas individuals afflicted by the tarantula in the past were likely to be assigned their role as tarantate by others and through the process of undergoing rituals of tarantism, Ada’s view of herself as a modern tarantata appears to be self-assigned, even if in relation to the re-valorization of the pizzica in the Salento and elsewhere. Moreover, for the tarantate of yesteryear, music was deliberately applied for healing within the context of an acknowledged belief system and considered to be the only way out. Meanwhile, Ada retrospectively views her involvement in the music and dance of the pizzica as curative, in the light of her own acquaintance with therapeutic alternatives such as psychoanalysis.

Likewise, past performances were determined by a ritual context focused on the symbolic complex of the tarantula spider, whereas Ada has re-enacted this ritual on many occasions for theatrical purposes or television cameras, and her motivations for doing so may be questioned. Many tarantate in the past, too, were accused of putting on a show. Such persisting questions of authenticity may become secondary, however, if we acknowledge that the impacts of cultural performances, even if staged, may be real in their effects on a level of experience and, moreover, that the healing power of the pizzica was acknowledged in the past, not only in ritual performances, but equally in its performances on manifold festive occasions (Liidtke 2005a).

Despite major discrepancies between the performance contexts of the tarantate and the neo-tarantati, the dances of both must be considered in relation to the negotiative processes involved, bringing into play individual, social and political aspects of recovering well-being. Performances may transfix participants by imposing out-of-context beliefs and practices. At the same time, they may also provide a way of integrating and making sense of difficult experiences in the lives of those seen to be transfixed by the tarantula. This mating behaviour is somewhat a myth; while it may occur in captive situations, where the male cannot escape, it is uncommon in the field. Personal communication. I thank Damian Walter for bringing these links to my attention. Lecce, 14 February 1998. Scorrano, 12 July 1999. Teatro Paisiello, Lecce, 15 May 1998. Maurizio Nocera (2005: 10) identifies tarantati: ‘those who feel the suffering of the bite or re-bite for having entered into competition with a divinity (the Greek Athena, the Latin Minerva, the Christian St Paul), which “punishes” them by inflicting their body with possession by the spider’; attarantati: ‘those who simulate the tarantate in spectacularized and dramaticized theatrical scenes’; and attarantanti: ‘intellectuals (though not alone) who, for reasons of study or other particular interests, were or are interested in this phenomenon, and as a result remain strongly influenced up to the point of taking on related forms of behaviour.’ Patruno’s choice to use the double ‘s’ rather than double ‘z’ spelling here is intentional. Perhaps a deliberate hint at ‘taking the piss’ in the sense of making fun of or ridiculing someone or something? Lecce, 20 February 1998. Galatina, 29 June 1999. Tricase, 27 November 1997. Lecce, 4 December 1997. Lecce, 24 November 1997. Lecce, 14 February 1998. Lecce, 1 April 2006. See the video Pizzica with a New York Accent (Ciuffitelli 2005b). Italian-American cultural project manager Mary Ciuffitelli has looked into Belloni’s influence in more detail (Ciuffitelli 2005a), as has Italian scholar and singer Laura Biagi (Biagi 2004). See Collu (2005: 59-73) for a description of this case. Montesano, 16 November 1997. 156 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 38. Spider Women Transfixed Tricase, 2 May 1998. The dialect term macara or maciara is translated as strega in Italian, meaning witch or sorceress (Rohlfs 1956-1961). The sanpaolari, meanwhile, were seen to be inheritors of St Paul's healing powers, and were often viewed as charlatans tainting the reputation of those with honest motivations (Turchini 1987; Montinaro 1996). Their antidotes included holy water and earth, la terra di San Paolo, taken from St Paul's grotto in Malta and used to sculpt medals, amulets, vases, cups, tablets or model statues of the apostle. Fossilized serpent teeth or tongues, glossopietre or lingue di San Paolo, of Maltese origin were also part of their remedy kit. Remedies suggested for cases of tarantism include: ‘a prescription containing twenty-four herbs and spices’ (Caputo 1741: 133); Alexipharmaca, a treatise dealing with poisons and their antidotes (Sigerist 1948: 110); healing saliva (Vallone 2004); crushed garlic mixed with treacle spread onto the bite to neutralize the poison; diaphoretics (administered to produce perspiration); draughts of lemon rind, parsley, mint, wild thyme and berries; alcohol mixed with treacle or rosemary (Russell 1979: 411-14). The approximate equivalent of 52.00 euros (using the conversion rate of 1,936.27 lire to one euro from 1 January 2002, when the euro was first introduced). Montesano, 6 August 1998. 11 August 1999, Between 1997 and 1999, I followed the work of Rita Cappello and her group of music and art therapists, Musicarte, working with the method la globalita dei linguaggi (Guerra-Lisi 1987), who were very much pioneering this work at the time. Giuliano Capani’s (2004) film Un ritmo per anima: tarantismo e terapie naturali, A Rhythm for the Soul: Tarantism and Natural Therapies, is a recent cinematographic document comparing and contrasting tarantism with present treatment and meditation practices involving rhythmic interaction. Lecce, 21 July 1999. 

Two people dancing in the centre of a circle are like a fire heating everyone looking on. Tambourine player, Ostuni, 21 May 1998 A girl no more than ten years old writhes on a white sheet. A young woman circles its perimeter, waving a red scarf at her in an elegantly tamed bullfighting fashion. It is a mild summer night in September 1999 and a crowd has gathered in the town of Casarano for a concert of the Alla Bua. The musicians had announced the young dancer’s request to repeat a piece rehearsed for her school performance. One of them kneels close to the dancer on the tarmac sports pitch, the concert venue, beating a large, cymbal-less tambourine (a ‘shamanic drum’, as he specifies) with a wooden drumstick, and spectators enclose the performance space. The girl dancer, dressed in a white dress and white sandals, moves rhythmically, rolling back and forth across the bleached linen sheet before coming to her feet to dance steps of the pizzica within the sheet’s contours. Eventually, she collapses gently to the ground only to repeat this sequence several times until the musicians come to the end of their piece. Flashes of Maria of Nardo's performance filmed in 1959 (Carpitella 1960) come to mind, with this perfect rendition of the main dance cycles of tarantism rituals as described by De Martino. The applause is enthusiastic. Clearly, it appears, this is what parents, schoolteachers and other onlookers want to see: a performance infused with the aesthetic criteria of a school ballet production; a depiction of the socially desired grace and gentleness of a well-brought-up young girl; an enactment of femininity as docile 159 Dances with Spiders and compliant, all the more pleasing when perceived as the spontaneous wish of a young community member wanting to show and share what she has learnt. Technically, a ritual of tarantism has been re-enacted. Yet I am left with the sense of an empty shell of reproduced movements. On the level of performative expressivity, there was little, if any, connection with the tarantate’s dance of bygone years. There was no hint of the crises and conflicts women (and men) conveyed through this ritual. Considering this disjuncture, what tools can be applied to compare what was a ritual embedded within a magico-religious belief system and what is predominantly a show or (well-dusted) museum piece? A focus on four key aspects: places, times, props (or performative devices) and techniques brings to the fore the tangible — musical and choreographic — aspects of performances, as well as principal factors seen to promote efficacy.! Like the musicians of the tarantate, today’s musicians have to ‘tune in’ to a place and its people, finding the rhythms that stir, excite and stimulate. This relies on a maximum number of participants agreeing to collaborate in the collectively acknowledged reality and rules of a performance. No single element determines success. Instead, it is the appropriate combination of various elements that brings out ‘the magic’ people marvel at. Such appropriateness relies on specific knowledge acquired through experience, and is constantly open to negotiation and change.

Existing studies in anthropology and performance provide a valuable backdrop here. Theatre scholars searching for tools to understand performance in Western contexts have always been concerned with theatre’s relation to the intangible spheres of human existence, the metaphysical, invisible, supernatural, ethical or holy (Artaud 1958; Brecht 1964; Grotowski 1976; Stanislavski 1980a, b, 1981; Brook 1998; Barba 2001). Their work highlights the social and potentially spiritual and moral side of theatrical performance, suggesting parallels to religious or ritual practice. Anthropologists, in turn, have aimed at overcoming simplistic distinctions between theatre and ritual, as well as ethnocentric interpretations of performance, by taking culturally specific contexts into account (Grotowski 1976; Beattie 1977; V. Turner 1982; Schechner 1988, 2002; Schieffelin 1996). This has brought to the fore the importance 160 Tarantula Threads and Showbiz Airs of performance in regard to other human institutions or social constructions, such as religion, politics, gender or ethnicity.

A shift in the consideration of dramatic practices, from being viewed ‘largely in terms of structures of representations to being seen as processes of practice and performance’ (Schieffelin 1996: 59), has placed attention on the socially and individually constructed nature of such practices. Ethnomusicologists and dance ethnologists (Williams 1991; Stokes 1994; Reed 1998; Buckland 1999, 2006; Farnell 1999; Guss 2000; Kaeppler 2000; Thomas 2003; Peterson Royce 2004; Post 2006) have contributed fundamentally to such an understanding of performance as a ‘vital form of social creativity’ (Stokes 1994: 24) able to generate, negotiate and control meanings and experiences; as intrinsically political and paradoxical (Cohen 1993); and as ‘part of the very construction and interpretation of social and conceptual s’ (Seeger 1987: xiv). Without dismissing major differences, the conceptual gulf between relationships and process the notions of theatre and ritual becomes less straightforward when considering the phenomenological level of experience: ‘Performances — whether ritual or dramatic — create and make present realities vivid enough to beguile, amuse or terrify. They alter moods, attitudes, social states and states of mind. Unlike texts, however, they are ephemeral; they create their effects and then are gone, leaving their reverberations (fresh insights, reconstituted selves, new statuses, altered realities) behind them. 

'Schieffelin 1996: 59) Moreover, as David Parkin (1996: xxi) writes: "Cultural performance is real in its effects but, because imagined, gives its creators and their audiences a freedom of invention and interpretation that does not exist with regard to structured or positive reality." Performances, whether theatre or ritual, become an experimental platform exposing participants to new roles and experiences, providing a means of contesting, manipulating and creating social constructions of the self, others and the world around. With a focus on the processual nature of performance practices, how did and does the Italian spider's dance beguile, amuse or terrify? What alternative realities were and are created? Perceptions of performative efficacy, and how this is negotiated, provide a helpful guideline. A look at places that characterize first past and then present dances posits an initial step to explore what factors may be variously seen to distinguish a hit from a flop.

Spider Sites: Performance Places

"Once we followed a tarantata down this road playing our instruments. She was crawling on her stomach imitating the serpent that had bitten her," explained Luigi Stifani, well-known violinist of the tarantate, as we walked through his hometown of Nardd, towards his barber's shop. On the front door, there was a sign reading Studio di cultura sul tarantolismo marking this salon, too, with the spider's imprint.

Up until De Martino's research in 1959, public spaces, village squares, streets or courtyards and, arguably, even churches became stages for the tarantate's rituals, as did private spheres, closed homes and secluded bedrooms. Historically, picturesque natural sites were favourite choices: fields, country roads and shady spots abundant in vegetation and water (De Martino 2005: 87). At first glance, it appears that almost any spot could be carved into a stage. However, a location's association with the initial "bite" or "crisis" most frequently determined decisions. Today, the chapel and grotto of St Paul in Galatina and Giurdignano remain two publicly accessible sites evoking the tarantula.*

Although many are oblivious of these places, they stand as testimony to powerful tensions between the Catholic Church and popular religious or spiritual needs. Although long since deconsecrated officially, devotees continue to come here and others insist that they are preserved.>

Early manuscripts and maps, meanwhile, conflated the tarantula spider with the Salento or Apulia as a whole. European travellers documented these practices with disbelief and suspicion (Boyle 1685; Burney 1771; Swinburne 1783), often taking them as proof of the ignorance and backwardness of southern Italy at large.° Burney presents scientific experiments disclaiming the views of believers: "Dr. Cirillo assured me that he had never been able to provoke that tarantula either to bite himself or others upon whom he had repeatedly tried the experiment. However, the whole is so thoroughly believed by some innocent people in the country" (1771: 313). He adds an apologetic footnote in the name of scientific progress: "This account may perhaps diminish the honour of music, by augmenting the number of sceptics, as to its miraculous powers; yet truth requires it should be given" (ibid.). It was also often claimed that the tarantula's bite was harmless beyond Apulian borders and poisonous only to those of Apulian origin.

Tarantula Threads and Showbiz Airs

Other southern Italian case studies contradict these views (Pitré 1894; Zanetti 1978; Rossi 1991), but the concentration of tarantism in______ De Martino tells of a Sicilian woman who became a tarantata after moving to the Salento and of a young Salentine who apparently continued to perform tarantism rituals while committed to military service in northern Italy (2005: 65). Others felt the tarantula's bite as they settled back in the Salento after years of working abroad (Miscuglio et al. 1981; Mingozzi 1982). Spider threads inevitably reached beyond Apulian ground and infiltrated foreign bloodstreams, but always maintained conceptual connections with their perceived southern Italian source.

The region of Apulia was also seen as inseparable from the indigenous music and dance of the tarantella. Dancing in the contexts of merrymaking at weddings, festivals, and other social occasions is likely to have provided a training ground for ritual choreographies. 'The old musicians', one Salentine musician in his fifties confirms, 'all have a sensitivity for places.' Tarantism is something that leads you to feel things, to feel the air, the particles which vibrate, such as the wind, for instance. The wind has a sound. To me, for example, it communicates a great number of things. To play the pizzica well you need a lot of training, a lot of resistance, because you begin to feel well only after three to four hours of playing. That's when energy begins to circulate and there's resonance. And then there are many other things, you travel, you see everything. The sound becomes one, until you don't feel anything anymore, and you begin to see everything from above; these things are all part of the experiences you have.*

The harsh reality of bygone training contexts was seen to further this ability. Luigi Toma tells how he learned in the ronde, or circles, of Torrepaduli: 'if you didn't keep in time with a circle, you were thrown out with a kick — bam! Certain times were established. People from each town kept to specific rhythms and to specific people. If you entered their circle and wanted to play but at a certain point no longer kept up, they threw you out!'? Another musician adds: I began playing when I was a child. At the popular festivals you played non-stop from evening until morning. There were no breaks for a minimum of eight to nine hours. This gives you the capacity to play when you grow up. The organism, the body, is made for playing. Now this isn't the case anymore. The young people no longer manage to do this, they don't have the physical resistance.'°

Dances with Spiders
Playing the pizzica demanded physical endurance and stamina, which past generations are likely to have gained through hard manual labor as well as long hours of music making and dancing. However, not everyone played and danced. One elderly woman in her eighties emphasized that there was no time between work in the fields, factories, and home.!! Just as skills in music making and dancing were passed down the generations, cases of affliction often predominated in a single family, as if inherited or acquired through the process of socialization. Difficult living conditions and problematic relationships were perpetuated, as was a familiarity with devices — both technical and conceptual — required to enact rituals. In this sense, the actual process of growing up in the Salentine environment sculpted individuals, both physically and perceptually, to be able to perform if and when the need arose. Moreover, as Damian Walter points out: 'If the Salentine peninsula was as harsh as it seemed to be — and if tarantism further expressed peasant women's frustrated sexuality and anxieties about fertility (deaths of young children, etc.) 

Others have similarly stressed the links between ritual procedures and natural surroundings, as well as working life. A tambourine player from Ostuni suggests a link between the rhythm of the pizzica and the song of the cinciarella (blue tit), a migratory bird found in southern Italy, marked by a lively 'tee, tee, tee' followed by a scolding 'chirr'. I have not heard others make this connection, although some identified animal behavior in dance moves. One dancer showed me how a male performer might imitate a cockerel, with a stretched-out hand quivering above his forehead, or a bee or serpent moving to sting or bite: with the index and middle fingers curved slightly downwards to simulate a poisonous needle or tongue, the male dancer approaches his female partner and, using his fingers to draw figures of eight in the air in front of her face and body, suddenly launches forward, stings, so to speak, without touching and retreats immediately while closing his outstretched fingers into a fist, as if to retrieve and carry away some invisible essence. Another musician adds that everyday working life may have provided further inspiration, as his hands stretch upwards to illustrate the motions of picking fruit or vine twigs. The tambourine, the musicians' key prop, provides a further link to work. It is made of animal skin (usually goat or cow hide) stretched over a circular wooden frame to which metal cymbals are attached. This frame was, and to a lesser extent is, also used by artisans to make work tools: covered with a metal netting or pierced animal skin it becomes a farnaru (sieve), used with rhythmic movements to sift flour. Associations with other forms of daily work come to mind, raising questions about the rhythmic nature of this work (and its daily tedium) in relation to the rhythms of dancing and playing. The crafts of weaving or spinning, in particular (central to the legend of Arachne), played a prime role in women's tasks in bygone days, creating analogies to the weaving of relationships on a social level and the spinning of fate ― by the three Fates or goddess Aphrodite in Greek mythology, for example ― on a cosmic level (Kinsley 1995: 193-94). In twenty-first-century Italy, meanwhile, spider webs continue to merge with Salentine (as well as Apulian) longitudes and latitudes. Assertions of local identities foster views of this region as home to the unique tradition of tarantism (Apolito 2000). In 2000, the local tourist board's postcards, decked with a tambourine and a couple dancing the pizzica, proclaimed the Salento as: 'Aperto tutto l'anno' (Open all year round) [see Fig. 4.1]. The music and dance of the tarantula make front-page material, attracting thousands to this region. An influx of one hundred thousand tourists was estimated solely in the period around the 2005 Notte della Taranta (Maruccio 2005). Most come for the summer concerts, but have no illusions of (or desire for) stumbling across a healing ritual of bygone days. Yet claims that these may persist at sites hidden in the Salentine countryside create expectation (Santoro 1982: 75). Any spot on the peninsula might still be a sacred stage for the tarantula: perhaps insider knowledge, not kept as secret as it could be, creates a halo of mystery and, in any case, good publicity. Village squares, closed-off crossroads, seaside promenades, and countryside venues are preferred contemporary showcases for the tarantula's music and dance. Abandoned farmhouses or rural chapels, widespread in the Salento, are other favorite sites. With generators fueling light bulbs and loudspeakers, and traffic signs attracting and directing crowds, deserted and silent places become temporarily infused with life. Props—such as flames lining the track leading to a performance or flickering on buildings around a stage—set the scene and mark places as out of the ordinary.

Although brightly spotlighted public stages with powerful hi-fi systems, including discotheques (Bruno 1999; Maruccio 1999), rule the popular music and dance scene, more enclosed, private spheres and celebrations also frequently host the pizzica. Birthday parties and other social gatherings held in the privacy of homes are welcome excuses to pull out the tambourine. The Pizzeria Lu Puzzu in the Griko town of Sternatia has become famous for its Tuesday-night pizzica sessions staged among the restaurant tables as an after-dinner digestive. Similarly, in autumn 2002, the Thurn und Taxis Pub in Lecce promoted weekly pizzica jam sessions.

In verbal rather than musical form, conferences, book presentations, and _ theatre productions bring the tarantula alive, on both outdoor and indoor stages. Art exhibitions and film productions throw its sounds and images onto canvas screens in galleries, cultural associations, and cinemas, while workshops introduce it to school syllabuses and university auditoriums. Students are animated to rediscover their roots, while tourists are invited to explore the exotic. The Salentine peninsula collapses into the tarantula as a poster promoting the 2004—05 season of the Lecce football team shows. Above the slogan Terra di Serie A, League A Country, a spider crawls over Italy's heel painted in the team's red and yellow colours, ironically precisely those that were seen to most affect the tarantate of the past.

Far from soccer stadiums, a select number of intellectually inspired friends and followers of the late Salentine poet and artist Antonio Verri have identified certain sites in the Salentine countryside as representative of the contemporary world of tarantism, sites that express the sibilo lungo or deep murmur.'® Although perhaps previously irrelevant to the tarantate, these landmarks — St Paul's grotto in Giurdignano, the Porto Badisco cave paintings, Torre St Emiliano [see Figs 0.3 and 3.1—3.3] and others — have acquired contemporary meanings through the historical, religious, or mystical import assigned to them (Chiriatti 1995; Liidtke 2002). They are sites of devotion where the much-used phrase la mia terra — my homeland, my earth, my roots — appears condensed into material form, instilling and reconfirming an awareness of the self as linked to the Salentine territory, especially when infused with music making and dancing. Fernando Bevilacqua put it this way: ‘There are certain places where I need to go during the year. It's like an exorcism, as if to wish myself to continue to live.'” 166 Tarantula Threads and Showbiz Airs

People and places conceptually shape each other. The tarantula becomes a matrix for the Salento and its people and vice versa. Each one creates and moulds the other. Meanings are projected onto a site, like a movie onto a screen, and the greater the sense of reality of this projection, the greater the perceived efficacy of the performance. 

Anyone doubting, questioning, or criticizing bursts this bubble of projection, cutting through the movie screen. With the Church's attempts to prohibit tarantism rituals, the tarantate increasingly performed behind locked doors. Today, too, success is jeopardized if the associations ascribed to a place deviate from those ascribed to a performance. Likewise, performance times play a key role in determining success. 

Spider Schedules: Performance Times

The tarantula's venom could strike at any time, day or night, and in any season of the year. However, initial crises coincided mostly with the hot summer months, under the auspices of the burning sun. Everyday life was at its harshest and the spider abundant in the fields. This was also the time of St Paul's festival. The anniversary of a first bite often provoked crises anew, as did other festive or social events. States of emergency could be treated at any time, but the hottest part of the day was seen as most conducive to recovery. Francesco Greco, who danced to the tunes of the tarantula in the 1960s, confirms this: 'The musicians came around 11 a.m., because that was the time, more or less, when this animal started to show its effects, the hot hours, from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m.. Those were the three peak hours.'!® Sweating was most profuse then, facilitating — as was believed — the expulsion of the spider's venom. Ritual phases lasted ten to fifteen minutes on average, followed by short breaks of another ten minutes or so. Generally, recovery required a minimum of three to four days of dancing, with rests at night-time.

Moreover, De Martino was told, St Paul gave his grace either at 12 noon, | p.m., 3 p.m. or 5 p.m. (2005: 42). Although these claims are hard to follow up, rituals were wrapped into the sun's twenty-four-hour cycle and annual rhythm: when the sun was at its highest and most intense, the tarantula's bite was most profuse and its dance likely to be most efficient. It also generally hit at specific points in a life cycle, most often during puberty or early adulthood, or in moments of major transitions, such as childbirth, marriage or loss of a spouse (De Martino 2005: 83). While some tarantate never repeated their initial performance, others, like Evelina, continued to do so for over half a century on every anniversary of their 'initial bite'.

Nowadays, meanwhile, the pizzica escapes the burning sun, as pleasantly air-conditioned summer nights are its main showcase. Village festivals and sagre, food fairs, have in recent years rarely been complete or truly traditional, so to speak, without this music's stamp. Although summer nights still hold the strongest spell, the pizzica may heat up any night of the year. The winter bonfire festival of St Anthony, for instance, celebrated in the small suburb of Villa Convento on 22 January 2005, was set to its rhythms. Although just a small gathering with a few sausage and chestnut stands, the pizzica was not missing.

While seasonal and religious cycles still influence the tarantula's beat, other cycles equally hold it in their grip. In spring 1998, during the local election campaign for Lecce's new mayor, pizzica concerts followed political speeches of all inclinations: spider music turned into political catchphrase and voting trigger. Meanwhile, annual events, such as the Night of the Tarantula or the Pizzicata Festival,!? follow the examples of major world music initiatives counting on the perennial pilgrimage of fans. Workshops and seminars organized by schools or the University of Lecce offer an intellectual or artistic tone according to the academic calendar. My own neighborhood in Lecce became the inadvertent audience to a didgeridoo, ringing out through the open balcony doors of a nearby flat, in tune to pizzica songs on summer nights in 2007. Such one-off happenings may have few immediately evident links to broader temporal patterns anchoring these events within the rhythms of daily life. Moreover, although the tarantula's music and dance come alive mostly at night, no specific hours can be allocated to their performances.

Where events mix verbal, visual, and musico-choreographic elements, a temporal hierarchy emerges: lectures and films, representing the tarantula's case in words, images, and recordings, set the scene and mood, creating a gradual build-up to the actual music making and dancing. Finally, a few hard-core performers often hang around after the official performance is over and microphones have been unplugged. Spontaneous circles, at times lasting into the early morning hours, provide time to improvise and unwind.

When a show, whether of past or contemporary spider dances, is embedded into larger acknowledged social and natural cycles, participation is legitimized and encouraged. Through correspondence and repetition, it is anchored into the passage of time, as defined by everyday life. In cases of tarantism, symptoms often involved responses of withdrawal from temporally specific circumstances, a means of periodically propelling individuals into a sphere that was free from the influence of cyclical patterns and the hardships these may have entailed.

Rituals, meanwhile, could guide the individual within this sphere through the imposition of performative rhythms rooted in the socio-natural rhythms of daily life, thereby aiming to draw the individual's sensory perception outwards and to coax the afflicted back into the present time and place. In modern circumstances, performances may still be linked to seasonal and religious cycles, but detachment from these cycles—be it, for instance, through air-conditioned and centrally heated lives or a lack of common belief systems—gives more credit to other cycles, such as those of commerce, politics, and tourism, often boasting their closeness to nature and the authentic past as a catchphrase. Respecting the cyclical process of a performance may be seen to boost efficacy.

Rituals were characterized by phases of preparation, exploration, climax, and repose. Staged shows equally benefit from a gradual build-up of rhythm and atmosphere, a variable period of intense playing, and an improvised and more laid-back time to finish off, without amplifications or schedule of any kind. Accordingly, participants are required to surrender to the continuity and unity of the performance rhythms for efficacy to take its course. This requires being sensitive not only to places and times but also to the props and techniques engaged with.

Tarantula Threads: Past Props and Techniques

'If you didn't find the tarantula's thread,' an elderly tarantato from the town of Acaya explained (Di Lecce 1994: 191), 'they didn't manage to dance, they didn't manage to move.' [II filo della taranta, the thread of the tarantula, had to be found: that stimulus, be it a rhythm, melody, colour, image, scent, or object, which would instigate the bitten woman (or man) to react and, most importantly, to dance.] I tempi giusti: the ‘right’ tempo or rhythms, had to be established in order to provoke an irresistible urge to dance. Musical exploration aimed at finding a trigger, an emotional button that would move the tarantata to express her crisis. Luigi Stifani explained how he had once played for a tarantata for hours and hours without being able to elicit any kind of response. Eventually, following a hunch, he struck up Chopin’s funeral march and, to his own and everyone else’s surprise, the afflicted jumped up and danced. ‘When she recovered,’ Stifani concluded with an indignant smile, ‘she asked me why I hadn’t played Chopin’s piece straight away!’° In some cases, rhythmic stimulation, not intended as music, was sufficient to bring about a response and, with it, a resurgence of symptoms: footsteps on the floor of a tobacco factory incited one tarantata to dance; a spoon hitting the sides of a bowl provoked another (De Martino 2005: 56, 58). Many, I was repeatedly told, avoided social occasions at which the pizzica was played during periods in which they felt particularly sensitive, and hence at risk of falling into a crisis outside a contained ritual framework. Music helped identify the cause of affliction. ‘You no longer saw a man, but a scorpion instead. It brought tears to our eyes to see him like this.’ Luigi Stifani relates his experience of playing for a tarantato bitten by a scorpion.?! The tarantate were said to become their predator: mostly a spider, sometimes other poisonous animals. Where everyday roles faltered, the spider and its counterparts provided role models catering to extremes of behaviour. In fact, diverse tarantula types existed in the context of tarantism rituals, providing scope for individual and historical variation. Each spider carried its own name and traits, determining the conduct of its victims. Dancing and singing tarantulas were most common. Others were angry or promiscuous, pushing the tarantate to aggressive or lustful behaviour. Yet others were sad and silent, responding only to funeral laments. Some were sleepy and even deaf, showing no reaction to music at all (Mina 1997). A varied costume cupboard of characters existed, determining the behaviour, wishes and whims of the tarantula’s prey. 170 Tarantula Threads and Showbiz Airs But what was it about the music that made it ‘right’? For centuries this question has intrigued researchers interested in the link between music and healing (Kircher 1641/1654; Katner 1952; Rouget 1986; Franco and Zuffi 1996). Was it the type of instrument or rhythm used, the melodic range or musical mode? Some musicians informed De Martino (2005: 299) that the tonality of the music played was crucial. The tarantate apparently responded mainly to musical pieces in specific keys: A major, D major, B minor and A minor. De Martino himself did not observe this, and I am equally unable to provide any confirmation. It seems clear that some highly subjective associations, as well as cultural conventions come into play, as, ‘by itself, music cannot alter the consciousness of those who are neither sensitized to it nor expectant of its results’ (Laderman 1996: 132). However, a general preference for fast rhythms established the pizzica as a favourite. Luigi Stifani (2000: 39) spoke of three types he used most in his career: la tarantata indiavolata and la tarantata sorda, the ‘possessed or devilish’ and ‘deaf’ forms, played in a major key; and la tarantata minore, performed in a minor key. The basic beat of the pizzica was also said to hold clues to ritual efficacy. Despite its 4/4 rhythm, varying accents give it a 6/8 feel, making its structure dual and ambiguous: four counts per bar overlaid with uneven triplets create a jumpy feel, characteristic of the skipping steps for which the tarantella dance is famous. The name pizzica pizzica itself gives a sense, moreover, of the triple rhythm of this music and dance form. Generally speaking, a continuous rhythm, diversely accentuated, came with melodic variants, improvisational in character. The instruments reflected this duality: the musical beat, set by the tambourine, was accompanied by an interweaving offbeat, generally provided by the violin. Accordions, harmonicas or guitars contributed further sound variety, although already a reduced selection from bygone centuries, in which musettes, shawms, trumpets, bombardons and other wind instruments were equally part of the game (De Martino 2005: 97).

Importantly, moreover, not all music was instrumental. Singing tarantate required vocals: declarations of love, funeral laments, religious hymns, and, most of all, evocations of the tarantula or St Paul through prayers or verbal dialogues, expressed aloud or silently. What is more, definitions of musical props were put to the test by the soundscape inside St Paul’s chapel. Musical instruments were officially forbidden, but personal accounts contradict this (Di Lecce 1994: 242). The apostle’s brides became their own musicians. Their screams and sighs mixed with the singing of songs and the clapping of hands. Recurring cries of just two syllables, 'A-hi', punctuated their efforts at ritualization. Images transported in the words of songs were said to provide other steps towards identification and recovery. Yet other props helped to re-evoke the tarantula, including the reconstruction of the setting and scene of the first bite. Objects present and clothes worn at the moment of the initial crisis became crucial props, as did icons of St Paul, mirrors, leaves, twigs or water. Swinburne (1783) adds ribbons and grapes to this list. Fragrances provided yet other tools: a young man believed to be a tarantato was seen to place a bunch of wild flowers close to his nose as if 'trying to obtain a stimulation through smell which did not come through hearing or sight' (De Martino 2005: 50). Another tarantata reported how, under the tarantula's spell, she became intolerant to certain smells (ibid.: 58). Chromatic explorations provided further clues, as the case of the man ejected during Maria of Nardo's ritual recalls. Coloured props acted as both magnets and repellents, determining the colour of the afflicting spider. Most important for this were coloured ribbons, nzacareddhe in the Salentine dialect. These are still sold as signs of devotion at religious festivals. De Martino (2005: 106) writes of diversely coloured bits of material suspended from a string tied across the ritual perimeter. The tarantate chose those that most affected them. According to Kircher's text (1641/1654), some ravaged pieces of cloth with their teeth or embraced them lovingly. Moreover, every move was made in the tarantula's name. A conceptual jump was taken to establish dramatic or ritual distance. The tarantata both was and was not herself. Choreographic ritual cycles, initiated by musical rhythms and the tarantate's identificatory actions, generally began with a slow section and then broke into a faster rhythm. In the first phase, performed on the ground, widespread interpretations suggest that the spirit of the tarantula, or offending counterpart, was called upon and brought alive through the process of embodiment. The spider was made visual and tangible through identification with its shape and movements: the tarantata would arch her spine into a 'hysteric arc', shuffle across the floor on her back and shoulders with her limbs stretched out spider-like, dance with a cushion above her shoulder, apparently representing the arachnid torso, or swing suspended from a rope. Alternatively, she was known for the feat of threading her entire body through the legs of a wicker chair, in simulation of the spider's weaving skills. Other movements characterizing rituals were seen to foster identification, as well as a sense of disorientation and a loss of balance, common to dance forms found in other regions of the world associated with so-called altered states of consciousness, often compared to the spider's dance (De Martino 1961a; Lewis 1971; Bourguignon 1973; Rouget 1986; Lapassade 1994, 1996a; Ardillo 1997; Daniel 2005). These included throwing the head from side to side; moving the pelvis rapidly up and down; running or dancing in a circle; or spinning around in a pirouette. In a second dance phase performed in an upright position, the spider dancer was said to enter into battle, as some interpretations relate. She had to face her predator, fight and eliminate it. Dance steps of the pizzica pizzica were seen to trample and crush the spider, as the heel hit the ground rapidly and forcefully, until the dancer collapsed from exhaustion and rested before recommencing another cycle. The performance ended when the spider was pacified. A complete and permanent cure, popular opinion states, was obtained only when the spider was killed.

In more recent centuries, the role of the spider has merged with that of the Apostle Paul, a further protagonist in the tarantula's dance. Luigi Chiriatti writes of how some, drawing on this association, were known to say prayers to St Paul whenever they came across a spider web (1995: 56). The apostle is frequently described as lo sposo delle tarantate, the spouse of the tarantate, providing one explanation for the white dress, the colour of a bride's gown in recent centuries, identifying his female devotees. Their costume and money offerings became dramatic media to seduce the saint at Galatina, as moments of identification and antagonism continued to emerge. Allusions to sexual intercourse, especially during the initial dance phase on the floor, as well as the erotic connotations of some lyrics, evoked St Paul's presence, as did other dramatic techniques: many approached the altar on their knees; one tarantata was filmed pounding on the door behind which St Paul's statue stood; others climbed onto the altar to be closer to the tapestry that bore his image. In the second phase, the saint was challenged: one tarantata was captured on celluloid as she circled the altar in Galatina's chapel, whipping a white handkerchief through the air as if to chase away her aggressor [see Fig. 1.3], while others used moves of the scherma to fight invisible counterparts (Chiriatti 1996: 12; De Martino 2005: 103). Props and techniques provided key clues to ritual efficacy, but so did the active participation of others. De Martino (2005: 104) presents the musical performers as exorcists, medics and artists all in one, mentioning how — apparently — 'in seventeenth-century Taranto, the musicians were public officials paid with regular salaries' (2005: 183). More commonly, musicians were remunerated and fed by the victim's family, causing major expenses. In the past, both men and women played for the tarantate, and rituals relied on their dexterity: not only their technical skills but also their ability to instill the performance with an emotional charge and to let go of any compulsion to control in order to submit to the needs of the tarantata involved. At some point, one elderly musician reported, the musicians themselves were taken over by the music. Something else played through them."

Vital knowledge about how to safeguard the ritual sequence was often provided by close family members or others who had extensive ritual experience. Luigi Santoro (1982: 81) points to the centrality of the figure of the macara, while Turchini (1987: 162) refers to the capo-attarantati, the head of the attarantati, who ensured that appropriate action was taken and organized ritual practicalities. Friends and relatives also took on responsibility for the safety and well-being of the afflicted: catching the tarantate when they collapsed, supplying food and drink, securing the scene from potential intruders and paying the musicians' fees. Moreover, bystanders or other tarantate could be invited to join in the dance. In fact, historical documents tell of large groups of afflicted dancers dressing up and dancing in crowds (Baldwin 1997).

Representatives of larger institutions have been equally influential within the complex play of tarantism, often restricting performative efficacy. Priests were encouraged to dissuade the tarantate from coming to Galatina, although others were invited to perform exorcism rituals. De Martino mentions how one tarantato was stopped in mid-dance because the collection of money during 174 Tarantula Threads and Showbiz Airs rituals was no longer authorized (2005: 53). During St Paul's festival the police curbed proceedings, calling the tarantate to order, keeping crowds at bay, or placating relatives enraged by journalists and photographers.

Following the publication of La terra del rimorso, journalists and researchers arrived with their props of cameras, tape recorders and microphones. Their dramatic techniques often implied trickery, as some hid on the balcony inside St Paul's chapel to film from behind a concealing curtain or smuggled themselves inside the chapel on the pretence of being relatives or musicians. Gianfranco Mingozzi's film Sulla terra del rimorso (1982) documents how a film team lured the reluctant and infuriated Maria of Nardod into her doctor's practice to interview her, while the narrator justifies this as legitimate for the sake of documenting 'the existence of a subaltern class which in many cases has not as yet acquired a sense of self- consciousness, and is unable to provide a direct testimony of itself without external mediators' (Barbati et al. 1978: 142)." Such patronizing views justified invasive techniques. These may explain the antagonism towards film cameras expressed by the tarantate, beyond questions about the extent to which this antagonism may have been triggered by class issues, in so far as those using the cameras may have represented a particular level of technological development and the inadvertent display of the financial means to acquire such technology."* In sum, ritual efficacy in bygone ritual contexts required both physical and conceptual containment. Although the afflicted essentially directed proceedings through their reactions, everyone present played an active role as a witness: as potential critic or accomplice. No matter what motive pulled them into the circle — be it curiosity, reverence or condemnation — any act of observing reconfirmed what was happening. As long as those present were willing to acknowledge the performative reality of the ritual setting, or at least refrained from denying it, they played a crucial role in promoting ritual efficacy and safeguarding the acceptability of this tradition.

Where in past rituals the right thread had to be found, the ‘right air’ needs to be struck in contemporary performances: that way and intensity of playing which binds the audience’s attention and compels participants to dance and applaud.

175 Dances with Spiders Showbiz Airs: Present Props and Techniques

With the 1990s’ pizzica boom, the new or neo-tarantati emerged. ‘All are looking for a state of grace,’ Daniele Durante (1999: 172) writes, ‘almost of trance, which can put them in relation with their own divinity, or demon, or the tarantula or St Rocco.’ This is not the only motivation, but one that highlights the persisting star position of symbolic and spiritual counterparts. Images of these counterparts abound and the tarantula still holds prime position, unchallenged at the ‘top of the pops’, on tambourine skins, billboards, posters, ashtrays or book and CD covers.

In 2002, a bar on Galatina’s main square displayed sweets shaped as spiders, calendars of the tarantate and T-shirts with their perpetrators. A market vendor with a spider sticker on his chest pocket sold others, at one euro each, among his selection of nuts and olives. Meanwhile, the newsagent across the road had a large selection of postcards with tambourines, some smeared with blood, and verses of songs addressing St Paul and the tarantula, while the spider advertising the 2007 Night of the Tarantula on billboards throughout the region also sold at 30 euros as a silver pendant in an elegant jewellery shop in Lecce’s old city centre.

The tarantula remains a buzzword, a magnet, a label. It has become history and memory inscribed on human skin: Pino Zimba, recently deceased leader of the group Zimbaria, had a spider tattooed onto his shoulder at the point where his father was bitten.?” Sometimes actual spiders have become inadvertent actors in a show, as one musician told how he had caught a tarantula and taken it to every performance of his band.*° Saints, such as Paul or Rocco, maintain a more marginal role. Some nuovi tarantati visit St Paul’s Galatina chapel on his feast day and hundreds make their annual pilgrimage to St Rocco’s festival without, however, necessarily entering the chapel safeguarding the saint’s relics.

The documentary film San Paolo e la tarantola concludes with the final acknowledgement: ‘Mit besonderem Dank an San Paolo’ (With special thanks to St Paul), as director Edoardo Winspeare, then a film-school student in Munich, resurrected the tarantate’s patron on cinema and television screens. Meanwhile, the ‘dancing shaman’ of the Porto Badisco caves is another favourite embellishment [see Figs 7.1 and 7.2]. In the eyes 176 Tarantula Threads and Showbiz Airs of some, the longevity of this cave painting outweighs that of the spider, symbolically making it a predecessor, a kind of source, with an archaeological halo of mystery augmenting its charisma. In the 1998 summer, a bright-red graffiti design of this figure stood out on the walls of a small, makeshift bar erected next to the largest inlet of Badisco, just a few strides from the iron-barred cave entrance [see Fig. 7.1] The following year, this bar was turned into a regular brick building at the expense of the shaman, as his image was torn down with the initial walls. However, his graffiti-style presence is alive and kicking in the Salentine music scene. ‘This figure,’ Daniele Durante (1999: 189) explains, ‘has struck the imagination of the Salentine people to such an extent, as to identify it with the divinity which they consider to be at the origin of their ... culture ... it is in the pizzica that they see its “still-beating heart”.’ While many Salentines would not grant the shaman such a monopoly, such historical associations provide perfect tools for grounding today’s performances in the past and in the territory of the Salento itself. Although the ancient Greek roots of tarantism are widely defended by academics (Salvatore 1989; Lapassade 1994; Di Mitri 1996), few, if any, images relating to the Greek world are visible within the contemporary manifestations of tarantism, although the lyrics of many songs in the Griko dialect — and Greek radio channels picked up across the Otranto channel when driving along the Adriatic coast — are a constant reminder of the Salento’s (cultural) proximity to Greek shores. The tambourine remains a key prop loaded with free-floating meanings not necessarily shared and not necessarily rooted in everyday life.

Students participating at the 1998 University of Lecce pizzica course directed by Giorgio Di Lecce spoke of these associations: ‘It’s an expression of energy inside ... an extension of our own voice ... something that carries you away.’*! ‘I check my pulse prior to starting to play the tambourine,’ another musician asserts, suggesting an intrinsic link between the tambourine’s rhythm and human heartbeat.** Fabio Tolledi (1998: 4) takes up this thread: ‘The tambourine, symbolic form of the cosmos, holds in its beat the relation that exists between the heart and the world.’ ‘The secret is the tambourine,’ yet another player affirms: It is round, like the moon. It is a feminine instrument. Its skin is generally made from the stomach of an animal, the stomach being at the centre of all living things, where the emotions are, where children are formed. The hand is used to play on this skin. Stretched out open wide, it has the shape of a spider. The spider beats the tambourine, in the centre, in the stomach, giving it a strong, continuous rhythm, following the beat of the heart.’? Such associations connect instruments, spiders and players, jeopardizing frequently expressed exclusive links between the pizzica and those born and bred in the Salento.*# Part of the tambourine’s secret is believed to lie in the experiences it is seen to provoke. Hands are generally bound with protective strips of cloth, but these may loosen and the skin below the thumb is frequently cut open from the friction of beating the instrument. Many players tell how they continued playing with a bleeding hand because they felt no pain and, in fact, many tambourine skins are smeared with dried blood. Voices express marvel at the fact that pain is annulled and this too is charged with broader meanings, as Tolledi (1998: 8) reveals: There exists among tambourine players a cruel and childish kind of pride with regard to the ‘baptism’ of those who play this instrument. This sonic virginity is broken by admission into the sphere of adult players by the blood which bleeds from the hand, and by the red ... which colours and signs the tambourine. The hand becomes a sign, many signs, a wound which opens and bleeds, a red mouth, an open sex. From this perspective, bleeding becomes an initiation and rite of passage facilitated by playing the tambourine and a means of inscribing a change from youth to adult status. Associations are made with women’s loss of virginity, a highly charged bodily metaphor for the vulnerability of social boundaries. Yet one might wonder whether past performers went to such extremes when hard manual labour was awaiting them the next day and their hands were, moreover, much more resistant from work.

Meanwhile, the human voice too remains a central device, as Daniele Durante (1999: 175) stresses: "Used as an instrument with tightly stretched chords ... verses lose their original significance; they are extrapolated from other songs and interspersed with cries, exclamations, which at times seem animalesque verses. Often ‘mamma’ is added to the ‘A-hi’ to obtain ‘A-hi mamma!’, an ancestral exclamation which, each time it is pronounced, produces an inexplicable excitement in the players with a subsequent increase in the sound volume."

178 Tarantula Threads and Showbiz Airs Lyrics are also highly significant. One dancer explained how these vary between the pizzica pizzica and scherma: "When the pizzica is danced for courtship, lyrics speak of love, encouraging dancers to give of their best, but, when it is performed for the scherma, words are much more aggressive, aiming to inspire anger, tension and courage."

Inevitably, money is also a prime prop, often determining whether a performance will be staged at all. In 2006, one of the key groups of the tarantula's music and dance was asking between 1,000 euros and 2,600 euros for one night's concert, depending on whether they were playing locally or elsewhere, with events outside the Salento generally being a better bet financially. One well-known and charismatic elderly musician, is said to ask up to 2,500 euros for a single appearance, even when playing in the Salento. Specific events may be bigger scoops, such as playing during election campaigns, for EU-funded projects or on the Night of the Tarantula, while other occasions may involve voluntary participation, often linked to an exchange of favours.

For most, playing is a sideline income, considering that these sums are shared among group members and may or may not include travel expenses. Many groups have brought out their own CDs, involving average expenditures of 300 euros per day for the use of a recording studio, not to speak of the time invested by group members, although sales subsequently contribute to concert incomes and publicity. Yet others have specialized in book and music sales concerning the tarantula and spend the summer months touring concert venues.

City and regional sponsorship have made certain events highly attractive for participants: in 2002, the first Salentine edition of Estadanza, a rich one-week programme of practical and theoretical courses on the tarantula's music and dance, directed by dance ethnologist Giuseppe Gala in collaboration with various local associations, cost no more than 100 euros including accommodation, with further discounts available for those resident in the Salento. Meanwhile for participants, concerts are generally free in the Salento, whereas abroad entrance fees are frequently charged: London's Rhythm and Sticks Festival sold £15 (22 euros) tickets for the performance of Salentine group Ghetonia on 20 July 2004. Meanwhile, the audience at the Beijing Night of the Tarantula on 2 May 2006 paid 30 yuan (almost 3 euros) each (Indennitate 2006). The Provincia di Lecce’s expenditure of 100,000 euros for this latter event inevitably created polemical reactions, with a spokesman for the Lecce town council provocatively offering a piazza in Lecce at only 20,000 euros for the same concert (Meis 2006).

The role of technological advances is equally important to the success of contemporary performances. ‘Not only must acoustics be good for the audience,’ one musician stresses, ‘but it is just as important that performers hear themselves and each other.” In this sense, today's groups are often in the hands of more or less skilled sound technicians and their show is influenced by other factors such as the amplification system available or sound pollution from elsewhere. At the same time, technology amplifies communicative means. The group Alla Bua was one of the first to play to the backdrop of their music video, while the Night of the Tarantula has involved huge screens duplicating and zooming in on what was happening on stage, while the entire concert was broadcast worldwide on satellite TV. Internet sites and forums provide other virtual performance spaces and avenues for venting opinions, creating contacts, exchanging information.

Moreover, the importance of the immediacy and flexibility of the musical source is spotlighted. The interaction or mutual ‘reactivity’ that is possible between live players and dancers, and was transmitted from older to younger generations in the past, is less direct when a mechanical source of music is used. ‘A good performance’, another musician points out, ‘depends not only on the sound being good both on and off stage, but also on a circuit of attention and enthusiasm between audience and musicians.’ Although technological devices may record and fix musical pieces on discs and digital files, and many DJs master the technical possibilities of interacting with their crowds of fans, they cannot make up for a live performance’s creative and improvisatory emotional charge and rhythm.

A tambourine maker and maestro player from Ostuni expands on this point: The other day, a music group from further south came to give a concert here in my hometown, but nobody was dancing. The group leader shouted to me to come and play with them. We began to play the pizzica of our town, slowly, gently, not in an unrestrained way ... The pizzica is life, it has its own rhythms and if you don’t speak the same language you must find the way, the air, the intonation to speak. You might have the instrument and everything else, but the right air is missing, the right motive.

The ‘right air’ has to be found, that rhythm and intention, that way of playing which will engage those present to take part, beginning with the tapping of toes on the piazza pavement or the barely visible swaying of shoulders. The right air must be adapted not only to the individual and group but also to the place where music making takes place. Someone may enter a circle limping and then begin to take in the air, to gain confidence, to let go and to show themselves in all their grandeur. But, if the right air is lost, the pizzica no longer makes anyone dance. With the contemporary pizzica boom, ‘official’ (and often disputed) pizzica courses abound, but these aspects of performing may not always be addressed. Many people become involved in the pizzica world without seeking out a tutor. A typical introductory route is through friends: you take part for the first time, get carried away by the music and dance, continue to dance, and begin to read books without giving it too much thought. Then you learn to play the tambourine. Another musician elaborates on the transmission of the pizzica: The dimension of experience, trance, is an individual thing, transmitted through exchange of experiences. Trance brings you into superior situations, putting you into contact with another world, a magical fact. To arrive at this point, it's necessary to respect certain rules: contact with the earth, natural terrain, the circle, and players keeping to the same rhythms. Also, a minimum of two hours of playing is needed before accessing any state of trance. Sufficient stamina, perfect rhythm, and lengthy playing are said to be required.

It's not only a matter of studying the tambourine and learning about harmony. It's about understanding what happens around you. The old people transmit these things by speaking and playing beside you. The importance of creating an emotional charge and maintaining a 'sonorous flow' is emphasized. Luigi Toma explains that nowadays his group rarely inserts a break during concerts: If I stop playing, it's difficult to start up again. This state in which the rhythm takes over ceases, and you have to work hard to return to it. Clearly, ways of performing vary widely, influencing what may be defined as a successful performance. Inevitably, gender issues are brought into play. Once a fellow female dancer corrected one of my dance steps, specifying that it was a man's step: The pizzica is danced in an unchained but never in an unseemly way. It mustn't become vulgar. You don't show your legs. There must always be elegance and composure.

Ada's description of her eighty-four-year-old mother's way of dancing shows the generational differences: She moves proudly, and at the same time with great humility towards her male partner. It is a way of dancing the pizzica that is entirely female. We, the new generation, have learned that we also have a masculine side and how to express this. Elderly women, however, will never take on masculine modes, as we do. They have a proud comportment, making sure to keep their legs very closed, taking tiny but very sensual steps. This was the role of women at the time, and they could not move beyond it. Changes inevitably jeopardize implicit rules once associated with the pizzica, and attempts at reinforcing these are often in vain, as Ada recounts: I tried ... but realized that nothing could be done. It’s not possible to say: ‘Look, it’s not done like that, it’s done like this,’ because in that moment they'll tell you: ‘I want to dance, move out of my way, I have to dance and I want to enter the circle.’ In this way, twenty, thirty people dance in one circle and there is too much energy, it’s not channelled in any way, it’s chaos."**" Tradition dictates that only one couple dance in a circle at one time. They become the nucleus of attention, holding each other's gaze and dancing without ever touching beyond slight brushes of the skin. Stimuli — whistles, applause, cries of admiration, laughter and more — are directed at the dancing couple from the audience, creating constant interaction. Yet, inevitably, the open and improvisatory nature of the pizzica steps and gestures easily overrides any disciplinary structures at its base, leading Giuseppe Gala (2002b: 46) to cynically describe the pizzica (or pizziche) today, as involving ‘a television-like emphasis on representing the relationship of couples: the exaggeratingly honeyed female role and the sugary gaze of men who drone around their prey’. Clearly, no essentialized pizzica exists. Intentions vary, as do ways of performing. Obvious performative similarities between past and present spider dances, based on sounds, steps and lyrics, are permeated with deeply rooted differences, which go beyond the dynamic and continuously re-creative character that applies to any performance genre. Modern technology provides a vast new gamut of virtual, rather than live, stimuli. Moreover, the human organism, the key prop of the tarantula’s music and dance, is exposed not only to highly varied individual experiences, but also to disparate sociocultural contexts. Contemporary performers not only may lack stamina, but also play in a context that lends the tarantula’s music and dance to whatever interpretation is at hand, making a ballet- school ritual copy the highlight of a night. Knowing about roots and rhythms cannot replace the experiential knowledge of appropriate relations assuring containment that the elderly talk about. Ritual set-ups guaranteed a minimum of support: perimeters were clearly demarcated, musicians played in a circle, someone experienced guided and secured the proceedings, throwing out intruders if need be. Today, performance circles are often crowded with participants ignorant of the value of someone directing interactions. Stages and amplifying systems split participants, and attempts at bridging gaps with performers descending into the crowd or inviting audience members on stage may only underline and deepen divisions. The tarantula’s music not only welds together but also breaks apart, as the strong rivalry among contemporary music groups repeatedly brings to the fore. Luigi Toma refers to this emphatically: ‘Why is it that all of us who live in the Salento don’t manage to work together? This is the basis of our music! At this point, we're all taking ourselves for a ride!’** The comparative perspective adopted here may be criticized as perpetuating wishful thinking regarding the continuity of those performative features perceived as beneficial by whoever is promoting these events. Although similarities emerge, these are no 183 Dances with Spiders guarantee of historical or cultural ties between bygone and modern tarantati. What was right in the past is not necessarily right nowadays. What is appropriate for one person is not necessarily so for another. What is interesting, however, is how a focus on continuity — and a demand for this — can both obscure and reveal the inherent power of performances: that is, the creative potential, or possibility for discontinuity and change, implicit in every new enactment. Inevitably, criteria of success depend on who establishes these. Nevertheless, it appears that performative efficacy — despite variations in past and present contexts and in participants (whether Salentine or not) — is linked to a sensitivity towards places, times, props, and techniques gained through extensive experiential knowledge. It is facilitated by the active participation of everyone present; the anchoring of performances in social and natural rhythms of everyday life; and the availability of performance techniques related to the larger socio-natural context as well as containment, sensory stimulation, and emotional charge. A key to success emerges in the way of playing and the intention behind doing so. The importance of surrendering to the music in the circles of musicians and dancers, moreover, comes into view, juxtaposed to the management of music and dance through cultural politics and policies, as well as artistic directives and arrangements: relinquishing control as opposed to controlling; abandonment versus regulation; letting go in the face of legislation; a paradox engulfed by the tarantula's web and, perhaps, an opposition inherent in the process of recovering well-being. In 2000, it involved a trans-European program funded by the EU Leader II Programme, including workshops with musicians and dancers from Ireland and Brittany. This event was seen by some as a counter-initiative to the Night of the Tarantula.

Nardo, 29 July 1999. Ibid. It is important to keep in mind that 'the terms for instruments have undergone numerous changes through the centuries, and the same term in one period could also refer to very different instruments in different geographical areas' (Dorothy Zinn in De Martino 2005: 92).

A short record was sold with De Martino's first edition of La terra del rimorso (1961a), documenting sounds registered in St Paul's chapel on 29 June 1959 and several musical pieces and songs performed during rituals. Likewise, Brizio Montinaro's collection Musiche e canti popolari del Salento, Vol. 3 (Edizioni Aramiré), includes two tracks of recordings (from 1974 and earlier) of the tarantate in Galatina.

De Martino distinguished three such steps towards recovery in one of the tarantate's famous hymns 'Santu Paulu meu de le tarante': first, the evocation of the presence of the causative agent: 'Say where the tarantula stung you'; secondly, the localization of the embodied crisis: 'Underneath the hem of the skirt'; and, finally, the presentation of a resolution by calling upon St Paul, 'who stings all the girls and makes them saints' (De Martino 2005: 99-100).

Maurizio Nocera, Lecce, 24 November 1997. Nardo, 6 July 1999. The connections between musical and cardiac rhythms are similarly drawn elsewhere: Marina Roseman (2002: 119) stresses the central role of bamboo-tube stampers in Temiar trance dances and how the rhythms of these instruments are compared to the rhythms of heartbeat and breathing.

The well-known Salentine group Ghetonia made its debut in the UK capital, performing its repertoire of songs in the Griko dialect and pieces featuring the rhythmic beat of the pizzica. The Purcell Room auditorium with its black-curtained walls contrasted sharply with the open-air settings of the Salento, but the concert was a huge success. The musicians interacted humorously with the audience and their pieces were enthusiastically received, with a standing ovation at the end. What really stood out for me, however, was a split-second interaction right at the end of the performance: as the musicians got back on stage for an encore and were about to strike their instruments, a member of the audience jumped to his feet, in a jack-in-the-box fashion, brandishing between his outstretched arms a bright red and yellow scarf — the colours of the Lecce football team — which read: ‘Forza Lecce!’ (Come on, Lecce!). Beyond its comic effect, this gesture pinpointed a Salentine émigré’s strong sense of (or desire for) belonging, with his football paraphrenalia, and, by way of association, may be seen to have rooted this music and all it entails within the Salento. All the more potent in the cosmopolitan setting of London’s South Bank Centre and in the context of an international ‘world music’ festival, this gesture could be viewed as creating and shaping not only geographical boundaries, but also symbolic and imaginary territories, zones of inclusion and exclusion, bringing to the fore questions of identity and the perceived need for identity within the modern-day world. In order to consider how identities are played out in relation to well-being in the contexts of the tarantula’s music and dance, it is useful to gradually zoom outwards from individual experiences, to social relations and, finally, group identities. Such a widening of the focal lens reveals the mutual influence between these various dynamic and entwined dimensions. As the sensory modalities of touch, sound, colour, motion and smell are engaged, participants in the pizzica's rhythms may move from one experiential state to another. Affliction may shape-shift to well-being, addressing not only individual suffering but also ‘scars of history’ (Roseman 1996: 234) on a communal level. In this sense, the tarantula's music and dance reveal themselves as one example of how, in the context of modernity, both in the Salento and elsewhere, ‘people are mediating the simultaneous yet differentiated, overlapped, and overlaid world of transnational communication and global economies’ (Roseman 2002: 121). Performance circles, or magic circles, are an integral part of the process of promoting well-being through music and dance. These circles may emerge during any occasion where the tarantula's music and dance are performed. However, big-time on-stage shows appear less conducive to the magic emerging due to their highly structured nature. Nevertheless, participants both on and off stage may still experience such magic.

Two young female dancers share their experiences:

"The experience of participating in these circles becomes something mystical and fascinating. The circle creates a harmony of sounds, bodies, emotions... everybody gives and takes energy in a quasi-symbiotic exchange with the others and with the music." (Negro and Sergio 2000: 1)

A Salentine musician emphasizes the importance of creating a circle, or una ronda, and going beyond tiredness to enter a different dimension of spirituality. Active participation and personal experience, along with the acquisition of technical abilities and experiential knowledge, provide a key to gaining the ability to feel and find the 'right air'.

Another musician explains, "It's impossible to say what exactly brings out this magic. It's unpredictable. You just have to be ready, without expecting anything." (Negro and Sergio 2000: 1)

Luigi Toma adds, "There has to be a real sense of explosion. Anybody can have a beautiful voice and sing. Anybody can know how to play the tambourine, but the emotional charge may not be there, this interior charge which is transmitted. You feel the impact physically, directly. You have to let yourself go when you play, without thinking about the people that are watching you." (Daniele Durante 1999: 173-74)

Daniele Durante (1999: 173-74) further distinguishes between on-stage concert settings and performance circles, where the musician is immersed in the crowd of dancers and spectators. The musicians must place themselves at the service of the music and the dancers, reminiscent of ritual players who spoke of 'music taking over'.

"Such 'circles of musicians, singers and dancers' are attributed a magical valence, which assured a cure from any kind of illness to all active participants ... What matters is not the technical ability of the musician or the grace of a single dancer, but the total effect ... that of a cyclical music ... of an incessant rhythm ... instilling a magical process with which it is possible to enchant and imprison certain forces and to exorcize others." (Daniele Durante 1999: 168-72)

So-called magical dynamics may be invisible to the eye, but are nevertheless experienced as highly tangible and real by participants. In the past, these dynamics were ascribed to the tarantula or St. Paul, as their victims appeared to be at the mercy of the tunes preferred by their particular aggressor. Stephen Storace (1753) told how he unexpectedly found himself playing his violin for a tarantata despite his ignorance of the tunes required. As someone else sang, he tried out the notes on his instrument and immediately impelled the afflicted to dance. When, however, he stopped to listen and learn the rest of the piece, the dancer helplessly collapsed to the ground, like a marionette attached to his violin strings (Katner 1956: 19-22; De Martino 2005: 93). In pursuit of alleviation, the afflicted were said to resort to the sounds (ricorrevano ai suoni), or to take up the sound (prendevano il suono), while musicians were said to make the sign (facevano il segno) with their instruments. Sensual stimuli worked to heighten the tarantata's perceptivity. Popular belief states that the tarantate physically became their afflicting spirit and direct bodily experience affirmed this reality, even if of a different order from that of everyday life. It is above all necessary to mimic the dance of the little spider—the tarantella. Following an irresistible identification, it is necessary to dance with the spider, indeed be the dancing spider; but at the same time, it is necessary to make an actual agonistic moment be felt—the superimposition and imposition of one's own choreutic rhythm upon that of the spider, forcing the spider to dance until it is tired, pursuing it as it flees the chasing foot, or squashing it and stamping it as the foot violently beats the floor to the rhythm of the tarantella. The tarantato executes the dance of the little taranta (the tarantella) as a victim possessed by the beast and as the hero who subdues the beast by dancing. (De Martino 2005: 36) De Martino portrays the dancing tarantata as both victim and hero experiencing the ambiguous powers of the spider and St. Paul, both credited with the ability to curse and cure. The initial embodiment of or union with the spirit counterparts may have enhanced and aggravated the tarantate's experience of themselves as passive victims, as subjected to the bodily symptoms, social pressures, and life conditions afflicting them. Ritual enactment implied surrendering the self. A sacrifice was involved, readiness to give in and let go, 'to allow the tarantula to take over'. The spider allowed for the expression of that which could not be expressed otherwise. It provided a door to new experiences, including the embodiment of a heroine or hero. In effect, little information is available on how the tarantate experienced rituals, as many claimed that they did not remember what had happened, perhaps tongue-tied by difficulties of verbalizing their experiences or by feelings of being fenced in by social taboos. Moreover, not remembering may also be a cultural norm, emphasizing the belief that the spider takes over the afflicted, who, consequently, cannot remember (Lapassade 1996a: 98). Scholars, meanwhile, have frequently interpreted these experiences in terms of trance or ecstasy, just as some participants in contemporary performances do. Considering the frequent uncritical use of these terms, others voice scepticism about their validity, suspecting the strategic functions such claims may serve and bringing questions of authenticity back on stage. In spite of these reservations, ritual cases suggest that an awareness of aspects of reality and perceptions of the self, alternative or complementary to those of the afflicted role, were accessed. With the ritual perimeter acting as an experimental playground, the perceived choice of costumes delimitating the tarantate’s life to date was stretched to include new self-perceptions, such as a sense of the self as entailing authority and the ability to act and choose. Similarly, contemporary ‘magic’ circles may bring out little-known aspects of the self, as the accounts of Ada, Tanya and others suggest. Although such ‘magical’ dynamics are likely to be experienced in diverse and contradictory ways, new experiences of the self may surface as participants tune into and abandon themselves to rhythms synchronized with others and their social and natural surroundings.

Rhythmic Intervention: Choosing to Entrain

The notion of rhythm brings into play conflicting definitions and numerous associations. It may be seen to refer to something greater than any one individual, which, at the same time, may become embodied or physically manifest in any one person. In the context of the tarantula’s music and dance, a look at rhythm proposes a view of well-being as grounded in an individual's ability to become ever more aware of rhythmic dimensions and to move beyond automatic, reflexive reactions to these, to the choice of whether, to what degree and in what way to engage with a specific rhythm.

In tarantism rituals, recovery was promoted by performance techniques linked both to the physiological rhythms of the afflicted and the existing social and natural cycles of the day-to-day environment. Nowadays, pizzica rhythms may be seen as indicative of social changes, though others dispute its links to daily life (Gala 2002b: 47). Manifold contradictory views and tendencies intertwine as daily and performative rhythms reciprocally shape or contest each other, negotiating identities and perceptions of reality.

As with music, daily performance relies on the continual negotiation and creation of rhythm, ‘a future-oriented temporal order . an activity (and action) that anticipates, expects or demands something to come’ (You 1994: 363-64). Rhythmic repetition entails an expectation of that which is familiar and, at the same time, the possibility of something different emerging. ‘The act of repeating or mirroring highlights the disjuncture between what is shared (mimesis) and what differs (alterity)’, as it ‘moves through old (repeatedly revisited) yet new (always encountered differently) territory’ (Roseman 2002: 125).

This ambivalence is also embodied in the pizzica’s ambiguous rhythm. According to Diego Carpitella (in De Martino 2005: 299), the dual nature of the pizzica tarantata, characterized by its beat/offbeat structure, reflected two typical instances of religious healing techniques: the crisis was both accentuated through the impact of the musical offbeat and controlled by the obstinate and constant beat. A similar effect may be provoked through the interrelationship of the tambourine’s insistent beat and the melodic tunes of other instruments, such as the violin.® In this way, as one musician confirms, the chaotic experience of tarantism crises could be directed, channelled and transformed: ‘There are the cymbals, which take you to the beyond, they give you access to another world. But the constant beat of the tambourine remains. It ensures that you remain linked to the here and now. It reassures you that you won't be left alone, that you are safe and able to come back.” Luisa del Giudice (2005: 249), meanwhile, points to an alternative feminist interpretation, arguing ‘that the noise allows the tarantata’s world-view to prevail temporarily, with its new and 194 SpiderWoMen Transformed subverted sense of “order”, while the steady beat recalls her back to duty and patriarchal “order” — that is the very cause and substance of her disorder and existential chaos’. In fact, the modern tarantata Tanya emphasized that the state she found herself in when painting to the pizzica didn’t leave her feeling unwell but was unsustainable if she wanted to be part of society at large. However, such experiences may be lived and interpreted, what is clear is that the direct experience of accessing a dimension understood as other than that of everyday life appeared to be of fundamental importance.

'The power of the rhythmic message within the group,' writes Edward Hall (1983: 184), 'is as strong as anything I know. It is one of the basic components in the process of identification, a hidden force that, like gravity, holds groups together.' Rhythm accentuates not only who is in but also who is out of synchrony, a point taken to heart by the Sonaglierus Metronomicus (or circle leader) — as specified by Francesco Patruno (2003) in his list of contemporary piSSica types — 'who claims to direct, in the manner of von Karajan, forty tambourine players, to make them all synchronize, by shouting TEMPOOO when he hears one of the players deviating by 1/32'. Patruno adds that this 'species' of the Sonaglierus Metronomicus is 'on the road to extinction — by heart attack'.

Beyond von Karajanesque efforts, the manipulation or conscious use of rhythm entails power, giving or quenching vitality. Human beings, like all other organisms, perform according to internal rhythms, which regulate such automatic body functions as the heartbeat, respiration, circulation, and metabolism. At the same time, human interaction relies on an awareness of rhythm and the ability to entrain, to 'become engaged in each other's rhythms' (Hall 1983: 177). As a phenomenon of resonance, entrainment implies the tendency of two oscillating bodies or two or more rhythmic cycles to lock into phase, to vibrate in synchrony. It creates connections — invisible ties between seemingly separate entities. Performance techniques render such rhythms tangible, sensitizing actors to their subtle influence and fine-tuning skills for perceiving these rhythms.

'An actor should be like a ping-pong player,' says drama therapist Steve Mitchell (1998: 6), 'the attention is following the rhythm of the game, but at the same time is witnessing the process and by so doing is able to take notice of an unexpected possibility'. An awareness of this realm of possibilities implies an openness to new opportunities and a perception of the self as exposed to an abundance of creative possibilities. These may include incorporating fixed victim mentalities, previously seen to poison and limit life circumstances, into a spectrum of diverse roles and rhythms, including those of the 'choreographer' moving flexibly from role to role and rhythm to rhythm.

Vibrating the Spider's Web: Tapping a Source of Vitality

One such role may involve accessing visceral experiences associated with the sensual, sexual, erotic, or orgasmic. Cases of tarantism were often linked to forbidden or lost love, as the story of Maria of Nardd indicates. The ritual itself abounded with erotic associations. Sexual taboos and conventions were put aside. The spider was given full lease. Social boundaries were transgressed, cultural limitations overcome. Such experiences in which everyday disjunctures may be seen to dissolve — of which the spider's liminal, transgressive, and ambiguous nature appears but a preview — may be reminiscent of religious experiences that contrast 'finite humanity and its bodily limitations with a sense of the infinite and supernatural possibility' (Harris 2000: 306-13). 

These considerations draw attention to how sexual associations and images are woven into historical and contemporary spider dances and what resonances these may have. Damian Walter points out that the performative cycle of the pizzica (the slow beginning, increasing activity and rhythm, 'orgasmic' experiences and a subsequent period of cooling down or rest), both in past rituals and some contemporary settings, may be seen to mirror coital and post-coital activity, suggesting parallels between the experience (or sexual arousal) of individual participants and the communal structure of the pizzica itself. From this perspective, even those participants who do not speak of so-called altered states of consciousness may be affected by the communal, intimate and rhythmic interaction of (shared and metaphorical) sexual activity, tying in with ideas of the potentially beneficial and therapeutic qualities of rhythmic experience in broader terms.

'Tarantism is also about sexual issues,' a psychiatrist at the Centre of Mental Health in Lecce confirms. 'In some public performances, female tarantate chose a man they found particularly attractive in the crowd and threw themselves at him.'

Maurizio Nocera adds: 'Those affected by tarantism are generally troubled in their sexuality. Male tarantati have a tendency to be more feminine and female tarantate tend to be very masculine.'

He suggests that in many cases latent homosexual tendencies may have been at the heart of the matter, and equates tarantism with la sofferenza pelvica, pelvic suffering: 'This suffering comes from a spider that continues to aggravate its prey. It sets out in the pelvic zone, where the spider moves without the person being conscious of it. Although difficult to verify, it appears that this paroxysmal movement drives the tarantata to auto-produce an uncontrollable orgasmic release. This need for release is not satisfied by making love and only becomes worse doing so. Only song, music, the demand for grace, for a symbol, can calm and tranquillize this need.'

Nocera draws an analogy between such paroxysmal movements, in the sense of spasmic contractions typical of an orgasmic climax, and the vibrations of a spider on its web in moments of crisis or death. This point also recalls allusions to sexual intercourse evoked by the tarantate's ritual moves while prostrate on the floor, the erotic connotations of lyrics, as well as the tarantate's designation as St Paul's brides. Receiving grace, too, has been interpreted in terms of an orgasmic experience. When asked how she experiences this moment, Maria of Nardo responded: 'Ma, che devo dire, si sciolgono le acque.' (But, what can I say, the waters are released) (Mingozzi 1982). This expression, Nocera explains, may refer either to the release of sexual tensions or, taken more literally, to the act of urinating, once again drawing a link to the role of fluids crossing bodily boundaries in healing contexts.

'Other tarantate specified how they had to 'release water' on entering Galatina, just as Evelina must urinate behind St Paul's altar during her annual pilgrimage. Some of the tarantate's symptoms (fainting spells and dizziness), as well as the dramatic techniques used (running in a circle or pirouetting), Nocera continues, involve a loss of control and a sense of surrender often seen to characterize orgasmic experiences. Such accounts suggest that a source of gratification and fulfilment, often denied in everyday life, was tapped through performance. In fact, Sandra Gilbert (1986: xi-xii) speaks of the tarantate's dances as 'an interlude of orgasmic freedom': 'The illness or "anomaly" of womanhood in a culture governed by the invisible but many-legged tarantula of patriarchal law takes multiple forms, but its one energy derives from the singular return of the repressed.' Although this view presents women one-sidedly as sexually inhibited and as mere victims to male dominance, it places spider rituals in a celebratory light: evoked as a moment of respite in which the 'true nature' of the tarantate surfaced, rupturing constraints and releasing passions. Some tarantate were reported to abstain from sex and food prior to the repetition of their rituals (Epifanio Ferdinando in De Martino 2005: 111). Both spheres, food and sex, serve as obvious sites of cultural anxiety, considering particularly the harsh living conditions in the Salento in bygone times, and resonate, moreover, with concerns for bodily boundaries (through food intake, excretion, sexual intercourse or childbirth). Nowadays, life in the Salento is less physically demanding, but both food and sexuality provide potent spheres of symbolic activity. Experiences of dancing the pizzica today are still frequently linked to questions of sexuality (and associated assumptions), and the pizzica pizzica, too, continues to be a very public expression of sensuality (Chiriatti and Lapassade 1985; Gala 2002a, b; Nocera 2005). According to Daniele Durante (1999: 174), the tambourine's role is influential in this respect. Its constant beat, he argues, stimulates the lower part of the listener's body, leading at times even to sexual arousal. Others link their experience of the pizzica to experiences of sexuality as well. Fernando Bevilacqua recounts: It was at a festival, I was playing the tambourine and I realized that a woman began responding with her tambourine. This exchange between us became stronger and stronger, completely absorbing me. Everything around me disappeared, leaving only her and me. Then I found myself high up. She'd lifted me up. I saw her and myself from above. We were united. It was a very strong sensation, like an orgasm.'!® Similarly, passionate Salentine dancer and film director Edoardo Winspeare (Nacci 2004: 31) says: Personally ... I was cured from my afflictions through the pizzica and through my type of tarantism. I danced a great deal, three to four hours a day, and discovered a lot of things about myself. I discovered my animal side in the pizzica ritual, in the circle ... when I danced with a woman, I rediscovered my masculine side with respect to a female being; the ritual controlled everything and in this way unexpected things came up that I didn't even think I had, seeing as I grew up ... with a very rigid, Catholic education. The pizzica liberated me. Although we may question what other factors were and are involved, Winspeare directly pinpoints the pizzica as having a curative influence on his life, in the sense that it allowed him to access new experiences, which he identifies as surprising and liberating. A young woman describes dancing the pizzica along similar lines: You allow the music to pass through you, to enter inside and to do what it wants with you. You become an instrument for something else. You are just a channel and everything passes through you ... when it's over you feel great. I could compare it, even if it isn't similar in any way, to the best time you've made love. (Nacci 2004: 55-59) In this context, it is important not to presuppose a universal physiological response to sexual activity, considering that cultural, gendered, and individual understandings of what constitutes an orgasm may differ. Moreover, these implications do not necessarily translate into experiential terms. ‘Ecstasy and joy are inseparable from suffering and eroticized pain in most Christian iconography,’ Damian Walter suggests. In the case of the tarantate, it isn't possible to argue that their use of orgasmic imagery is associated as much with the pain of affliction as it is with joyful release, rather than suggesting it indicates some kind of unconditional (although pleasurable) ‘flooding’ of the senses? Perhaps describing their experiences in these terms allows them to articulate a more positive and transformational response to the pain of affliction? They might not be able to escape their pain, but they may be able to reshape the experience of pain integration into their lives.

‘Acute pain’, writes medical anthropologist Elisabeth Hsu (2005: 84), ‘evokes “presence” and alerts one’s “sensory attentiveness”,’ creating an openness to potentially beneficial impacts from the social context. Although the notion of pain is used to describe lived experiences of diverse quality and intensity, acute (as opposed to chronic) pain ‘is acute for both the person in pain and those surrounding him or her, and it thus generates synchronicity, a situation in which all participants involved are acutely aware of only one single event and turn their full attention to it’ (ibid.: 85). Boundaries between self and other collapse as ‘a state of trans-individual fluidity’ emerges and a sense of social connectedness is enhanced (ibid.: 87), reminiscent of ‘magical’ experiences in the context of the tarantula’s music and dance, in both past and present contexts.

In this sense, a focus on notions and experiences of sexuality and sensuality, of the erotic and orgasmic, brings individual and social dimensions of spider dances into resonance: “Boundary loss” is the individual and “feeling they are one” is the collective way of looking at the same thing,’ writes William McNeill (1995: 8-9), ‘a blurring of self-awareness and the heightening of fellow-feeling with all who share in the dance.’

Integrating Toxins: Connecting Self and Other

Widening our focus from the level of individual experience in performance situations to the broader contexts of everyday life stories and relationships reveals how music making and dancing may provide a means of integrating ‘poisons’ of all kinds — harsh living conditions, restricting social relations, limiting self-perceptions. This points to the links between the tarantula’s music and dance and how participants related and relate to themselves and others.

Through music, dance, and the performance of prescribed acts, the tarantato Francesco Greco underwent profound changes in his perceptions of himself, others, and reality at large. Whereas prior to ritual intervention, he had felt extremely weak, he became capable of doing inexplicable things and eventually recovered to a state of general well-being. Where doctors had discriminated against him as mentally ill, he became accepted as part of a larger community of tarantate (even if as good as virtual at this stage in time). Finally, his belief in his vulnerability to St Paul’s anger turned his initial disrespect for religious saints into a deep-seated respect for the apostle. Although circumstances may not have changed, new perspectives and insights led to a greater sense of well-being. The situation of women, and men, has changed in the Salento since the tarantate danced and screamed, but the stories of Ada, Tanya, and others reveal that the tarantula's influence is anything but swept under the carpet. Daily lives are cross-cut by limitations of all kinds — economic, social, political, as well as bodily — marked by 200 SpiderWoMen Transformed views of the self as having little choice, as being subject to the whims of life circumstances, others' desires or destiny. In the Salento, as in much of southern Italy, high unemployment figures and low social security combine with little, if any, state support for those without work, for single parents or for the care of children or the elderly.?° precarious conditions and are adept in finding strategies to cope on a day-to-day basis. Inevitably, family networks play a central role in this context, as do the supplements for daily needs provided by small farm subsistence run by many families in the rural areas. Likewise, young people are frequently restrained by financial restrictions from moving out to live on their own. Those who do may still eat at home, both to be part of family life and in order to live on limited incomes. Such interdependence may, among other factors, accentuate other prevalent limitations, such as those associated with gender relations.

At Torrepaduli, on 15 August 2005, I asked the middle-aged wife of a musician beating his tambourine whether she would like to dance with me. She declined, and after a moment of hesitation explained: ‘Poi lui mi fa storie’ (Afterwards he makes a fuss).’2! Her husband's potential reaction limited her moves, holding her in its clutches. This reaction appears to reflect a much more widespread tendency, as Luisa Del Giudice (2005: 250-51) notes: Few women hold prominent musical roles today. One finds few women on concert stages, other than in supporting roles (or as the ‘pretty face’, that is, the singer in the ensemble). ‘Stanno li ... con le mani legate’ (There they stand ... with their hands tied), laments one female musician. They continue, however, to constitute the majority of dancers on the public piazzas, but they are surprisingly absent as cultural activists. Slowly, this is changing, with a few female singers, such as Imma Giannuzzi, Enza Pagliara and Cinzia Villani, leading their own bands. Nevertheless, the predominantly restrictive roles of women in the pizzica world may be seen as representative of women's roles more generally.

In the Salento, a nineteen-year-old girl from the small town of Uggiano La Chiesa has to be home by 11 p.m. at the latest to keep to her father's terms. Another Salentine woman in her mid-thirties tells me of her difficult relationship with her father and how this has limited her life. ‘Now I'm catching up on the lost years. I've learnt through suffering,’ she says with tears in her eyes. ‘Now I'm 201 Dances with Spiders travelling, studying, walking on my own feet.?? Only recently, it seems, has she cut through the fine threads of her own attitudes and belief systems — no doubt shaped by guilt, duty, fear, economic dependence, as well as social pressures — stepping out of her familiar inculcated sense of self and its limitations and, making her own decisions, moving into territory that she had not previously dared tiptoe into, while inevitably jeopardizing existing family relations. But men, it appears, are no less entangled. A Salentine medic gives me his view, influenced by Jungian ideas: Tarantism is linked to a regionally specific collective unconscious and culturally specific archetypes: these women weave their webs around men, entangling them. Men know they will become their victims. They already have this propensity, seeing that il mammismo is so widely diffused. Mothers’ hold on men is extremely strong in this region and from their mothers’ hands they pass into their women’s hold.”? Another middle-aged man asserts: For me a woman is a spider. To tell the truth, once I was looking for the ideal woman, but on my way I only met women as spiders. When I say ideal woman, I’m alluding to the knowing woman, one who is able to understand me, to tolerate me too. But, as I said before, I haven't been lucky: on my way I have always found spiders. (Nocera 2005: 62)

An implicit analogy with the myth of the female tarantula eating its male partner after copulating springs to mind: the opposite sex as temptation and condemnation combined, reminiscent of assumptions about women, primitivism and sexuality more generally: of how ‘entomologists’ anthropomorphizing descriptions of love affairs of praying mantises and black widow spiders had proven to be directly analogous to the effects of the sexual woman’s depredations in the human environment’ (Dijkstra 1996: 212-13).

What emerges from both male and female accounts about gender relations is a game of victims and tyrants, a sense of the self as falling prey to the demands and expectations of those onto whom the label of tyrants is projected. Such relations inevitably bring into play the problematic and controversial debates on ‘honour and shame’ in the Mediterranean context, distinguishing, in basic terms, divisions of labour and morality according to gender (Goddard 1987, 1996; Giordano 2002).

Such relations, moreover, risk promoting assumptions of male and female as clear-cut categories based on a specific gender model. Both men and women use the idiom of tarantism to convey feelings of being helpless, powerless and at the mercy of marionette strings pulled by others, whereas multiple gender discourses and categories, conflicting and contradicting each other, are likely to be at hand (Moore 1994: 824). In this sense, it becomes vital to attend to the ‘multiple perspectives, shifting purposes and reflexive and ironic commentaries’ (Raheja and Gold 1994: 9) among women, as well as men, that challenge normalizing and essentializing discourses.

In fact, the tarantula’s music and dance have increasingly turned into symbols of self-assertion, power and celebration. The music of tarantismo has been recast as a celebratory practice of current Salentine identity. It follows that the figure of the tarantata has also been positively recast. Not only has the stigma been lifted from the tarantata’s shoulders, there seems to be a growing positive reevaluation (romanticization? glorification?) of this figure as it undergoes something of an apotheosis. She has become a heroine, passing from something of a feared outcast to shaman. Possessed by a spider god with whom she becomes one, temporarily unbound by societal norms, she explores the existential fringe via the dance, bringing spiritual and mental health back to herself and to the community (which is literally standing around her). She is not merely a passive receptor of musical vibrations that others played to awaken her, therefore, but a spiritual leader, acting on behalf of those incapable (though just as needy) of freeing themselves. (Del Giudice 2005: 253-54) Ada Metafune, for example, gives workshops on the tarantula’s music and dance in the Salento and throughout Italy and, at times, finds herself transmitting her personal experiences to course participants confronting her with problematic aspects of their lives, sensing the insights and strength she has gained from her own life crises. In this sense, women such as Ada may come to embody role models for others, testifying to possibilities of transforming perceptions of the self, from ‘powerless’ to ‘empowered’, from ‘helpless victim’ to ‘creative choreographer’.

Clearly, however, such views equally risk presenting essentialized categories, which are likely not only to coexist and overlap, but also to shift among infinite subtle nuances between these categories, as well as unforeseen possibilities.

Zooming out yet further from the impact of the tarantula’s music and dance on individual life stories and relations draws attention to the collective influence — and inherent risks — of this music and dance on local discourses on identity.

Transforming Identities: Evoking a Sense of Belonging

‘We have it inside’ is a frequently voiced stance, suggesting that the pizzica and everything associated with it is ‘pulsing’ in the blood of those born in the Salento, creating a sense of identity commonly, unreflectively, voiced in the expression ‘We're DOC Salentines!’ DOC, denominazione d'origine controllata, controlled denomination of origin, is the unit of measure and quality assigned to regionally specific products of the European Union and ascribed to the people of the Salento as a (perceived) guarantee of originality, as an official stamp of legitimacy.

In this sense, the tarantula and the pizzica pay lip service to social constructions of local identity voiced with enthusiasm, becoming almost an expression of modesty, as the ability to perform is ultimately seen as a heaven-sent gift not attributed to individual talent, commitment or merit. Yet the criteria that make one person DOC but not another are rarely clear, as the rhythm of the pizzica is essentialized into a biological function, naturalized and, inevitably, mystified.

‘If in the fifties and sixties tourist invitations to the Salento tended to ignore, even hide the last “relics” of tarantism, today the same invites express pride with reference to tarantism: come to the land of tarantism ... come to know the Salento, it has tarantism, with its antique, Dionysian and perhaps even pre-Greek roots, in its blood,’ writes social anthropologist Paolo Apolito (2000: 140). He stresses how the myth of the tarantula has taken on religious qualities, all the more potent as this myth is not, like many others, delocalized but has, instead, been reinvented within the region of its apparent origins.

Such a focus on what is perceived as ‘local’ can be observed across Europe, and may be viewed not only as a counter-reaction to ‘globalization’, but also as a result of European funding incentives for regional as opposed to national initiatives, aiming to promote associations with a united Europe of regions beyond national affiliations. The Salentine peninsula more specifically is a roulette wheel of potential identities and fleeting points of reference, having been exposed to a history of foreign domination and becoming a major gateway to Europe for refugees and asylum seekers in recent years, as well as a newly prized tourist oasis and sought-after region for northern Europeans seeking to buy a holiday or retirement home. In the past, victims of the tarantula naturalized their afflictions through spider poisoning and the tarantate were often severely criticized for manipulating this link for personal and political reasons. In the contemporary Salento, musicians and dancers, as well as cultural administrators and intellectuals, are frequently accused of wanting to enlarge their own name or bank account, of exploiting the tarantula's music and dance for manipulative purposes. Clearly, other issues are at stake.

In recent years, social anthropologist Giovanni Pizza (2002a, b) has contributed significantly to a critical discourse on questions of essentialized and naturalized identities in the Salento. He writes: "Only the conscious or unconscious incorporation of hegemonic stereotypes, even if widespread among the population, can incite us to consider our sense of belonging to be inscribed in our blood, our flesh or even in our genetic inheritance" (2002a: 55). He repeatedly warns against the passive incorporation of platitudes inseparable from existing power structures and ideologies.

The pizzica exacerbates sensations, beliefs, attitudes and opinions, making them more acute, amplifying the intentions with which it is performed, acting as hi-fi systems for enacted beliefs and motivations. Voices, instruments, microphones, not to speak of satellite television, propagate rivalry and ambitions of becoming the latest star on stage just as much as gestures of solidarity and friendship. Every actor in this game faces the choice of whether or not to use whatever the pizzica brings to the surface as a "methodological and ethical mirror metaphor" (Pizza 2002a: 53).

The rhetoric of conserving one's own identity often hides not the fear of looking at 'the other', but the fear of looking into one's own face ... out of fear of reflecting oneself ... of finding oneself in front of the recurrence of a monstrous image ... Obscuring the mirror is a precondition for an essentialist discourse that conceives identity as objects, essences to preserve 'intimate' and 'profound' truths; it is a political operation of concealing motivations, intentions and the objectives of one's own discourses and actions. (ibid.: 52)

Obscuring potential mirrors of self-reflection may provoke automatic reflexes to project onto 'others' (groups, individuals, bodies) everything the self is not identified with, that which is rejected and condemned, making personal 'demons' visible in an amplified, tangible form. What is more, every minimal glimpse of this mirror may create a further reaction of grasping yet more strongly onto that which is accepted as part of the self's identity, that which is seen as agreeable and amenable, including naturalizing explanations diagnosing pizzica rhythms in bloodstreams and DNA codes.

With regard to southern Italy, these issues have been widely discussed in terms of the 'Southern Question', attesting to the deeply rooted differences between Italy's northern and southern regions (Schneider 1998). In his historical study of ritual cycles in the town of Calvello in Basilicata, Hermann Tak (2000: 243) stresses how "the North" became an imaginary "other" replacing one time fierce antagonistic inter-town relations'. Such juxtapositions also emerge in Christian Giordano's (1992) discussion of a 'culture of superimposition' characterizing regions such as southern Italy, subjected to hundreds of years of domination by foreign powers, resulting in the internalization of fatalistic attitudes such as the 'image of miseria', a belief in poverty as collective fate, or the governo ladro (thieving government), involving perceptions of the state as hostile and unreliable. Although these concepts need to be taken on with care, cultural self-reification or essentialism in the context of the tarantula’s music and dance today is likely to be a way of reaffirming one’s values in the face of these broader socio-economic power structures. With these considerations in mind, individual experiences of performance situations inevitably mould and are moulded by social relations activated in these contexts, as well as intentions and interpretations that encourage or inhibit participation. As these pages reveal, the tarantula’s music and dance hold the potential not only to accentuate individual afflictions and social conflicts but also to promote well-being and the reintegration of individuals in the larger webs of everyday community lives. As a creative platform for new experiences and perceptions, they hold the power both to exclude and include other potential participants. They may deepen situations and sensations of disjuncture just as much as those of belonging.

In the past, identification with the toxic spider was facilitated through music and dance, as well as such sensual stimuli as scents and colours. This provided a basis for transformations (without any guarantee, however), integrating the spider, and all rejected aspects of the self it had come to embody, into a new, broader sense of the self. In the same way, a confrontation with what is seen to be the ‘perpetrator’ today — be it globalization, the Italian state, foreign musical directors, other music groups, the opposite sex or dismissed desires — may provide a first step towards transformation. As music is allowed to take over, the familiar and foreign may be expressed and brought into communication, linking the self and other and evoking a sense of belonging to humanity at large. Fatalistic perceptions of the self as victim become redundant, and ever more choices are created as additional outfits are integrated into existing costume cupboards.

What is fundamental to the recovery of well-being, vitality and presence is the way of performing and underlying intent — of finding the ‘right air’, its magical dimensions and potential to rhythmically intervene — and whether these are integrated and interpreted to either perpetuate or transform afflicting self-perceptions. In this sense, spider dances today continue to entail both golden cages and the keys to these.


Evelina's Story: Living with the Tarantula

In August 2005, together with my Salentine friend Patrizia, I arrive once more at Evelina's homestead. Walking into the courtyard through the main gate, we see her standing, tiny and delicate, no more than one meter twenty tall, framed by a pointed archway leading to the stables. She greets us from a distance, with a firm, warm voice: "Ciao!" and, recognizing who we are, raises one hand in a joking, chiding gesture. We kiss the cheeks of her beaming face in greeting. She is eighty-one years old now, and her back curves at the shoulders, but her eyes and stride are full of vitality. She takes us to see the cows, chickens, and pigs in their stalls and then invites us to come through to greet Michela, her daughter-in-law, la padrona di casa, the landlady, as she says, taking herself out of the way, almost erasing herself with this gesture, small as she is, seemingly unaware that it was her we had primarily come to see.

We greet Michela and, while she finishes what she was doing, sit and talk with Evelina. Her story pours forth in significant episodes as she speaks in dialect to my friend Patrizia. She tells about the death of her father when she was just twelve and the loss, soon after, of her brother killed in the war, a letter arriving to announce his death. Over the years, she has often told me about them, eager to communicate these incisive snapshots of her life.

Michela joins us and begins to take over the conversation. Others come too: two of Michela's children, neighbors, friends, mainly elderly. Most I know from my initial period of fieldwork (1997-98) when I joined them on several occasions to pick tobacco in their fields. Now, seven years later, memories come up of those times; jokes told then, people passed away since. At this point, Evelina no longer goes into the fields. At the time, she kept up better than I could with the fast-moving group of harvesters, stripping the large, oily leaves off their strong stalks, creating cracking sounds that mixed with the chit-chat and banter linking the group partly hidden from one another behind the head-high plants. Michela has stopped working in the fields, too. She hopes to receive a disability pension due to her back and leg problems and to run only the big house and adjoining bed and breakfast on her own, now that all of her children work in the north of Italy for most of the year. We sit and chat. Evelina is silently invisible, buried in the back and forth of words and laughter. Others answer questions directed to her, but she seems to have lost her voice. Evelina's bubbly personality stands out within the larger group, especially her age and energetic body. Her lack of frills in both manner and dress is evident. Evelina's grandson points out that she has worn a black dress, headscarf, socks, and long sleeves since her mother's death.

Evelina is different from the typical southern Italian image of femininity. Her sensitivity and need for space have led Michela to be cautious not to aggravate her condition. Evelina is tied to the house, refusing to leave since fainting in the village church years ago. Evelina and Michela share one rooftop and one family destiny. Evelina's mother remarried, and their move to the current homestead was marked by jealousy. Evelina's son, Roberto, was born out of wedlock, precluding any future marriage. No wonder the tarantula had found her.

Michela married into this entanglement and has dedicated her life to the family. Her early pension is likely linked to her hard work. Every year, she accompanies her mother-in-law to Galatina, along with her husband and youngest son, Paolo. Paolo's name is a promise fulfilled to the apostle when Evelina was in crisis. Evelina's family makes no fuss about their fate. The family treats Evelina with affection, but they refuse to tell their story, fearing it would upset her. At times, it holds Evelina in its claws, turning her into a protagonist on St Paul’s ‘stage’ in Galatina, putting the whole family into gear to fulfill its whims. At other times, it pushes Evelina into invisibility and silence, letting the family take over, speaking for her in disregard of her physical presence. As Patrizia and I leave, with gifts of home-grown vegetables, eggs, and homemade cheese, we greet Roberto, busy milking the cows. Michela says she will go and help him now, as she hadn't been able to assist him during our visit. Earlier, he had passed by briefly, welcoming us warmly and cordially but without stopping in his tracks to continue his afternoon chores. He has always struck me as a silent and hard worker.

As we drive home, I cannot help but think that although no dance, music, or straightforward curative rituals are involved in Evelina’s life story, there is a subtle play at hand: a pendulum swinging between the extremes of all-controlling domination by her tarantula through the crises it is seen to provoke, with Evelina’s family playing to its tunes, and self-annihilating surrender, with Evelina giving herself up to the orchestrations of her family. In the chapel of St Paul, I have seen Evelina collapse and her body turn rigid, immobile, frozen. In a social context in her home, surrounded by family and friends, I see her fall into a state of ‘absence’, her presence withdrawn, her participation reduced to zero. Yet, at other moments, her vibrant and sensitive presence radiates to everyone present. Such pendulum swings may be seen to have characterized the lives of the tarantate more generally.

Tarantula Rhythms: Reflections on Performance and Well-being

Historical documents reveal how the tarantate’s crises have always been marked by symptoms oscillating between the extremes of hyperactivity and lethargy. Their stories, meanwhile, reveal discordant relations with others and the social context at large. Rhythms of breath, pulse, and motion snapped and went berserk: bodies became listless, drowsy, paralyzed, or were taken over by convulsions, shaking, and trembling. Interaction with others and the world around became jarred and handicapped, dictated by taboos and social judgments, as well as variables of pain, anger, or fear. Physiological, as well as social rhythms were thrown out of balance. An infection of the afflicted individual's skin surface and bloodstream was metaphorically linked to an affliction on the level of social relations. Likewise, the cases of some new tarantati, dancing to feel better, are linked to a lack of rhythmic synchronicity, to fractured relationships, feelings of fragmentation, emptiness, and a desire for deeper meaning.

Leonardo da Vinci’s evocative phrase — ‘The bite of the taranta maintains a man in his intention, that is whatever he was thinking when he was bitten’ (cod. H. 18v. in De Martino 2005) — suggests that traumatic experiences associated with the tarantula’s bite became inscribed not only in the body but also in the sense of self, safeguarded ever after, leaving the afflicted individual suspended within the specific perspective or web of meanings activated at the moment of the bite. Time stood still though bodies aged and lives passed. A discrepancy emerged, a sense of the self as no longer linked to the present. Here performative acts intervened, providing an alternative code. Even in the absence of music and dance, Evelina’s tendency to withdraw may be remedied by her public appearance on St Paul’s ground, dictated by the tarantula’s presence. Here she enters into relational frameworks very different from those of her secluded everyday life. Her family generally seeks to protect her, to cushion the impact, pushing the chapel door closed against the weight of the crowd outside, motivated by a wish for privacy, a desire to get through this unasked-for but unavoidable visit as quickly and as calmly as possible. I have always been struck by their matter-of-fact manner, suggestive of nothing to prove and a lot to accept, their openness to the questions of curious onlookers without overextending themselves. Evelina herself tends to avoid anyone approaching her, but at times, walking with one arm akimbo, appears anything but indifferent to all the attention she receives. Under St Paul’s shield she finds her place once a year in a social life outside the self-imposed perimeter of her homestead, taking a step beyond her quotidian limits in the tarantula’s name. She surrenders and makes her sacrifice. My impression is, however, that if Evelina had the choice she would not go to Galatina. If only she could, she would stay at home. Yet she is compelled to visit St Paul’s chapel to maintain her delicate equilibrium. Her pilgrimage remains her only way out.

Here a fundamental difference emerges from today’s tarantati. Those who participate in the tarantula’s music and dance with the expressive desire to get better based on previous experiences viewed as beneficial are driven by a choice rather than compulsion: a choice based on the knowledge that the tarantula’s music and dance may be one possible avenue to feeling better, a means of letting go, a way of accessing experiences alternative to those provoked by difficult situations their daily lives may entail. In this sense, today’s tarantati appear to actively seek out the tarantula and its ‘magic’ to free themselves from conventions and restrictions in their lives, while Evelina, it seems, if only she knew how, would gladly cut the spider's threads. Although she gains temporary release through her visits to Galatina, ever since she was first bitten in 1953, over half a century ago, Evelina has never completely recovered. In this sense, her pilgrimages may be seen to be placed at the service of her affliction. Underlying circumstances — including belief systems, social relations and economic conditions — may persist, as do her symptoms. A similar risk of perpetuating afflictions may be equally inherent in attempts at engaging with the tarantula’s music and dance to promote well-being today. Dancing and music making may be a way to face ‘demons’, afflictions and hardship, to express these and come to terms with them, just as they may be a form of distraction, of addiction or compulsion, propagating the means to look away. This ambiguous nature of spider dances points to key reflections on well-being and performance more generally. It alerts us to the value of taking a sensitive approach to certain human conditions associated with crises, which may be easily dispatched as pathological in contemporary Western society, when in effect they may be inherently transformative and therapeutic if protected and expressed within a socially accepted explanatory and supportive framework. The tarantate were not described as ill. They were seen as normal people under the tarantula’s spell. Rituals accentuated their crises. Treatment involved enhancing symptoms, by providing sensual stimuli that provoked crises further. It also relied on containment, allowing for the expression of such crises in a safe environment. In this sense, symptoms were part and parcel of treatment, an initial expression of the issue at heart, pointing to the potential inherent in acute pain expression in a safe social context. As crises were aggravated, a homeopathic process was set in motion. Personal stories and memories could be recomposed and re-conceptualized as new perspectives and experiences of the self emerged through the externalization of symptoms, the expression of crises, and the possibilities of beneficial inputs, such as support, nourishment, and containment, from the broader social environment. At the same time, such social frameworks of support could inevitably be exploited or exploitative, thereby perpetuating crises. These inherent risks demand a careful consideration of the intentions motivating any kind of performance. Spider dances further draw attention to the value of developing a sensitivity towards entrainment and the choice of whether or not to entrain. This challenges conceptions of the boundedness of individual existence in favor of an amplified notion of the self, as being part of and affected by broader societal circumstances, contexts, and values.

Dancing Beyond Spiders

Rhythm permeates perceived dualities of body and mind, biology and society, self and other, demanding an openness to letting go of perceived boundaries, self-perceptions, views of reality to leave room for the new and unexpected. In performance contexts, this is facilitated not only by a unitary and continuous rhythm, but also by the intensity or emotional input of performers, who, in turn, must be willing to let themselves be transported by the rhythms that emerge. Such surrender is further promoted when rhythms are recognized and legitimized as socially meaningful, through a link to the socio-natural cycles and performative rhythms of everyday life. Here too, however, underlying intentions are fundamental, and the extent to which these allow not only for 'letting go' in a safe environment, but also for reintegration into wider socio-natural webs.

Finally, all the 'arts', as forms of creative expression, provide potentially curative stimuli, creating alternative — imagined and invented — realities. As rules and values of everyday life become redundant, notions of good and evil are suspended, and everything becomes possible. Questions of authenticity (whether of crises, states of consciousness, or musical execution) may lose their pertinence, as invention, in the sense of performative realities, may become a healing device in itself. Although easily discredited as pretence and not free from risks of manipulation and abuse, invention opens up new possibilities and perspectives, which may be integrated into daily lives if safeguarded by a protective framework.

As such, imagined and invented realities provide space for inventions, for creative interventions, and discontinuity: room for something alternative, unfamiliar, new to emerge, in the face of claims for continuity, maintaining the status quo of afflicting circumstances. Dances with spiders suggest that well-being and soundness emerge where the sense of self integrates ever more aspects of existence. In this sense, healing becomes a form of art in itself, and a choice, aimed at evoking new and 'wholesome', if inconsistent and ever-expanding, experiences of the self. Rhythmic performance, meanwhile, reveals itself as one potential means of regaining a sense of the ground under our feet and the sky above our heads, by developing the ability to tune in, with spiders and demons projected elsewhere, in order to draw them, too, into the dance. 

Epilogue

On 29 June 2007, around 5.30 a.m., Evelina steps into St Paul's chapel in Galatina. She gives a shrill cry, drops back into the prepared arms of her grandson and, as if taken over by shock waves, stamps her feet forcefully onto the ground. Her stomach churns. She is lowered to the floor. The chapel is filled to the brim with onlookers. Outside, the pizzica circle, previously blocking the entrance, has stopped resounding across the square. All night long, musicians and dancers had (despite reprimands) selected this location to execute their modern-day vigil, following the concert on the main square of San Pietro piazza the night before. After a few minutes, Evelina returns to her senses. She disappears briefly behind the altar and is greeted by friendly questions on her return. She answers without hesitation. Her eye catches that of her son, and they smile at each other: the chit-chat seems to disperse the tension of what had just occurred. As Evelina steps out of the chapel, a round of applause greets her. She waves back in acknowledgement. By the year 2007, her crises have propelled her to celebrity. With her family, she moves on to the main church, following a route they have taken for over half a century. The author accompanies them to ‘their’ pew and for a coffee in the legendary — perhaps aptly named — Eros Bar. As they say goodbye, Evelina lingers behind a little. She has something to tell the author: ‘Abbiamo fatto pace’ (We have made peace).




========================\n\n\n



Five hundred years ago, a bizarre "dancing plague" descended on the Alsatian city of Strasbourg. People were seen leaping and convulsing "in the public markets, in alleys, and in the streets." The first victim, a Frau Troffea, was spotted on July 16, 1518. Within a few days, three dozen more citizens were affected, and by the middle of August, as many as 400 people had succumbed. Many writhed and whirled for hours before collapsing from exhaustion, and a number of deaths were recorded.

Modern theories have touted the role of a rye-loving psychoactive fungus (unlikely) or an episode of mass psychological trauma brought on by a prolonged period of socio-economic stress (a modish, but feasible explanation). Back in 1518, the chronicler Hieronymous Gebwiler had no doubts about the cause of the outbreak. God was sending a none-too-subtle sign that he was appalled by the city's moral decay. This terrible illness, which cruelly mimicked and exaggerated the movements of dance, should convince the people to "keep some moderation" in their pastimes and to "omit shameful and blasphemous dances." At the very least, they should "never dance in the wrong place and with inappropriate persons, as when they dance in cloisters and nunneries with monks and nuns."

If Strasbourg did not take heed of God's warning, "for our obstinacy He will let us sink in a Red Sea of sins." Others looked beyond supernatural explanations. The city's medical boffins suggested that overheated blood, perhaps resulting from an imbalance in the body's humours, was sending victims into their frantic trances. Could the madness be vanquished sooner if the afflicted were forced to continue with their gyrations? To this end, two guildhalls were pressed into service, and platforms were erected in the horse and grain markets. Troops were deployed, and the infected were spurred on by the sound of pipes and drums. As one might expect, the results were disastrous. Nobody was cured, and it became apparent that merely watching the diseased in their frenzied state was enough to spread the mania among the populace.

Consequently, all music was banned from Strasbourg until Michaelmas, though exceptions were made for the weddings and private Masses of the city's more well-heeled families. Even they, however, were only permitted to listen to soothing stringed instruments and "on their conscience, not to use tambourines and drums." It was time to prescribe piety. All preachers were to "speak out publicly from their pulpits, praying to God and pleading that he send His grace and mercy to us." Masses were celebrated, and a moral cleansing of the city was undertaken: prostitutes, gamblers, drunkards, and hooligans were to be banished. Finally, a pilgrimage to the shrine of St Vitus in the nearby Vosges mountains was arranged. Holy oil and water were dispensed, and, so the chronicles insist, all was soon well.

An interesting clash of perspectives can be discerned in the events that unfolded at Strasbourg those 500 summers ago. Dancing manias were not uncommon during the medieval era, and divine intervention was often posited as the cause. Sometimes, lending a more sinister edge to the analysis, demonic forces came into the reckoning. Appetites, or basic bodily maltunction, were, for Paracelsus, the culprits. In 1518, the Strasbourg authorities were caught between two approaches to fending off disease and may have looked, with envy, to their neighbors to the south. In Italy, it was commonly held that when bitten by a certain kind of spider, a person would sink into deep melancholy. The only way to rouse him was to play a little pizzica music, and if the right tune were found, the patient would embark on a wild dance that allowed the venom to be diluted in the bloodstream and seep out through the skin. It didn't always work, but then, as readers of Samuel knew, the therapeutic power of music had always been unpredictable: at one point David plays his harp, and the evil spirit possessing Saul is driven away. A little later, the strumming irritates Saul so much that he throws a spear at David, hoping to pin him to the wall. Despite the risks, a resourceful harpist might have made a few kreuzers at Strasbourg in 1518.

The "dancing plague" was no kind of dance, but a mania that still evades explanation. Christianity had often viewed dancing as a conduit for sin. It was, for Augustine, "a circle whose centre is the Devil". Medieval theologians enjoyed quoting such warnings, and Dominicans appear to have been especially censorious. Johannes Nider vilified dance as one of the Devil's "many weapons for the slaying of souls", while John Bromyard told the tale of some pious men who found a demon sitting on a city's ramparts. When asked to explain his choice of perch, the demon replied that, inside the walls, "I do not need the help of anyone ... the whole city is subject to us." The men enter and discover the entire populace engaged in dissolute dancing: as Chrysostom had put it, long ago, "where dance is found, there is the Devil".

When the dancing got out of hand, condign punishment, we're told, was apt to follow. It was said that, at Maastricht in 1278, 200 people had been seized by a dancing frenzy and disrupted funeral rites. Small wonder that a bridge over the River Meuse collapsed and many of the maniacal revellers drowned. Avoiding such pitfalls and looking suspiciously at dance would, of course, become a theme in some brands of Protestantism. Even in Strasbourg, which charted a relatively moderate theological course, it was decreed that there should be no dancing in the streets or "shameless songs" on Sundays. Perhaps the memory of 1518 helped carry through such legislation, although at least the rubrics were not as severe as those over in Augsburg. "All piping, drumming and other hitting and playing of instruments" was prohibited. If the feet began to tap, who knew what terpsichorean mischief might ensue?


====================================\n\n\n


When Dance Becomes Political: Georgian Rave Culture as the Site of Global and Local Construction of Politics

Abstract

This thesis investigates the relationship between understandings of politics and rave culture in Georgia at the international and local level. It looks into the social movement that emerged around rave culture in Tbilisi and relates it to the global process of Europeanization of the country. By examining the portrayal of this movement on international media and putting it into conversation with the local actors—ravers and leaders of the movement, the paper argues that the movement was mobilized by intentional framing of technologies of rave culture, namely, cultural style, music, drugs, dance, and club space, as political.

The political agency of ravers emerged in relation to the inhumane drug policy that the Georgian state was actively using as a repressive mechanism at that time. Apart from the collective political mobilization, this thesis investigates individual and performative ways of doing cultural politics. The sexuality and body politics, which largely marked the movement and the culture as queer, defined the political agency of ravers in confrontation to the society. This very struggle between the younger and older generations, so-called liberal and conservative parts of society over the “right to the body,” has largely been articulated by international media.

While these framings are not necessarily wrong, they have omitted and downplayed the importance of the collective struggle against the police state and reduced the agenda of the movement to cultural confrontation between different groups of society. This process has taken place in the global context of what is labeled as “post-Soviet” transformation of the country from “pre-European” to the European state.

On the conceptual level, the construction of modern liberal subjectivity has been exclusively defined in lines with queer modernity and serving to uphold developmentalist vision of Georgia by Western media. While embracing modernity as a reference point, rave culture in Georgia has negotiated and contested the Eurocentric vision of the culture through its struggle for the drug policy. Despite this contestation on the practice and discourse level, the movement has been largely dependent on international media representation.

Whilst confined to one case, the study informs how culture that has mostly been associated with escapism and hedonism can produce political activism. It can further be expanded into covering the wider geopolitical space of post-Socialism as well as in theorizing Europeanization and ideas of modernity beyond cultural politics.

Key Words: politics, rave, social movements, cultural style, Europeanization, globalization, modernity, Liberalism, performativity, body politics, drug policy

Introduction
On 10th of June, 2017, thousands of people marched in the main avenue of Tbilisi to protest the detention of hip-hop artists based on drug chargesi1, marking the largest grassroots demonstration in the history of independent Georgia since the 2003 Rose Revolution. A year later, on May 12, 2018, the second wave of protests hit the streets of Tbilisi in response to the police raids in two famous nightclubs of Tbilisi - Café Gallery and Bassiani. The protest turned into a massive rave in front of the parliament building. The event was referred to as the "rave-volution." Although the protesters were unable to fully achieve their goal of changing drug policy, it is undeniable that between 2015 and 2018, the activists associated with the techno clubs mobilized the largest grassroots movement in the country. The slogan of the resistance was "We Dance Together, We Fight Together," and the techno club 'Bassiani' became the epicenter of protests and international and local media coverage.

Before the demonstrations, international media outlets widely framed clubs in post-Socialist spaces as places of social transformation for the youth. Georgian rave culture was related to the globalizing process of Europeanization in the country. Although not all demonstrators in 2018 were affiliated with the rave culture, the media and public perception presented it as the protest of the rave culture.

The latter became political on two levels: the liberation of the body from oppressive local culture and the state (articulated by international media and the leadership of the club) and the collective mobilization for legislative changes. The connection between these two understandings of cultural politics makes rave culture in Georgia an interesting case to investigate and positions it in the broader context of rave history, on one hand, and the academic debate about the role of cultural politics in political mobilization, on the other.

While rave culture and techno clubs have historically been associated with escapism, hedonism, and nihilism, this paper aims to explain the relationship between understandings of politics and rave on international and local levels. The paper will answer the following questions:

1. How did Georgian ravers acquire political agency in local and global narratives?
2. How did the grassroots mobilization of the movement take place in the club Bassiani?
3. How did the political subjectivities arise in relation to the body politics of the rave culture in Georgia?
4. What do these understandings tell us about global geopolitical imagination about Georgia?

Based on interviews with ravers and international media articles on the movement, the author will look into the collective, individual, and geopolitical dimensions of politics around rave.

In the first chapter, the author will review existing theoretical approaches to the cultural elements of rave and performativity and briefly look into its history and convergence with the human drug policy movement in Georgia. In the second chapter, the author will explain how the technologies of rave culture – music, dance, and drugs – were instrumentalized by the leaders of the movement and how the framing of these very technologies led to political mobilization. In the third chapter, the author will concentrate on two major themes of the culture: drug use and sexuality and explain how political subjectivities came into being in global and local narratives. In the final chapter, the author will argue that the logic behind this subjectivity construction is defined by ideas about modernity and reflects the global imagination about Georgia as a post-Soviet pre-European state that can transform into an European modern state by intelligible queer performance. 

1. Politics and Collective Mobilization: The Georgian Case of Rave as Movement
2. Cultural Politics of Rave as Culture: Its Technologies and European Modernity
3. Geopolitics and the Project of European Modernity

1.1. History of Techno Culture and the Georgian Case of Rave Movement

Born in Detroit and raised in Europe, techno music "joined [pre-existing music genre] house in inspiring and invigorating popular music of Europe in a way that was unheard over the past twenty-five years" (Gilbert & Pearson, 1999:74). It originally emerged in the 1980s as a non-commercial working-class subculture but has been largely commercialized and widespread since then. With its stylistic expression in clothes, music, substance abuse, and hedonistic lifestyle, techno rave has millions of young followers.

In this thesis, I use the words "rave movement" and "rave culture" interchangeably. I will refer to it as a movement when speaking about the Georgian case and activities of the rave community beyond club settings. And, I will use "culture" in a more general sense as dance and music culture. This particular understanding of rave as culture is more common in academic texts.

While techno has Western origins, it is by no means "representative for a people or a culture, but rather as an example for the removal of ethnic ties to dance music and for a musical culture delimited by civilization" (Jerrentrup, 2000:71). It has a DIY approach, requiring no knowledge of music instruments or singing — everyone, who has a computer, can learn it. The sonic characteristics of technology-based music and the social character of raves that turned it into a global music and dance culture.

While techno can be heard and listened to anywhere, and raves do not necessarily assume certain kind of music, I will be considering techno raves in association with clubs. Dominance of seeing rave as culture or subculture by no means deprives it of political connotation. Unlike young people who articulate their discontent with political conditions and revolt against traditional political institutions, rave culture "struggles in political sense for their right to their own lives" (Hitzler & Pfadenhauer 2002:90).

Cultural studies saw the 1990s rave events in the UK and the US as DIY self-organized spaces and emphasized on their ability to contest mainstream culture and ideologies (Anderson & Kavanaugh, 2007). With mainstreaming and commercialization of the culture in academia, rave is considered as politically "died out" phenomenon, and drug consumption associated with it is framed as a public health issue, usually assessed through epidemiological quantitative research (Ibid).

Unlike in academia, international media "resurrected" rave as political and is widely constructing a Eurocentric narrative of how post-Socialist capitals are becoming more political through development of rave culture. This reflects the vision of politics that does not necessarily assume the collective or public mobilization, but the exact same definition of politics as "right to one's own life" (Hitzler & Pfadenhauer 2002:90), which according to these articles, the youth of post-Socialist countries are deprived of.

Ironically, in Georgia, techno led to actual collective mobilization and can be considered a socio-political movement. The word "movement" is sometimes used to describe the global character of techno raves (see, for example, Hitzler & Pfadenhauer 2002:90), I refer to techno in Georgia in the more conventional sense as a political movement that seeks "change beyond individual benefit through collective action" (Dzenovska 2018:25). Thus, rave is the movement and the culture at the same time. The two concepts can be understood in the collective and cultural ways of doing politics, respectively. Collective action of techno movement in Georgia was largely framed in relation to the society and the state. Collective action frames are action-oriented sets of beliefs and meanings that inspire and legitimize the activities and campaigns of social movements (Benford, R. & Snow D. 2000:614). The process of attribution is central to diagnosing the problem (e.g. harsh drug policy) and suggesting relevant solutions (e.g. change of legislation). And subsequently create motivational framing - “the rationale for engaging in the action and construction of respective vocabulary” (Benford, R. & Snow D. 2000:617). In the process of meeting these framing tasks, movement engages in intentional as well as unintentional strategizing, discursively assembles the parts of experience, events and information that are relevant to these strategies and faces possible counter action (Benford, R. & Snow D. 2000). These can include a very wide range of actions and practices that social movements (including Georgian one) usually exploit.

While the techno movement in Georgia can be studied from different angles, I will look into how it exploited a variety of conventional and non-conventional political tools and agency of its technologies for political mobilization. I will concentrate on the framing processes that led to grassroot mobilization in clubs and CEU eTD Collection motivated ravers to participate in activism outside of the club. Treating rave as a culture allows me to contrast it with other social movements in Georgia because the affiliation with club makes it different from any other grassroot mobilization or advocacy practices in the country. At the same time, treating how the elements of these culture have been framed as political (mostly by leaders) allows me to contrast the Georgian case with the other rave cultures that never left club settings.

Techno raves have been introduced to Tbilisi when the culture was already largely commercialized and mainstream in Europe. It started as a commercial project in Tbilisi as well. In the 2000s, several electronic music clubs have opened, but the techno boom started in the 2010s, especially with the opening of club Bassiani in Tbilisi. While the movement around techno club has been the biggest in size, this period coincides with the rise of other grassroots social movements (Women’s Movement, Queer Movement, Anti-Occupation Movement). Mass demonstrations, campaigns, cooperation around legislation with the government have been common tools which the civil society has been using, indicating the overall increase in political activism.

The rise of these movements had several reasons — the recent change of government being one of the main ones. Political party Georgian Dream was a coalition of all opposing parties that came to power in 2012. The newly elected government largely promoted itself in contrast to its predecessor’s (“United National Movement”) punitive politics. One of the first things they did after elections was a massive amnesty of prisoners. Georgia had one of the biggest shares of prison population in Europe (Human Rights Watch, 2018). However, random forceful detainments and testing of people for drugs as well as imposing harsh punishment based on drug charges, together with the lack of proper legislative framework to process the drug related cases were still common after amnesty, especially in 2013-2017 (EMC, 2019). Harsh drug policies have not been challenged due to the painful memory of the 1990s. After the wars in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, heroin addiction had become one of the biggest public health issues in the country. No wonder, the fight against crime and drugs was so entwined and encouraged, up until 2014 it had never been a subject of public debate, except for the fragmented demands of legalising Marijuana. Detention of Beka Tsikarishvili on possession of Marijuana led to the first campaign “Beka is not a criminal”, which brought the change in drug CEU eTD Collection legislation, but more importantly, led to the release of hundreds of people and turned into “The White Noise Movement”. The White Noise Movement extended its scope to advocating for more extensive legal changes in harsh drug policy and covered not only Marijuana, but other substances as well. The movement provided help to those being prosecuted for drug charges, to the families of the victims of the policy, and to spread information about one’s rights and possibilities of the grounds of communication with the police. The advocacy and communication with the users and their families was limited to legal help and can be considered as the first steps of movement building. Several NGOs were involved in this process.

With the opening of club Bassiani, the scope and the character of mobilization were extended and moved around the club. From the very start, there was a connection between the techno clubs and the movement due to the club leader's personal involvement in the cause. The association of drugs and clubs made this connection even stronger. Even the first meeting to announce the start of the movement and the results of the campaign “Beka is not a criminal” was held at club Mtkvari. Later, in 2016, the National Public Meeting on Drug Policy at club Bassiani made the movement and the club inseparable. Clubs formed the grassroots power of the movement, while the NGOs took over the legal and institutional aspect of it.

When the clubs got raided in 2018, the rave movement already had very strong support of tens of thousands and connections within the ruling party. The raid was unexpected, because the policy change the movement had been fighting for was already suggested by the Healthcare Committee of the ruling party. The very same day of the raid, around 10000 people came to protest in front of the parliament building in Tbilisi. The demonstration turned into a rave, which was supposed to resume the next day, but was prevented by the small, but extremely aggressive groups of men (including organized alt-right). The minister of internal affairs apologized to the demonstrators, and the police evacuated them by buses. The police did not find any drugs in the club, and Bassiani opened in 2 weeks. A few months later, Marijuana was decriminalized. However, the suggested policy change was never fully implemented, and the movement fell apart.

Neither techno, nor clubbing are inherently social or political. The collective character of the raves does not answer the question of mobilization either, because Georgia is an exception rather than the rule in terms of collective action outside of the club. However, it should be recognized that the club, with its intentions as well as its general organization of the space in a way that people can interact with each other, creates solid grounds for recruitment of at least low-risk activists through communication and group affiliation. The latter refers to the resistance through activities that do not involve physical, emotional, or financial dangers (McAdam, 1986). Due to the brutal drug laws in Georgia, the spaces where drug consumption is prevalent constitute high-risk activities, which might have created grounds for people's openness to participate in other types of low or high-risk resistance. This can be considered as cultural opportunity. Cultural possibilities are factors that "constrain and facilitate movement frames and framing activities" (Benford, R. & Snow D. 2000:629). This will help understand how the movement framed dance and rave as political in relation to existing cultural possibilities.

The relative freedom of expression and demonstration that existed in 2017-2018 also created space for specific forms of activism that grassroots groups widely opted for. This can be described as political opportunities. The degree and extent of political possibility in any society is usually very hard to predicate (Benford, R. & Snow D. 2000:631). However, I will investigate how the leaders of the club assessed political possibilities to further their agenda and faced constraints and counter-action.

Apart from drug policy change, techno aimed for cultural societal transformation as well, expressed in changing attitudes towards drug consumption and sexuality. The two can be described as the right to the body. Clubs have tightly been associated with the queer movement and acted as gay-friendly places since the 2000s. In 2016, Bassiani and affiliated queer activists started organizing queer nights series "Horoom" at the club. In a homophobic country like Georgia, where over 90% of the population explicitly articulates its hatred to LGBTQ+ community (Aghdgomelashvili, 2016), and the freedom of assembly and demonstration for queers is constrained by conservative and church-affiliated groups, such association immediately turned them into a political statement.

At the same time, techno clubs in the city have been positioning themselves as against homophobia, sexism, and for equal rights. In general, Bassiani has been consistently supporting other movements (feminist groups, miners' strike) in their public statements and collaborated for some causes. However, apart from White Noise Movement, these intersections were more fragmented. As for the queer movement, it was largely supported through mainly queer nights, which turned the clubs into spaces of safe socialization for the LGBTQ+ community.

These activities challenged the normative cultural concepts of sexuality within the club, which I refer to individualized or performative understanding of politics, and I will elaborate on later in this chapter. Whether I look at collective or individual ways of doing politics, the process of meaning production in the club is central to my analysis. Therefore, I will explain the agency of dance, music, space, and drugs and their relationship with the raver body and style, that were the pre-requisites of the attribution process.

1.2. The cultural politics of rave as culture and its technologies

When I first started thinking about rave culture, I kept asking myself what made Bassiani so special. With concrete walls and industrial design, the space constitutes a very dark labyrinth where one barely sees anything. The main dancefloor is large and hosts thousands of people every weekend, the small one is much lighter in terms of actual light and music played in it. The dress code is black, the music strictly techno, or industrial and hard techno, sometimes house-techno and at queer parties house (the genre historically associated with queers and women). Fascinating for sure, but the space itself is not even designed in a way to leave much space for communication. But it is not speaking, it is dancing and music that framed rave as political. Therefore, I will elaborate on these aspects of culture in this section. When reflecting on the role of dance, music, space and drugs, treat them as technologies that greatly determined political content and forms of struggle of rave in Georgia. Such approach is inspired by the vision of non-human agency in Actor-Network Theory. The latter aims to understand the interaction between human and non-human world as dialectical. It “claims that we should simply not believe the question of the connections among heterogeneous actors to be closed, that what is usually meant by ‘social’ has probably to do with the reassembling of new types of actors” (Latour 2005:75). Such broadening of social as not limited to human interaction allows seeing the technologies of rave as participants of the social process and explain how they have been charged with meaning. The problem of this approach is that it can easily fall victim to essentializing them and turn their working into self-fulfilling prophecies. Saying that the technologies of rave have agency does not inform about what kind of meaning they will produce. However, they are useful for my inquiry as they created certain cultural possibilities within the rave culture that were intentionally or unintentionally exploited for political purposes.

12 CEU eTD Collection Historically techno music was developed in the harsh socio-economic reality of Detroit. “Techno was not the sonic representation of inequality”, but rather operated in the zone of beat induced pleasure and relief (Gilbert & Pearson 1999:74). This distinguishes the social meaning of techno from other genres like hip-hop that also was born in response to racialized social-economic oppression but articulated it in storytelling manner. Void of verbality techno does not illustrate or narrate. It challenges the humanist notions of “musicality” by not forcing “machine music into shapes and textures” (Gilbert & Pearson 1999:74). In doing so it blurs the inherited sonic distinction between “technology” and “humanity” in music (Ibid). As an electronic dance music techno is literally designed to make you move and synchronize with the music as well as the other bodies in the space (Burger & Toivianen 2018). While the techno by its name refers to technologies, rave is inherently human and collective. Which makes the music and dance site-specific. The space and relevant “vibe” that is generated during the event bears the most importance (Ibid). The design of the techno clubs often repeats the atmosphere of the hollow concrete warehouses that hosted them before. The dance is performed together with the others but not in relation to each other. Dark clubs, consumption of drugs and alcohol, as well as social construction of the space as queer and free from social norms might encourage sexual encounters, but due to its post-humanistic qualities mentioned above techno culture with its gender neutral clothing and dancing styles, and robotic sound creates space “not simply to regress to a moment before the regulating discourses of sexuality,... but to go beyond them into an imagined cyborg future, and “act as the site of a constructible, engineerable, alterable, androgynous corporeality” (Gilbert & Pearson 1999:74-75). With one eye in the future, techno provides possibilities to reconsider gender and sexuality. Its historic association with the marginalized and racialized groups will help me understand the subjectivity formation in line with queer body politics of the movement. Technologies and site-specific embodiment of techno culture does not imply that it will necessarily be free of sexism, racism, and other structures of oppression. For example, the struggle against the discrimination of female DJs is still very real and are often discussed at conferences or public debates in the industry. However, even in its construction of the role of DJ, techno leaves a lot of space to charge with meaning in relation to socio-cultural context. For example, the DJs are not usually the reason for people going to clubs (Biehl 13 CEU eTD Collection Missal 2019). Together with the music and space, the drugs also constitute a very important part of the culture. In the 1980s, a certain set of drugs like MDMA, Ecstasy, and Speed were introduced to the rave scene. These substances work on the human brain on a chemical level, which is usually experienced by users as feeling energetic, empathetic, euphoric, and happy (Kalant 2001). While alcohol and different kinds of so-called club drugs, together with consumer habits, definitely play a role in creating the specific "vibe" in the club, I would rather understand substance abuse as another set of technologies that not only became political but the main reason for organizing.

The historic and cultural implications of drugs give insights into their role in political agency. Certain set of substances like cocaine and cannabis became illegal in Europe and America not based on public health concerns, "but because they were associated with the cultures of non-white immigrant communities and of groups of young women enjoying unprecedented (for at least a century) degrees of social, economic, and sexual independence" (Gilbert & Pearson 1999:155). While humans have been engaging with various kinds of substances in different ways, some became illegal in specific historical moments of Europe, which defined their social meaning in relation to different kinds of authority that sought to regulate the bodies of the marginalized (Ibid). In the context of Georgia, it is primarily state regulation of the drug use that relates to the struggle of ravers; therefore, it will be treated as the politically charged issue around which the movement was built. The negative attitude of society towards drugs can be described as cultural constrain that acted against the movement.

It should be noted that the social organization of consumption also generates political meanings and subjectivities. Substance abuse at techno clubs is often referred to as "recreational" and relate to the abovementioned function of release and pleasure. The reason behind it is the overall idea of pleasure and release mentioned above. The techno culture in this sense transgresses the ideas of capitalist productivity and rationality with its dissociation of time, accent on pleasure, and feeling (Gilbert & Pearson 1999). However, the transgression is individual and does not imply collective mobilization at all. Quite the contrary, it encourages unapologetic escapism (Ibid). Paul Willis (2014) to some extent articulates the same criticism when speaking about Hippies and Punks. He claims that these subcultures only challenged the systems of oppression through symbolic solutions and never really mobilized against the underlying structural inequality (Willis 2014). But he sees the transformative capacity of cultural "politics through transformation of objects, style, <14 CEU eTD Collection> thought and consciousness" (p. 224). Willis (2014) understands politics as a dynamic ideology that catches its momentum in everydayness. Put this way, the portrayal of techno in relation to the local norms (or what is imagined as local mainstream) does constitute politics through everyday performative expression of that ideology. In the next section, I will elaborate how the ideology can be articulated not only through verbal, but also through performative embodiment that places the body as the central site of meaning inscription (Biehl-Missal 2019:19).

1.3. Cultural style, performative capacity of rave culture and modernity
"Freedom is not a potential that waits for its exercise. It comes into being through its exercise" (Butler, 2009, p. vi-vii). This very notion of freedom as exercise has been central in constructing the rave as a political project and ravers as political subjects. The frequent use of the word "Freedom" and the visually charged demonstrations of ravers make liberty something one has to "embody" - exercise corporeally. For example, freedom in this context is embodied through dance, consumption of drugs, relevant (usually gender-neutral) clothes that serve as cultural markers of these activities.

The meaning of these cultural markers is acquired contextually and reproduces cultural styles. The cultural style refers to "practices that signify differences between social categories" (Ferguson 1999:97), eg. In this case, raver/liberal/young/European vs. Old/conservative/traditional/pro-Russian are social categories that are produced and are recognizable as relevant cultural styles. I intentionally avoid referring to ravers as a subcultural style, because for it to act like one it has to challenge the "normalized" process of signification (Hebridge 1991). Such a vision would limit it to only local understanding of rave as resistance to the locally produced meaning of cultural styles, while globally rave is not necessarily transgressing the mainstream process of signification. Quite the contrary, as mentioned above, it has penetrated numerous spaces as the mainstream culture. However, as much as it constitutes a global cultural style, it varies from place to place. The reason for this is its performative capacity of the style (Ferguson, 1999:98).

In this sense, "performativity suggests a dramatic and contingent construction of meaning" (Butler, 1990:139). This definition of performativity was originally developed by Judith Butler regarding social construction of sex in "Gender Trouble," however, I would like to use it in a broader sense and apply it to understandings of subjectivity formation, particularly, production of ravers as political subjects. The cultural style of ravers is very tightly connected to body politics, which in turn involves gender and one's right to the body (in terms of drug consumption, dance), but by no means is limited to it. Following Butler's logic (1990), subjectivities are not merely expressed in performance but are rather constructed through the very performance. In order to be recognized as political actors, the ravers have to be able to understand the repertoire of what they see as politics and enact it in a certain way. If the struggle for freedom over the body is perceived as the political agency, the relevant performance should be in place. However, this is not a mechanical process in which one gets instructions and follows the script, but a creative production (Ferguson, 1999). Therefore, it cannot be reduced to a simple attribution of the rave as a political project with its toolkit of European narratives, but rather a complex process of creating Liberal subjectivities at the crossroads of the global and local. The core idea of Liberalism in this context can be defined as its belief in the natural freedom of the individual, which everyone has to aspire to (Jahn, 2012). “In line with this assumption, the demise of the Soviet Union, understood as a major barrier to the realization of this natural development, led to the expectation that democracy and freedom could now (be) spread unimpeded across the world” (Jahn, 2012:151). While these visions of modernity have largely been challenged, and the existence of multiple rather than one West-oriented understandings have been suggested. “We live in an age of modernity where proposals and counterproposals all use certain key, modern principles as reference points” (Furie, 2010). It means that different actors might be using various access points and categorizing logic for defining modernity. Even when explicitly they operate in the same framework of e.g. European modernity, the latter does not act like a unifying coherent discourse. I will argue that this relationship between local and global forces is more complicated than a simple imposition of meaning by the latter to the first. However, the context in which the ideas about modernity emerge plays an important role.

1.4. Geopolitics and respective project of European modernity

Since independence, Georgian cultural and political policies have been explicitly Europe-oriented. The interest in techno culture by international media, as well as the number of international articles and media pieces promoting Georgia as a party/tourist destination, has been a parallel trend as well. Especially after the 2003 Rose Revolution, the process of Europeanization and modernization was celebrated in multiple ways, starting with reforms, policy changes, and campaigns, and ending with such everyday symbols as flags of the European Union [16 CEU eTD Collection] above every governmental building in the country.

One of the important cultural factors has been the tendency to see Europeanization in connection to human rights protection, especially of queers. The reasons for the tendency to see Europe as the propagator of queer rights in Georgia is not arbitrary and has been supported by relevant reforms like the introduction of anti-discrimination legislation as a pre-requisite of the European Association Agreement. I will argue that when applied to Georgia, the idea of European modernity takes sexual transformation as its main accessing point. Puar (2013) calls this strategy homonationalism. The term originally was developed to describe the strategy of sexual “othering” of the racialized/ethnicized groups to serve the nationalistic and imperial interests of the USA (Puar 2013:4). For example, justifying violence and war in Iraq by producing the latter as homophobic and therefore dangerous and backward-minded (Ibid). Unlike the example provided by Puar, Georgia is not produced as non-European and “other” who needs to be targeted with force and excluded, but rather I will argue that Georgia is constructed as pre-European, pre-liberal country that has to politically (through reforms) and culturally (performance) meet certain criteria to become part of European culture through embracing this very queer modernity (Puar, 2013). Thus, the rave culture became a political project not only through collective or individual resistance, but as the one with specific Europe-oriented agenda. By contrast, the drugs have never really been a part of the Western modernist project. Quite the opposite, European modernity was "puritan" in relation to drugs due to the historical associations to minorities outlined above (Gilbert & Pearson 1999). In the case of Georgia, the police did not target minorities or only disadvantaged groups of users. The "zero tolerance" and "war on drugs" more typical to the US context (Wacquant 2012) were implemented and "sold" as European/modernist projects. The massive character of incarceration of the male population was quite arbitrary, and the police power promoted through several reality shows and live arrests of criminals. In this thesis, I will argue that the main demand of the rave movement was not limited to the freedom and the right to the body but exposed the repressive mechanisms of the state. The political agency of ravers emerged in the political context that placed their agenda in opposition to such "puritan" anti-drug modernity. The suggested version of modernity was largely contested and manipulated, taking some aspects (queer modernity) while rejecting the other (puritan modernity). Therefore, the relationship between the global (Western) and local (Georgian) should be understood in terms of "glocalization" - the process of merging the global 17 CEU eTD Collection products/ideas with the local and forming something new (Appadurai,1990). The interrelated ideas of Europeanness, freedom, and politics do not move only one way (from global to local), but merge and can be locally challenged as well. The possibility to transgress is related to political agency and largely defined as such. Butler (1990) sees the capacity to challenge the binary system of gender, through the subversion of this performance. The raver culture challenges the mainstream cultural styles of body and corporeality at the local level through drug consumption and gender expression, which is recognized as resistance both locally and globally. At the same time, it is complicit in terms of the ideas of what a proper liberal European modern subject means and should act like. Thus, resistance cannot be equated to political agency as it is relative to different forces. Therefore, I treat political agency not in absolute terms equated to resistance, but in relation to existing/created cultural and political opportunities and meaning production processes. Framing political agency proactively for something (queer liberation and drug policy) and reactively (against or in accordance to state and police, society and European ideas of modernity) will act like access points for my research. To cover the respective global and local processes of such attribution, I analyzed international media articles and conducted in-depth interviews with ravers. I will elaborate on my choice of units of analysis in the following section.

1.5. Methodology

The division of local and global understandings of politics in relation to techno is quite arbitrary, because in both cases I use the same access points to them. However, in my treatment of the data as well as positionality towards the units of analysis, I have been an outsider towards the media articles and an insider towards the ravers and leaders of the movement. The first required much less ethical considerations than the second one, as I had to negotiate my role as an anthropologist and activist (sometimes even friend). Instead of imposing meaning of what is rave, politics, and resistance, they were generated through 13 in-depth interviews with the ravers and leaders of the movement. 

Due to the pandemic, the interviews were conducted online, which affected the dynamics of the interviews, making them formal and uncomfortable. However, the respondents had more time and were more keen to talk. For reasons of confidentiality, their quotes will be presented with letters instead of their names. The respondents were far from being passive subjects who enacted upon ideas they 18 CEU eTD Collection had been introduced with, but rather produced and reproduced meaning in their own terms (Blaike, 2004). Their relationship with media articles and international representation was very much based on knowledge of the latter and intuitive, sometimes (in case of leaders) even strategic and academic approach to the subject.

The sampling of the leaders was intentional — people responsible for different aspects of the movement — club, queer parties, drug policy, media communication, etc. Such stratification allowed me to get multiple entry points into the structure of the movement and processes of different kinds of mobilization, but all of them somehow affiliated with the club. The club Bassiani was chosen since it contributed to the movement building and cultural production of rave most. All the leaders had been activists before starting the movement, were educated, well-traveled, and had some background in the creative industry and NGO sector as well. The respondents had discussed these topics in different formats before (interviews, international conferences) and gave very extensive information to each question, often using academic terms themselves.

The interviews with the ravers were based on more random sampling, and respondents were recruited through raver community groups on Facebook. Their age ranged from 18 to 35 and came from diverse ranges of socio-economic backgrounds. Most of them were students, worked at service jobs like bartenders, or were small entrepreneurs themselves. Some were into rave culture for years, while others had started it recently. In terms of political activism, except for two of them, had participated in some kind of activism — demonstrations, mainly, but only one had been very active, and the rest had participated only in the events associated with the rave movement or queer events.

A lot of people expressed their desire to be interviewed and spoke about their attitudes in very extensive manner, most of them knew about the history of techno and dance in general, and quite good knowledge of drug legislation as well. Another type of data source was popular media articles. The majority of these articles appeared in magazines about culture, art, and music, but I came across several big international outlets that made story-pieces on the topic. In this thesis, I thoroughly investigated 4 articles specifically (2 in The Guardian, 2 in The New York Times, and 2 in The Economist) about Georgia. I intentionally excluded magazines specifying in culture, art, music, because their perceived audience is supposed to be more familiar with the rave in Georgia and have a more niche audience. Since they are specialized in art and culture, they bring forth the political, creative, and consumerist components of rave to promote it as well. However, these articles did not offer any significantly different approaches to the topic either. By contrast, the magazines I concentrate on have a lot more readers and much more ambitious goals. For example, in the mission statement of The New York Times, they state: “We seek the truth and help people understand the world”. Similarity, The Economist, while specialized in writing about “business and world affairs”, sets their aims as the “advocacy of economic and political freedom around the world”. The Guardian goes further by not simply setting the mission, but their audience as “a global, progressive audience”. These outlets can definitely be described as liberal media in a sense of how much emphasis they place even in their mission statements on “enlightening” the world, the progressive, free audience. The key concepts that often repeat themselves in relation to rave culture as well.

Obviously, there are articles that produce a lot more extensive in-depth investigations and paint a more complex picture of political life and rave culture in Georgia. However, I concentrated on the tendencies that dominate international media rather than more marginal pieces. Overall, the articles provide quite a uniform vision of the techno culture and generally society in Georgia as well as Post-Soviet space.

The dichotomies generated by these articles would make Levi-Strauss jealous about. Therefore, exactly the division principles of these categories were assessed through discourse analysis. In the interviews, subjectivity formation and framing logic of arguments were analyzed with the same method, and both were coded in Atlas software. The analysis is limited to only a certain part of the community and the opinions cannot be generalized over the whole movement. However, certain dominant trends and narratives have been easily identified.

The concepts that had emerged in the interviews and ones from the international media articles have been put into conversation with each other. Codes generated by two sets of data have also been very explicitly similar. My position as an activist and part of the rave community gave me the access, but also challenged me as a researcher and interviewer.

On one hand, I had the trust of the community, but their familiarity with my views and ideological positions might have affected the interviews with leaders. Over the last 5 years I have been friends with some of them, co-organized demonstrations and talks, but also had conflicts over the privacy issues at Horoom events. This is why they often became protective when I asked about the political capacity of rave and often emphasized their openness to criticism.

On the other hand, since the grassroot movements are in decline in Georgia and the government has become a lot more violent in its treatment of political movements, the relatively insider positionality allowed me to get the information that they would not share with the outsiders. Those who did not know about my views on drugs and sexuality, were more prone to explain the situation at clubs as harmless and criticized the movement less.

While the interviews revolved around the term “politics” it was often implicit and required follow-up questions with ravers. For analytical purposes, I divided the discourses about politics, freedom, and culture in 3 categories:

1. the politization of the culture and respective movement building, which mostly deals with the interviews with the movement leaders;
2. The subjectivities that arise in relation to drugs and sexuality and define political agency of ravers. This part is the dialogue between the articles and interviews;
3. the geopolitical dimension of the techno and politics that is mostly based on the international media articles and generates the understandings of political agency in relation to Europeanization at the country level. The analysis will be divided into three respective chapters.

Chapter 2: Producing Political Meaning in the Club
"Music, dance, and drugs — when you put such potent substances together, a lot can happen." (Interview with B.)

On how exactly the leaders put these "substances" together to give them political meaning, leaders suggest "dancefloor activism," which, despite the interviewee's frequent exposure to clubs in Tbilisi, was still hard to understand. During the interviews, they elaborated on it and drew a picture of very intentional meaning-production processes, which will be explained in this chapter.

In its most literal sense, "dancefloor activism" refers to the communication, agitation, and socialization in the club during techno events. Clubs like "Cafe Gallery" and "Mtkvari" in Georgia had already been associated with queers and drug users before Bassiani. However, unlike the latter, they did not articulate an explicit political stance and agenda. Bassiani positioned itself as a safe space for marginalized groups of society, primarily queers and drug users, and to some extent, women.

"Society thinks we are faggots and junkies. Actually, they are right," says one of the founders of queer nights Horoom. Bringing together queers and users, and at the same time embracing these identities, framed ravers in relation to sexuality and drug politics from the very start. On the other hand, the society implicitly became the target of their activities and discourses. Their actions went beyond these formal activities like demonstrations, queer events, and online activism. Rather, it exploited the technologies of rave culture to its benefit.

The framing in the narrative of all leaders is largely defined as "meaning production," which exploited drugs, music, dance, and space to serve a bigger agenda of transformation. The leaders speak of these technologies of rave culture as a vessel that you can "fill in" with meaning.

The first step that distinguished rave clubs in Tbilisi from other famous clubs of the world was their relatively open-door policy. While the clubs often position as safe spaces for queers, women, and other oppressed groups, to make this space actually safe, clubs in Tbilisi did not impose strict face control. It was not "homophobes out," but rather the agenda was to let everyone in and change them.

"All marginalized groups started to unite at the dancefloor. People from suburbs and gettos, men with patriarchal mindset, all were in. But the difference was that we [queers] were setting rules. And these rules were based on care and respect culture. They were pre-set by us as a way of collective survival and organizing. This culture became habitual and naturally spread outside of the club setting." - says G., co-founder of the queer Horoom nights. The inclusion and transformation of different groups of society rather than exclusion of those became the main organizing principle. It is the behavior, the cultural style reflected in the ways "people relate to each other" (both ravers and leaders actively use this phrase) that had to be changed through active communication.

As claimed by ravers, the Tbilisi dancefloor really attracted people of different social groups among young people, which was also reflected in the interviews. However, the ticket in big clubs like Bassiani or Khidi usually costs at least 6 Euros, which is not necessarily affordable for everyone. While all respondents speak about the problem of economic inequality in the country, the fact that the club is the commerce and automatically leaves certain groups outside has largely been ignored. Although I still cannot say if the rave was an exclusively middle-class activity or not, it definitely was dominated by certain types of people: those who could afford the ticket or had social contacts to get invitations and who were let in by face-control. The people coming to the club were imagined as potential activists and targets to transform. The leaders frequently used words like “fighters” and “allies” in relation to clubgoers. However, both ravers and leaders admit that there was a limit to inclusivity. The face control at the club had to ensure that no one got hurt, harassed, or abused in the club. This is why queer parties had a very strict verification process to get in.

The ravers complain that the word “raver” has become very mainstream, and people who “do not understand the values of the culture and are homophobes” still subscribe to it (Interviews with L. and T.). Or “people go just to do drugs in the club” (Interview with the leader N.). This illustrates the conflicting aims of the rave as a culture that, to some extent, has to differentiate itself from the mainstream and maintain certain exclusivity (Jerrentrup 2000) and the aims of the rave as a movement to turn people into low or high risk activists (McAdam 1986). The club as a business and rave as culture with its values and ambition to differentiate itself clashes with the idea of unity and expansion that social movement aims for.

The relationship with the police decided this problem for the benefit of political movement building and mainstreaming and turned the culture into a political tool for achieving the goal. The conflict never disappeared, though. The connection between the drug policing and relevant political resistance to it derived from the nature of the repressive mechanism that started to target clubgoers (usually men) around clubs. “When the clubbing booms in Georgia since 2014 the police did not need to run after people on the streets. They knew that a lot of drug users gather here. The police would follow people going in or out of the club and arrest them. The area around the club became a convenient hunting ground. On the other hand, it became a convenient place for communication and indoctrination of victims of drug policy and general public as well. This movement was the result of synergy between clubs and activists.”

However, the latter went way beyond that. Even much earlier before the rave demonstration of 2018, the term “struggle” was often used in reference to the clubbing nights. For a long time as a clubgoer and supporter of the movement, I thought it referred to the kind of resistance that is drug consumption or transgression of gender roles, and/or to the transformation of people’s attitudes I assumed was happening on the dancefloor. As an ethnographer, I realized that it implied actual, aggressive (yet rarely physical) confrontation with the police.

“We barely managed to dance during raves. At every event, someone would get arrested, and we [activists and lawyers] would run to the police stations and drug testing centers. In the end, the policemen recognized us immediately and were sick of us and would let people go just not to deal with us.” — recalls one of the leaders B. P. describes it as a seek and rescue game. He says: “We would abandon the dancefloor, go rescue the arrested person from the police, and bring them back to the club to dance. This is what “We Dance Together, We Fight Together” stands for. This was turning the event into a catharsis, as P. explains the political meaning of dance. The catharsis here stands for the pleasure of victory rather than a hedonistic or escapist act of forgetting. However, it is not the only kind of pleasure experienced in the club. "unwinding", "leaving the problems behind", "self-reflecting", "zoning out" have been the terms often used by ravers to describe their conditions in the club. Only the most politically active ravers were involved in this part of dancefloor activism, but all of them attribute to dance, music, and drugs more complex qualities than recreation and hedonism.

The problem of police brutality and injustice is usually mentioned to explain the need for and pleasure from such recreation. The relationship with the police was prerequisite and mediatory with the relation to state. With the growth of the movement, as leader B. puts it, their strategies shifted from "police to politics" he says: "We started learning international practices. Our rhetoric also shifted from exposing repression to healthcare politics. Came up with the legislative project and suggested to the government. However, the main power still lay within the movement. They [government] saw it as social capital."

According to the leaders, the politicians called the project on legislative changes as "Bassiani project". Unlike many other civil society initiatives, the state started to take them seriously because of the grassroots power they had demonstrated during protests and in confrontation with the police. The shift from police to politics is framed as the transition from individual solutions (like rescuing the arrested people) to collective and institutional ones (like legislative change). This framing is reflected in the slogans of the movement as well: "Care instead of punishment."

Learning international practices to find a diagnostic frame implies the evidence-based political solution to the problem. Hence, the change expected is not simply at the cultural level, or address the problem of police brutality, or denounces state's regulatory politics, but expects the politics to be democratic and social.

Nevertheless, the right to the body is implicitly present in all interviews, mostly in relation to sexuality. It did not matter if respondents identified themselves as queer or not, all of them defined club as the space of interactions that they otherwise did not have, mostly in relation to gender and sexual minorities. The place was claimed to make people more tolerant and friendly because of its diversity. The latter often described in relation to people's looks and gender expression.

Drugs are ascribed an important role in this transformation. All respondents agree that drugs "amplify" the experience of enjoyment and pleasure, but also make people more "empathetic". At the same time, they differentiate between the "workings" of different drugs. "When MDMA was popular and available in Tbilisi we witnessed the best times of rave. This drug is most empathetic", - explains one of the leaders of the movement. By empathetic he means making one empathetic. This word repeats itself or the same concept is articulated as "solidarity", "understanding others", "openness to others", "tolerance", "help", "care"'. Club drugs are also believed to have certain qualities that make one more motivated and hence participate in activities outside of the club. One of the leaders B. The contrasts of club drugs with the previous generation's choices, such as heroin and morphine, are described as "uppers" and less addictive. The drugs are seen as having power but are not indispensable to the culture. The crucial aspect is the mobilization, which will be elaborated on in the next chapter.

Music is the uniting factor of the community, and it is seen as less political and more impactful on understanding the world. The quote, "The music was becoming better in the country and I was growing with it, with better music the relationships between people became better as well," exemplifies this belief.

Dance is the central term and symbol of resistance, which was used for peaceful protest. The accentuation of the body, specifically the dancing body, is related to freedom. The name of the queer event series, "Horoom," is a traditional Georgian military dance, and "Bassiani" refers to a battle in medieval Georgia. These associations integrate local cultural elements and capitalize on existing cultural possibilities.

The dancing body is considered a "weapon" of struggle, and its political capacity is amplified through empathy and unity with other dancing bodies. The absence of text in dance allows for a peaceful protest that does not hurt others. The quote, "Techno can easily be charged with meaning because of no lyrics," highlights the importance of dance in the culture. However, dance and music on their own are not considered political. Almost all respondents agree that for it to be political, it has to carry a political message and address the respective authority, namely the state and society. The leaders repeatedly stress that the policy papers suggested by other movements in Georgia usually would end up on some politician's shelves and forgotten. Human rights frames exploited by these entities (the leaders often refer to worker's movement, feminist, and queer movements) have been criticized because of their reliance on conventional ways of communication.

However, all leaders and some of the ravers think that rave as a movement has exhausted its possibilities. They think new ways of activism need to be invented. On how to proceed, most of them do not have the answer. In their assessment of achievements, leaders define unity and grassroots power against the state as the most important one. While the policy change did not happen in its suggested form, the policing and forceful testing on drugs decreased. The implementation of the anti-drug laws also involves less incarceration and usually results in probation and deals with prosecutors. Decriminalization of marijuana consumption also resulted in much less arrests. These observations are voiced by all respondents. Such framing mostly resonates with the framing of the problem as political and finding collective solutions to it.

The second and most considerable achievement, according to respondents, is the unity and increased awareness, which they report as transforming subjects and their relation to each other and their body. "People [attending raves] changing overnight" (usually explicitly or implicitly implying changing their attitudes towards queers) has been repeated a number of times by most respondents, especially leaders. This change and idea of transformation go deeper into the subjectivity construction, which is not limited to the raver, but targets the whole society. This discourse is articulated by international media and to an extent by respondents as well and will be discussed in the next chapter.

Chapter 3. Producing Political Subjectivities
3.1. "Junkies"

My interest in rave culture was originally triggered by the articles and documentaries about the techno scene that I was repeatedly confronted with. As a frequent club goer and supporter of the movement, I found these articles odd or even misleading. When comparing them to the narratives of the ravers, it became obvious that these articles also downplayed the role of drug policy and the struggle against the state and the police. My interviews with Georgian clubgoers, especially with the leaders, suggested that respondents were more than familiar with international media representation and referred to it before I even asked a question. Overall, the understanding of political struggle as well as culture was explicitly reflected on and criticized by respondents. In this section, I will discuss how the political subjectivities are fashioned in relation to drugs and sexuality in/through the narratives of local and international actors and explain how political agency is inscribed in these subjectivities through relevant performance and representation.

The common narrative that brings together the articles and differentiates them from the ones written about the Western techno-scene represents Georgian (as well as post-soviet) society in dichotomous terms: it appears divided along "progressive" and "‘liberal/social liberal" lines. The Economist, for example, states that “Tbilisi is getting hip, and traditionalists feel threatened” (17 May, 2018), and the Guardian that “‘in just a few years, Bassiani has become a catalyst for progressive politics in a conservative society” (January 22, 2019). The cleavage runs sometimes along generational lines, defining the younger segment as sexually liberated (accepting especially of homosexuality), westernized, future-oriented, in favor of freedom of expression and lifestyle. This segment is contrasted with a conservative, prudent, traditional side of society.

“The decriminalization of cannabis” says for example The Guardian, “has been a confusing development in the standoff between Georgia’s young, progressive generation and their conservative elders” (Guardian, January 22, 2019). Apart from the facts that these articles contain several inaccuracies and omissions, the language about techno culture in Georgia, and more generally about Post-Soviet countries, is strikingly similar to each other. Articles often come with photos of dark club pictures and demonstrations that often include young queer-looking people in leather, latex, or cross-dressing attires. Headlines and titles of the articles as well as picture already refer to the confrontation within the society, hint to the Soviet past and/or define party as political. These include for example: “Bassiani: the Tbilisi techno mecca shaking off post-Soviet repression” (Guardian January 22, 2019), “At This Techno Club, the Party Is Political” (New York Times, May 29, 2019), “Dance revolution: Young Georgians fight for their right to party” (Economist, 17 May,2018).

The raids on clubs, the reasons for the mobilization during the large rally of May 12th, 2018, and the roots of the movement in club and techno culture surfaces/may be alluded to here and 28 CEU eTD Collection there, but are never fully developed into a coherent conclusion of what exactly the protest were about. The only exception is a New York Times article (May 29, 2019) which dedicates a few sentences to the history of clubbing politics. Everywhere else, the aim of the struggle is defined vaguely as some “right to party” (The Economist, 17 May, 2018), and in all outlets the conflict is subsumed under some general confrontation between liberal and conservative forces, Western and Post-Soviet ways of living and relevant younger and older generations.

Police brutality and the organized politics of the party in power are rarely connected to the broader context of repressive drug policy and confrontation with the state. Most often, descriptions totally exclude context and present detention and raids as mere facts, as in in curt exposé in the Guardian: “In May last year, armed police raided Bassiani and made eight drug-related arrests; in response, thousands of clubbers protested outside parliament, sparking a dramatic weekend of counter-demonstrations and riot police intervention” (January 22, 2019).

By contrast, the symbolic epicenter of the struggle and major disappointment in ravers’ eyes is state policy and police. Respondents all agree about the brutal character of the drug policy, and reflect a profound understanding of how it is politically instrumentalized in order to control the population. As one respondent S. puts it: “The government needs to manipulate people. The terror gives politicians power”. Although ravers' attitudes towards drug consumption may oscillate dramatically between adamant refusal of consumption to a sincere embrace of drug culture, actors all support the view that the only adequate state response to drug problems is through care, prevention and information rather than punishment. They all have been victims of drug policy to some degree, either personally or through friends or family. Male respondents are likely to have been stopped by the police around the club, sometimes incarcerated for years for being caught with small amounts of MDMA, Ecstasy or any other substance. Many of them were on probation at the time I interviewed them. In other words, all have a pretty much direct experience of being treated like “criminals that need to be punished together with the murderers and rapists” — in the terms of a respondent once arrested for possessing two pills of Ecstasy. Such vision questions the state authority which uses police violence as control mechanism. The police violence is also often described as “cynical” (Interview with B.) and “humiliating” (Interview with A.). One of the ravers tells a story of how police strip-searched him in the street near club - “I was standing there in my underwear in the middle of the street.” The police brutality is not perceived unfair not only because of the positive meaning ascribed to drugs, but due to the ways it was done. Respondents implicitly and explicitly see it as the demonstration of power towards its population. The slogans of the movement “The War with the People Has to End” and “Violent Drug Policy Has to End” refers to this framing. Resistance is shaped as the bottom-up confrontation, while rave culture representative of the people. At the same time, the latter does not attempt to break in through to the top, but rather peacefully co-exist. Party politics is very sharply contrasted with the grassroots politics, the first one considered to be corrupt and something to be avoided. “I am politically active and protest everything I consider to be unfair, however, until it becomes party politics.” - says the respondent. This sentiment is very common among ravers who still are cautious when using the word “politics” and try to contrast the “honesty” of their protests with the formal politics. The respondents are not afraid of the word and use in variety of context to describe their everyday practices. The idea that the latter affects public and what is perceived as formal politics and the other way around is quite explicitly articulated by respondents. “Everything is more or less political. It has even become a problem. The dance is political if it sends a message to the society and state, if the action bears meaning beyond entertainment. For example, having a different space at the dancefloor, especially queer nights, is already a statement.”- says one of the respondents. The vision of the state and society as recipients of the message is common response to the question what makes rave political. Unlike articles, changing people’s attitudes to drug users and depriving the state of punitive drug mechanisms is the central agenda of the movement. It does not exist on its own in the confines of the clubs either. “Dance cannot be political in the club if it does not leave its settings. Art cannot be political if it is locked up and does not reach people.” - says another respondent. The political agency is largely framed as the capacity of “demonstration” be it protest in the streets or confrontation of the immediate communities like family and friends, or through style expressed in clothes and behavior. Thus, politics is not limited to the space and subjectivity, but ideology and ways of communicating it, which as mentioned above, does not have to be verbal. The argument against policing is not limited to the ideas about justice and right to the body. It is seen as a cause of the lack of information and access to drugs that eventually leads to higher fatality and incarceration rates. "When drugs are unavailable, you seek for something easy to get and might end up using something really bad for your health." - explains one respondent, referring to drug-related deaths in 2018. Such arguments [against repressive drug policy] are often voiced by respondents and are grounded in the public health needs. When ravers call themselves users, they not only refer to the consumption of drugs but also their drive to deprive the state of its control mechanism and assert power over their bodies. However, the latter is not seen as individualized and private but as a public entity that might need care and management from the state.

If the struggle against drug policy is so central to rave politics, why does the international media so eagerly omit the confrontation between the state and rave culture? It might have several reasons. However, as mentioned above, the grassroot movements against drug policy have never reached such huge support in the history. While there is a lot of exchange between clubs throughout the world, as the leaders of the movement say, "even in Europe they are trying to avoid speaking about drugs. The drugs are still stigmatized topic." In its quest to paint a positive picture of ravers, international media might intentionally be avoiding such a frame.

Subjectivities are strictly divided into dichotomous categories that fill in the pre-existing analytical categories of West and Post-Soviet, liberal and conservative, young and old. The subjects are deprived of the capacity to challenge these dichotomies or ascribe different meanings to them; there is nothing in-between. The society consists of these crystalized subjectivities that operate solely in the domain of culture, hence, the underrepresentation of the state and institutions like police that uphold the system of oppression.

Nevertheless, despite such under and sometimes misrepresentation the content of the struggle, political agency is by no means denied to the rave culture. Quite the opposite, the latter is assumed to embody a bigger, more fundamental and geopolitical struggle of liberation and modernization. And the most fundamental criteria of determining their capacity to do so is framed as transgression of the sexual and gender norms. In the following section, I will explain how queerness becomes the marker of political agency in the narrative of international media and relate it to the ways rave culture is gendered at local level.

3.2. "Faggots"
The articles in question do not always explicitly explain the reasons of the rave struggle, but in all of them, clubs are largely portrayed in opposition to the "traditional" ways of living (like extended families, prevalence of the Orthodox Christianity) as "rare space for sexual encounters" (Guardian, January 22, 2019), "rare islands of free expression" (New York Times, May 29, 2019). The control mechanisms of the club against the imagined danger from conservatives is also directly connected to the perceived need to create a safe space for queers in the club. Sexuality acts as a logic of both categorizing the society in abovementioned binaries and at the same time acquiring political agency. "After a police raid prompted mass protests, the defiantly queer nightclub became an emblem of a new, progressive Georgia. Its founders explain how they're standing up to conservatism." (Guardian, January 22, 2019) While queerness is not the reason for the police raid in question, as a conservative act is constructed against progressive and queer culture. The same is true for the headlines and titles that never really mention the state or police, and frame the struggle in cultural terms. The culture becomes political through queer performance against the conservative part of society. This vision is not necessarily contradictory, neither to the local discourses about politics and rave, nor to its perception by different groups of society and government.

The comments of local alt-right also very much resonate with these ideas: "Bassiani and Gallery are gay clubs, where drugs are being sold and the youth are recruited in illegal activities," quotes the Guardian (January 22, 2019). Dimitri Lortkipanidze, a leader of Georgian March, an ultranationalist group. Similarly, at the demonstration of 2018, the prime minister apologized to the ravers who were besieged by alt-right groups for the raid and promised that the police "would protect the safety and health of each citizen of Georgia, despite their [sexual] orientation, religion, and age"!

The existence of queer parties—as the only safe place for many "closeted queers who have never been out, and suffered a lot" (interview with the founder of Horoom G.)—is one of the important ways the club is constructed as a political space. Together with being a user, queerness and queer support are openly stated as one of the most critical components of freedom. In interviews, the struggle for freedom that involved the liberation of the clubgoers and the Georgian society goes hand in hand with transgressing gender and sexual roles. Homophobia and patriarchy are also mentioned as the major problems of society that the rave culture opposes.

While in articles, freedom is almost exclusively connected to queer sexuality and the right to party, the ravers paint a more complex picture of how the raver subjectivity is gendered and sexualized. To begin with, clubgoers describe "freedom" in the club as "liberty to be whoever you want" or "who you want to be at that moment" (interviews with ravers). One interesting point is that, more often than not, neither "freedom" nor "being" is defined in essentialist terms as something one discovers or expresses, but as quite fluid, not fixed in time, and largely related to solidarity, sexual/gender non-conformity, and drug use.

The sexual liberation is also not simply related to sex and homosexuality, but rather to the transgression of toxic masculinity. The transformation of "babuliki" (slang for the urban, masculine, macho type man in Georgian) and the absence of fights at the club are referred to by almost every respondent as an important achievement of the club. The transformation is observed not only through personal interaction but also the respective performance. For example, one of the leaders, G, quoted his friend: "When, as a man in Georgia, you get beaten up because of long hair and ear-piercing, you are queer; what the hell else are you then?" And added: "Queerness means different things in different cultures. Sometimes the earring can be a statement". Transgression is also connected with nudity, wearing drag or extravagant clothes, but above all the relationships produced by the culture. To the question "What is the basis of rave culture?" the respondents univocally answer: "The respect for each others' space." The club is also described as a place where one does not get judged for what they wear or how they behave, provided they do not bother others. As a frequent clubgoer, I definitely can testify against the first statement. The informally established dress code of techno clubs is being non-mainstream, embodying the cultural style of rave through all-black clothes, glitter at queer parties, exposing your body parts, wearing comfortable sport shoes and pants. This alternative normativity is not imposed as dress code in most clubs of Tbilisi, but encouraged by more subtle social ways like negative or positive comments on looks. However, overall, the cultural style seems to be still less based on what one wears, but how one acts.

The struggle is defined in the same sense as well. "The way people treat each other, the culture of behavior codes and etiquette — this is what united us" (interview with a leader G.). According to more experienced ravers, this is the culture that one might possess before club, but also acquires/learns by going to clubs. Once again emphasizing the flexibility to individually manipulate the style.

The door policy at Bassiani is not really based on dress code. This is one of the most important differences between Georgian techno clubs and ones in Europe. That is also the reason club owners and leaders do not agree with the comparison of Bassiani to Berghain, Tbilisi techno scene to the one in Europe, often made by the international media. "European clubs openly exclude homophobes, we say the opposite: come let's dance together and follow rules" (Interview with the founder of Bassiani N.). Another leader P. says, that unlike Berghain, where cutting a line into club through VIP lists, is considered to be cool, while in Tbilisi it would be unacceptable. "This is more than just partying for us. The privileges have to be abandoned at the entrance of the club. Everyone has to be equal on the dancefloor."

Obviously, this does not mean that the ravers do not define themselves in opposition to the society, especially conservative groups and alt-right, but their vision ranges from total hatred to understanding and self-blame. "Maybe we did not dance with them. Maybe they think we look down at them and that is why they hate us." - says one of the leaders. Another one says that the 2018 demonstration went out of their control. "We were totally demoralized and could not manage who was saying what. It was very spontaneous. Things were said that made people upset." The demonstration ended when the minister of internal affairs suggested the police would forcefully dissolve the counterdemonstration. "The counter protesters were not a lot in numbers, but very radicalized and aggressive. Some of them were affiliated with some groups in the government, but other were not." - says one of the leaders. Another one explains their solution to stop demonstration and take activists by government-provided buses "We could not allow the police that raided us the previous to do the same to the other part of society. So, we swallowed our pride and agreed to dissolve our demonstration". At the same time, not just the counter-actors, but the society is largely portrayed as homophobic and conservative by clubgoers and leaders. Lack of education, influence of the church and state are named as main reasons for it. Similar to the articles in question, they suggest that the confrontation in the society is generational. "The iron curtain lay over our parents' one. They [34 CEU eTD Collection] cannot perceive the progress. For example, the way they think about women." (Interview with T.) According to the interviews, even the drugs are gendered and belong to generation. "The older generation calls our drugs 'faggot' drugs", - says leader B. Another one, P, says that they [ravers] tried to demasculinize the drug use by framing the oppression of queers and victims of drug policy. Some attribute even more importance to the generation and suggest that the rave culture is a reaction to parents' culture. "This was the protest of the youth. The elder ones were there as well, but it is the young who initiated. It was a counter-action against older generation's culture from the people born in independent Georgia. It was kid's culture." - explains one of the leaders. While most agree that "This dance belongs to this [young] generation" (Interview with S.), their confrontation is largely framed as ideological. The conservative part of society is not limited to the older generation. In respondents' narrative, conservative ideology is framed as deprived of the political agency. "They are brainwashed" (interview with T.) or "were brainwashed", manipulated by church, state, institutions. The tendency to contrast themselves as belonging to rave culture somehow co-exists with their political agenda to transform their opponents. This conflict played out very dramatically during the 2018 "Rave-olution", when according to leaders, the speakers at the demonstration repeatedly framed the society as "backward-minded" and contrasted them with the ravers. According to the leaders, the conflict over how to handle the counter-action against the ravers led to the dissolution of the movement, and, consequently, loss of political meaning of rave culture as well. Put this way, the downplay of drugs and struggle against government at the expense of endogenizing queer agenda by international media seems to be negligence, rather than intentional decision. However, not when we look at the alignment of the queer with analytical categories of modernity and more global context of Europeanization. The strategy employed by international media is homonationalism. Which is actively reproduced by local actors as differentiating strategy. Therefore, rather than the purposes of "othering" as described by Puar in context of the Muslim subject, in this case queer modernity serves the purposes of making the subject intelligible and extend the boundaries of Europeanness through "transition" rather than exclusion. In the following chapter, I will elaborate the geopolitical dimension of the rave culture and explain how Georgia as "post-soviet" is constructed in Western imagination. Chapter 4. The European Gaze The categories of "conservative" and "liberal" articulated by international media can be grouped under respective geopolitical and ideological frames: the division between the West and Post-Soviet, and the construction of modern subject of developmental state. Since Georgia is not considered to be the East Europe, it is labelled as "New East", that is even "further than East Europe" (Guardian, September 21, 2016) and novel to what I will call the European gaze2. The New East is not limited to Georgia, but includes other countries of the Post-Soviet bloc - Ukraine, Armenia, Azerbaijan and sometimes Russia as well. Thus, Georgia is imagined as part of a larger geopolitical space that is separate from other parts of the world. The geopolitical division is largely based on the vision of Soviet history as determining and unifying experience of the region. Stuck in spatial and temporal transition, Georgia is constantly haunted by its past. 30 years and one revolution after it remains post-Soviet, but at the same time “pre-European”. I do not use the term "pre-European" in its conventional meaning—to describe times (usually Americas, New Zealand, Australia) before colonization, but rather as an ideological reference to subject formation (lexico.com).

The transition from the pre-European subjectivity to becoming European is not described as a continuous process, but rather as a painful "rupture" and revolution (the frequent use of these words in all articles being one indicator). Similarly, ravers largely perceive this process as the transformation of generations from Post-Soviet to modern, but rather than rupture, they see it as a continuum. Instead of confrontation, both literally and figuratively, they expand their ideas and "befriending" the perceived other part of society. The task the leaders think they have achieved to only a certain extent.

Once again, the need to transform society and communicate clashes with the logic of differentiating their culture. This very clash physically played out at the 2018 demonstration between the ravers and conservative groups, which the movement could not contain anymore and fell apart. While the leaders and ravers see transformation as a continuous process and present, media places the European and Westernized in the "future" against the present of Georgia that still lives in the Soviet "past." The future, on the other hand, spatially only exists in the West, but is not unattainable. It does not come with time, but rather with the ideological transformation to the liberal subject, even the drug policy is defined as "narrow-minded" (Vice, 19, 2019). Quite opposite to the words "repressive", "punitive", "non-human", "harsh" used by the respondents.

The problem of policing is turned into the problem of culture and society and that of the "mind" and mentality rather than the body. It is the latter that has to embody the mental transformation, though. And has to do it in a way that is intelligible to the presumed Western reader. Luce "European" and "Western" interchangeably, and the same goes for the articles in question, but I still prefer "European" to explain the specificity of the case. While the articles are not necessarily written by European authors, the Geopolitical quest of Georgia to belong to Europe constructs these subjectivities from the perspective of "European gaze" that not only decided (literally and figuratively) whether the subject belongs to the European family or not, but also sets the criteria of this judgement.

 The tropes of difference, as mentioned above, come to being in relation to the temporal placement of the subject in the "limbo" of post-soviet. When looking at the connection between the sets of dichotomies and inaccuracies in the articles, these intentions become obvious. On Sunday afternoon, counter-protesters with shaved heads arrived, wearing masks, to spoil the fun (Economist, 17 May, 2018). Georgian alt-right does not usually have shaved heads. Skinheads that might be associated with alt-right neither were there, nor present among Georgian radical right scene altogether, but the representation of the alt-right in this case is adjusted to the visual understandings of the assumed reader.

The same principle of intelligibility guides the inner paradoxical connections created within the sets of dichotomies. For example, Soviet is associated with Orthodox that "still prevails" (Guardian, January 22, 2019), ignoring the fact that Orthodox Church rose in Georgia only after the collapse of Soviet Union. Once again, the vision of queer modernity as inherently secular (Puar, 2013) leads to the ahistorical connection of religion with the past to uphold the linear developmentalist temporality.

The ways in which struggle and transformation are articulated are much more diverse throughout articles. Different modes of politics are mentioned and emphasized at varying degrees. The collective mobilization, awareness raising, legislative change are covered at varying degrees. However, the political agency is largely determined as performative capacity of embracing queer modernity.

"A new, Westernised generation "want to express themselves not only by dancing, but through different lifestyle" (Guardian, January 22, 2019), quotes a popular political scientist from Georgia. The politics in these articles is defined as the conflict between the generations with different cultural styles. The narrative solidified with the selective quotes by local actors.

In general, the visual material, but also the way of writing is very much oriented to create a certain political and spatial landscape. The sets of categories are embodied by humans and non-humans — when e.g. describing "post Soviet pool" (NY times, May 29, 2019), mountainous landscapes, bodies and ways people dress lighting, and above all music make up the non-human agency of the New East in diverse ways. Sometimes they make the articles sound like tourist brochures in their efforts to create certain imagery of the urban and rural scenery.

"It has also helped make Tbilisi a dream destination for techno tourists, who complete their long weekends with a soak in the city's sulphurous hot springs and a few bracing shots of chacha" (Guardian, January 22, 2019). Clothes, space, mountains, but also other mainstream touristic clichés like chacha (Georgian name for grappa) are painted in a way to "sell" them to potential clients.

The construction of ravers in lines with modernity is largely associated with the ability to consume the culture. However, at the same time, it is a lot more than commerce. Its never-ending state of transformation from post-Soviet to modern resolved this paradox — the commercial character of the club as business, but at the same time it being the place of political struggle and individual transformation brings both the ideas of economic and cultural liberalism together. But its geopolitical "location" is not fixed and unchangeable. It can embrace the queer modernity through never-ending cycles of revolutionary "acts", like the "rave revolution." This is how dance in front of the parliament building in Tbilisi becomes geopolitical performance that goes way beyond the local transformation of youth culture and/or drug policy.

I do not assume that the discourses articulated by the international media were directly reproduced by local actors. As suggested by Anna Rekhviashvili (2018), instead of viewing them as passive recipients and practitioners of the pre-existing discourses, interviews illustrate how they negotiate, reinterpret, criticize, and use media attention to their own benefit.

When commenting on international media and the representation of Georgian techno culture as 1990s Berlin, the respondents hugely disagree with the comparisons. "Europeans could not understand our struggle. They cannot imagine people going to prison for 5-8 years for one Ecstasy pill. They have always had a hedonistic approach," - says P.

The movement leaders and the ravers who have more knowledge of the techno scenes of Europe say that the European rave culture has different values and emerged in the specific context that shaped it as "resistance against gentrification, loss of pleasure." Whereas the repressive policies in Georgia shaped it as a struggle against state and police. "Techno had lost its political meaning and was escapist and hedonistic in Europe," says the founder of the club N.

And yet, there is certain agreement among respondents that the techno inherently is based on the ideas of equality and care. Some ravers think that since this culture existed in Europe longer, it has similar history as a culture, but not necessarily as a political struggle. "Since Georgians were already good at dancing and partying they easily understood and embraced techno," - says S.

The performative capacity of the culture both literally and figuratively establishes techno as something that can be locally adjusted, or has already been mixed with pre-existing cultural opportunities and challenged by political constraints.

In narratives of respondents, the vision of modern subjectivity is not necessarily connected to Europe. While the word "development" often repeats itself in the interviews, respondents usually disagree with comparisons of Berlin and Georgian techno. Those who have been to Europe are even more skeptical of those connections articulated by international media.

Even though they never use the term, they describe the process of transformation as "glocalization" of the European techno project into Georgian. The trope of difference between Georgian and European is not constructed the same way by ravers and leaders of the movement. The ravers emphasize the longer history of techno in Europe, which for them refers to a more embedded culture and less constrained drugs. "Soon we catch up with Germany, but I do not know where Germany will be at that moment," - says S.

The vision of Georgia as developing, but also always in quest of catching up with Europe reveals another geopolitical trope that the development is not just linear, but a continuous process that always goes forward and which arranges countries in relation to each other. Another tendency of imagining European past in Georgian present is also articulated by ravers. "Probably it was the same in Europe, people started to organize in clubs and then hit the streets," - says L. The leaders also refer to the political meaning of the techno-acquired uniting of the post-Berlin wall city. Similar references have been made by Horoom founders in relation to the Stonewall Riots to justify the importance of entertainment places in political mobilization. At the same time, unlike media, they reflect on it not as history repeating itself, but as the part of history that they chose for reference. History becomes not something that happened, but a discursive frame they use for justifying their politics. Thus, the Berlin Narrative is consciously exploited for political goals.

However, the leaders speak of certain dependency on international media and the tropes produced by them. One of the leaders, P, explains how he immediately contacted international outlets after the raid of the club. International media plays a role in gaining negotiating power against the government, and hence such emphasis on it is implicit. According to the respondents, during and before demonstrations in 2018, the government actively targeted ravers, especially leaders through "troll factories." Support of international media allowed ravers to take informational war to the space where they believed the government had less power. And more importantly, it can be seen as leverage, since the Georgian politics in the last 17 years have actively been revolving around becoming part of the European Union.

Thus, the rave movement had to protect itself from policing and make political choices of alliance and confrontation in the hostile political settings, primarily depending on the grassroots power of the culture and international support. As a result, the movement selectively embraced some parts of the suggested project of modernity (like queer modernity), but reinterpreted the political agency of the subject in its own terms in other aspects (drug consumption and policy). While more or less aware of this process, there is a limit to their power to negotiate. As stated above, their capacity to challenge the state depended on triangulation of grassroots power and international media. This dependency puts them in a precarious position in terms of how much discursive power they can exercise.

Therefore, political dance is danced not simply in relation to each other, the society, and/or the government, but the imagined international (Western) society that is the consumer of the culture and political arbiter of these agents as well.

In my thesis, I treated the relationship between rave culture in Georgia as the analytical site of global and theoretical discourse formation about political subjectivity and agency. Two important aspects of body politics — sexuality and drug consumption — have determined the organizing logic of these categories at both discourse and practice level. The political agency has been shaped by the ideas of performativity of cultural style, which mostly takes transgression of gender and sexuality in relation to local cultural constraints as its central marker. However, I also demonstrated that while this tendency of defining the political agency in relation to sexuality is pronounced in the narratives of both local and global actors, the other aspect — the relationship with state and police and the respective struggle against harsh drug policy — has been severely underrepresented in the narratives of international media.

During my research, I could not find any examples of big grassroots drug policy movements and realized that the question of drug consumption is not simply downplayed because of the associated stigma, which still makes it a taboo even at discussions about nightlife and rave, but informs about the global imagination about Georgia. The post-Soviet country, labelled as 41 CEU eTD Collection, is in a transitional state towards European modernity. The ideas of linear progress and modernity are present in local discourses, shaped by the country's geopolitical drive to join the European Union. While local discourses embrace or reject certain aspects of modernity, they are still guided by the idea of modernist transformation.

Local actors criticize and challenge international representations and comparisons, seeking space for local interpretation. The local framing of political problems in relation to state and police control of the body exposes the repressive character of the state, reducing its politics to policing and instrumentalizing drugs as a control mechanism.

The political agency in relation to state and police is important to my analysis, but I chose to concentrate on the grassroots movement building through the club, rather than delving into the politics at the party level. This was motivated by my aim to uncover the most important aspect of the rave movement – grassroots mobilization around the culture that made it different from other political movements in Georgia and other rave cultures worldwide.

The limitation of access to events happening behind closed doors of the party was another reason for focusing on the club level. While ravers and movement leaders were open in sharing information on their immediate communication with the police and state, the more specific interests of state actors in drugs and possible connections to cartels, or inner struggles inside the party, require a level of investigation I am not equipped for.

Handling rave as a movement formed by framing the space, style, music, and above all dance as political allowed me to bring forward the relatively rare phenomenon of cultural politics turning into a collective politics. These findings can be instrumentalized for practical purposes of movement building and inform theory on cultural politics.

Unlike my respondents, I look back at those years of struggle with more optimism. The movements have ups and downs, and they inevitably disappear or change form. The political meaning that the rave culture in Georgia generated has helped thousands of victims of drug policy and demonstrated alternative ways of making politics. The possibility of culture to inspire and produce collective politics can be further investigated on a larger geopolitical level and conceptually expand the ways of understanding Europeanization and ideas of modernity beyond cultural politics.


===================================\n\n\n


When Dance Becomes Political: Georgian Rave Culture as the Site of Global and Local Construction of Politics
By Maia Tabidze
Submitted to Central European University Department of Sociology and Social Anthropology
Supervisors: Claudio Sopranzetti, Alexandra Kowalski

Abstract
This thesis investigates the relationship between understandings of politics and rave culture in Georgia at the international and local level. It looks into the social movement that emerged around rave culture in Tbilisi and relates it to the global process of Europeanization of the country. By examining the portrayal of this movement on international media and putting it into conversation with the local actors—ravers and leaders of the movement, the paper argues that the movement was mobilized by intentional framing of technologies of rave culture, namely, cultural style, music, drugs, dance, and club space, as political.

The political agency of ravers emerged in relation to the inhumane drug policy that the Georgian state was actively using as a repressive mechanism at that time. Apart from the collective political mobilization, this thesis investigates individual and performative ways of doing cultural politics. The sexuality and body politics, which largely marked the movement and the culture as queer, defined the political agency of ravers in confrontation to the society. This very struggle between the younger and older generations, so-called liberal and conservative parts of society over the “right to the body,” has largely been articulated by international media.

While these framings are not necessarily wrong, they have omitted and downplayed the importance of the collective struggle against the police state and reduced the agenda of the movement to cultural confrontation between different groups of society. This process has taken place in the global context of what is labeled as “post-Soviet” transformation of the country from “pre-European” to the European state.

On the conceptual level, the construction of modern liberal subjectivity has been exclusively defined in lines with queer modernity and serving to uphold developmentalist vision of Georgia by Western media. While embracing modernity as a reference point, rave culture in Georgia has negotiated and contested the Eurocentric vision of the culture through its struggle for the drug policy. Despite this contestation on the practice and discourse level, the movement has been largely dependent on international media representation.

Whilst confined to one case, the study informs how culture that has mostly been associated with escapism and hedonism can produce political activism. It can further be expanded into covering the wider geopolitical space of post-Socialism as well as in theorizing Europeanization and ideas of modernity beyond cultural politics.

Key Words: politics, rave, social movements, cultural style, Europeanization, globalization, modernity, Liberalism, performativity, body politics, drug policy

Introduction
On 10th of June, 2017, thousands of people marched in the main avenue of Tbilisi to protest the detention of hip-hop artists based on drug chargesi1, marking the largest grassroots demonstration in the history of independent Georgia since the 2003 Rose Revolution. A year later, on May 12, 2018, the second wave of protests hit the streets of Tbilisi in response to the police raids in two famous nightclubs of Tbilisi - Café Gallery and Bassiani. The protest turned into a massive rave in front of the parliament building. The event was referred to as the "rave-volution." Although the protesters were unable to fully achieve their goal of changing drug policy, it is undeniable that between 2015 and 2018, the activists associated with the techno clubs mobilized the largest grassroots movement in the country. The slogan of the resistance was "We Dance Together, We Fight Together," and the techno club 'Bassiani' became the epicenter of protests and international and local media coverage.

Before the demonstrations, international media outlets widely framed clubs in post-Socialist spaces as places of social transformation for the youth. Georgian rave culture was related to the globalizing process of Europeanization in the country. Although not all demonstrators in 2018 were affiliated with the rave culture, the media and public perception presented it as the protest of the rave culture.

The latter became political on two levels: the liberation of the body from oppressive local culture and the state (articulated by international media and the leadership of the club) and the collective mobilization for legislative changes. The connection between these two understandings of cultural politics makes rave culture in Georgia an interesting case to investigate and positions it in the broader context of rave history, on one hand, and the academic debate about the role of cultural politics in political mobilization, on the other.

While rave culture and techno clubs have historically been associated with escapism, hedonism, and nihilism, this paper aims to explain the relationship between understandings of politics and rave on international and local levels. The paper will answer the following questions:

1. How did Georgian ravers acquire political agency in local and global narratives?
2. How did the grassroots mobilization of the movement take place in the club Bassiani?
3. How did the political subjectivities arise in relation to the body politics of the rave culture in Georgia?
4. What do these understandings tell us about global geopolitical imagination about Georgia?

Based on interviews with ravers and international media articles on the movement, the author will look into the collective, individual, and geopolitical dimensions of politics around rave.

In the first chapter, the author will review existing theoretical approaches to the cultural elements of rave and performativity and briefly look into its history and convergence with the human drug policy movement in Georgia. In the second chapter, the author will explain how the technologies of rave culture – music, dance, and drugs – were instrumentalized by the leaders of the movement and how the framing of these very technologies led to political mobilization. In the third chapter, the author will concentrate on two major themes of the culture: drug use and sexuality and explain how political subjectivities came into being in global and local narratives. In the final chapter, the author will argue that the logic behind this subjectivity construction is defined by ideas about modernity and reflects the global imagination about Georgia as a post-Soviet pre-European state that can transform into an European modern state by intelligible queer performance. 1. Politics and Collective Mobilization: The Georgian Case of Rave as Movement
2. Cultural Politics of Rave as Culture: Its Technologies and European Modernity
3. Geopolitics and the Project of European Modernity

1.1. History of Techno Culture and the Georgian Case of Rave Movement

Born in Detroit and raised in Europe, techno music "joined [pre-existing music genre] house in inspiring and invigorating popular music of Europe in a way that was unheard over the past twenty-five years" (Gilbert & Pearson, 1999:74). It originally emerged in the 1980s as a non-commercial working-class subculture but has been largely commercialized and widespread since then. With its stylistic expression in clothes, music, substance abuse, and hedonistic lifestyle, techno rave has millions of young followers.

In this thesis, I use the words "rave movement" and "rave culture" interchangeably. I will refer to it as a movement when speaking about the Georgian case and activities of the rave community beyond club settings. And, I will use "culture" in a more general sense as dance and music culture. This particular understanding of rave as culture is more common in academic texts.

While techno has Western origins, it is by no means "representative for a people or a culture, but rather as an example for the removal of ethnic ties to dance music and for a musical culture delimited by civilization" (Jerrentrup, 2000:71). It has a DIY approach, requiring no knowledge of music instruments or singing — everyone, who has a computer, can learn it. The sonic characteristics of technology-based music and the social character of raves that turned it into a global music and dance culture.

While techno can be heard and listened to anywhere, and raves do not necessarily assume certain kind of music, I will be considering techno raves in association with clubs. Dominance of seeing rave as culture or subculture by no means deprives it of political connotation. Unlike young people who articulate their discontent with political conditions and revolt against traditional political institutions, rave culture "struggles in political sense for their right to their own lives" (Hitzler & Pfadenhauer 2002:90).

Cultural studies saw the 1990s rave events in the UK and the US as DIY self-organized spaces and emphasized on their ability to contest mainstream culture and ideologies (Anderson & Kavanaugh, 2007). With mainstreaming and commercialization of the culture in academia, rave is considered as politically "died out" phenomenon, and drug consumption associated with it is framed as a public health issue, usually assessed through epidemiological quantitative research (Ibid).

Unlike in academia, international media "resurrected" rave as political and is widely constructing a Eurocentric narrative of how post-Socialist capitals are becoming more political through development of rave culture. This reflects the vision of politics that does not necessarily assume the collective or public mobilization, but the exact same definition of politics as "right to one's own life" (Hitzler & Pfadenhauer 2002:90), which according to these articles, the youth of post-Socialist countries are deprived of.

Ironically, in Georgia, techno led to actual collective mobilization and can be considered a socio-political movement. The word "movement" is sometimes used to describe the global character of techno raves (see, for example, Hitzler & Pfadenhauer 2002:90), I refer to techno in Georgia in the more conventional sense as a political movement that seeks "change beyond individual benefit through collective action" (Dzenovska 2018:25). Thus, rave is the movement and the culture at the same time. The two concepts can be understood in the collective and cultural ways of doing politics, respectively. Collective action of techno movement in Georgia was largely framed in relation to the society and the state. Collective action frames are action-oriented sets of beliefs and meanings that inspire and legitimize the activities and campaigns of social movements (Benford, R. & Snow D. 2000:614). The process of attribution is central to diagnosing the problem (e.g. harsh drug policy) and suggesting relevant solutions (e.g. change of legislation). And subsequently create motivational framing - “the rationale for engaging in the action and construction of respective vocabulary” (Benford, R. & Snow D. 2000:617). In the process of meeting these framing tasks, movement engages in intentional as well as unintentional strategizing, discursively assembles the parts of experience, events and information that are relevant to these strategies and faces possible counter action (Benford, R. & Snow D. 2000). These can include a very wide range of actions and practices that social movements (including Georgian one) usually exploit.

While the techno movement in Georgia can be studied from different angles, I will look into how it exploited a variety of conventional and non-conventional political tools and agency of its technologies for political mobilization. I will concentrate on the framing processes that led to grassroot mobilization in clubs and CEU eTD Collection motivated ravers to participate in activism outside of the club. Treating rave as a culture allows me to contrast it with other social movements in Georgia because the affiliation with club makes it different from any other grassroot mobilization or advocacy practices in the country. At the same time, treating how the elements of these culture have been framed as political (mostly by leaders) allows me to contrast the Georgian case with the other rave cultures that never left club settings.

Techno raves have been introduced to Tbilisi when the culture was already largely commercialized and mainstream in Europe. It started as a commercial project in Tbilisi as well. In the 2000s, several electronic music clubs have opened, but the techno boom started in the 2010s, especially with the opening of club Bassiani in Tbilisi. While the movement around techno club has been the biggest in size, this period coincides with the rise of other grassroots social movements (Women’s Movement, Queer Movement, Anti-Occupation Movement). Mass demonstrations, campaigns, cooperation around legislation with the government have been common tools which the civil society has been using, indicating the overall increase in political activism.

The rise of these movements had several reasons — the recent change of government being one of the main ones. Political party Georgian Dream was a coalition of all opposing parties that came to power in 2012. The newly elected government largely promoted itself in contrast to its predecessor’s (“United National Movement”) punitive politics. One of the first things they did after elections was a massive amnesty of prisoners. Georgia had one of the biggest shares of prison population in Europe (Human Rights Watch, 2018). However, random forceful detainments and testing of people for drugs as well as imposing harsh punishment based on drug charges, together with the lack of proper legislative framework to process the drug related cases were still common after amnesty, especially in 2013-2017 (EMC, 2019). Harsh drug policies have not been challenged due to the painful memory of the 1990s. After the wars in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, heroin addiction had become one of the biggest public health issues in the country. No wonder, the fight against crime and drugs was so entwined and encouraged, up until 2014 it had never been a subject of public debate, except for the fragmented demands of legalising Marijuana. Detention of Beka Tsikarishvili on possession of Marijuana led to the first campaign “Beka is not a criminal”, which brought the change in drug CEU eTD Collection legislation, but more importantly, led to the release of hundreds of people and turned into “The White Noise Movement”. The White Noise Movement extended its scope to advocating for more extensive legal changes in harsh drug policy and covered not only Marijuana, but other substances as well. The movement provided help to those being prosecuted for drug charges, to the families of the victims of the policy, and to spread information about one’s rights and possibilities of the grounds of communication with the police. The advocacy and communication with the users and their families was limited to legal help and can be considered as the first steps of movement building. Several NGOs were involved in this process.

With the opening of club Bassiani, the scope and the character of mobilization were extended and moved around the club. From the very start, there was a connection between the techno clubs and the movement due to the club leader's personal involvement in the cause. The association of drugs and clubs made this connection even stronger. Even the first meeting to announce the start of the movement and the results of the campaign “Beka is not a criminal” was held at club Mtkvari. Later, in 2016, the National Public Meeting on Drug Policy at club Bassiani made the movement and the club inseparable. Clubs formed the grassroots power of the movement, while the NGOs took over the legal and institutional aspect of it.

When the clubs got raided in 2018, the rave movement already had very strong support of tens of thousands and connections within the ruling party. The raid was unexpected, because the policy change the movement had been fighting for was already suggested by the Healthcare Committee of the ruling party. The very same day of the raid, around 10000 people came to protest in front of the parliament building in Tbilisi. The demonstration turned into a rave, which was supposed to resume the next day, but was prevented by the small, but extremely aggressive groups of men (including organized alt-right). The minister of internal affairs apologized to the demonstrators, and the police evacuated them by buses. The police did not find any drugs in the club, and Bassiani opened in 2 weeks. A few months later, Marijuana was decriminalized. However, the suggested policy change was never fully implemented, and the movement fell apart.

Neither techno, nor clubbing are inherently social or political. The collective character of the raves does not answer the question of mobilization either, because Georgia is an exception rather than the rule in terms of collective action outside of the club. However, it should be recognized that the club, with its intentions as well as its general organization of the space in a way that people can interact with each other, creates solid grounds for recruitment of at least low-risk activists through communication and group affiliation. The latter refers to the resistance through activities that do not involve physical, emotional, or financial dangers (McAdam, 1986). Due to the brutal drug laws in Georgia, the spaces where drug consumption is prevalent constitute high-risk activities, which might have created grounds for people's openness to participate in other types of low or high-risk resistance. This can be considered as cultural opportunity. Cultural possibilities are factors that "constrain and facilitate movement frames and framing activities" (Benford, R. & Snow D. 2000:629). This will help understand how the movement framed dance and rave as political in relation to existing cultural possibilities.

The relative freedom of expression and demonstration that existed in 2017-2018 also created space for specific forms of activism that grassroots groups widely opted for. This can be described as political opportunities. The degree and extent of political possibility in any society is usually very hard to predicate (Benford, R. & Snow D. 2000:631). However, I will investigate how the leaders of the club assessed political possibilities to further their agenda and faced constraints and counter-action.

Apart from drug policy change, techno aimed for cultural societal transformation as well, expressed in changing attitudes towards drug consumption and sexuality. The two can be described as the right to the body. Clubs have tightly been associated with the queer movement and acted as gay-friendly places since the 2000s. In 2016, Bassiani and affiliated queer activists started organizing queer nights series "Horoom" at the club. In a homophobic country like Georgia, where over 90% of the population explicitly articulates its hatred to LGBTQ+ community (Aghdgomelashvili, 2016), and the freedom of assembly and demonstration for queers is constrained by conservative and church-affiliated groups, such association immediately turned them into a political statement.

At the same time, techno clubs in the city have been positioning themselves as against homophobia, sexism, and for equal rights. In general, Bassiani has been consistently supporting other movements (feminist groups, miners' strike) in their public statements and collaborated for some causes. However, apart from White Noise Movement, these intersections were more fragmented. As for the queer movement, it was largely supported through mainly queer nights, which turned the clubs into spaces of safe socialization for the LGBTQ+ community.

These activities challenged the normative cultural concepts of sexuality within the club, which I refer to individualized or performative understanding of politics, and I will elaborate on later in this chapter. Whether I look at collective or individual ways of doing politics, the process of meaning production in the club is central to my analysis. Therefore, I will explain the agency of dance, music, space, and drugs and their relationship with the raver body and style, that were the pre-requisites of the attribution process.

1.2. The cultural politics of rave as culture and its technologies

When I first started thinking about rave culture, I kept asking myself what made Bassiani so special. With concrete walls and industrial design, the space constitutes a very dark labyrinth where one barely sees anything. The main dancefloor is large and hosts thousands of people every weekend, the small one is much lighter in terms of actual light and music played in it. The dress code is black, the music strictly techno, or industrial and hard techno, sometimes house-techno and at queer parties house (the genre historically associated with queers and women). Fascinating for sure, but the space itself is not even designed in a way to leave much space for communication. But it is not speaking, it is dancing and music that framed rave as political. Therefore, I will elaborate on these aspects of culture in this section. When reflecting on the role of dance, music, space and drugs, treat them as technologies that greatly determined political content and forms of struggle of rave in Georgia. Such approach is inspired by the vision of non-human agency in Actor-Network Theory. The latter aims to understand the interaction between human and non-human world as dialectical. It “claims that we should simply not believe the question of the connections among heterogeneous actors to be closed, that what is usually meant by ‘social’ has probably to do with the reassembling of new types of actors” (Latour 2005:75). Such broadening of social as not limited to human interaction allows seeing the technologies of rave as participants of the social process and explain how they have been charged with meaning. The problem of this approach is that it can easily fall victim to essentializing them and turn their working into self-fulfilling prophecies. Saying that the technologies of rave have agency does not inform about what kind of meaning they will produce. However, they are useful for my inquiry as they created certain cultural possibilities within the rave culture that were intentionally or unintentionally exploited for political purposes.

12 CEU eTD Collection Historically techno music was developed in the harsh socio-economic reality of Detroit. “Techno was not the sonic representation of inequality”, but rather operated in the zone of beat induced pleasure and relief (Gilbert & Pearson 1999:74). This distinguishes the social meaning of techno from other genres like hip-hop that also was born in response to racialized social-economic oppression but articulated it in storytelling manner. Void of verbality techno does not illustrate or narrate. It challenges the humanist notions of “musicality” by not forcing “machine music into shapes and textures” (Gilbert & Pearson 1999:74). In doing so it blurs the inherited sonic distinction between “technology” and “humanity” in music (Ibid). As an electronic dance music techno is literally designed to make you move and synchronize with the music as well as the other bodies in the space (Burger & Toivianen 2018). While the techno by its name refers to technologies, rave is inherently human and collective. Which makes the music and dance site-specific. The space and relevant “vibe” that is generated during the event bears the most importance (Ibid). The design of the techno clubs often repeats the atmosphere of the hollow concrete warehouses that hosted them before. The dance is performed together with the others but not in relation to each other. Dark clubs, consumption of drugs and alcohol, as well as social construction of the space as queer and free from social norms might encourage sexual encounters, but due to its post-humanistic qualities mentioned above techno culture with its gender neutral clothing and dancing styles, and robotic sound creates space “not simply to regress to a moment before the regulating discourses of sexuality,... but to go beyond them into an imagined cyborg future, and “act as the site of a constructible, engineerable, alterable, androgynous corporeality” (Gilbert & Pearson 1999:74-75). With one eye in the future, techno provides possibilities to reconsider gender and sexuality. Its historic association with the marginalized and racialized groups will help me understand the subjectivity formation in line with queer body politics of the movement. Technologies and site-specific embodiment of techno culture does not imply that it will necessarily be free of sexism, racism, and other structures of oppression. For example, the struggle against the discrimination of female DJs is still very real and are often discussed at conferences or public debates in the industry. However, even in its construction of the role of DJ, techno leaves a lot of space to charge with meaning in relation to socio-cultural context. For example, the DJs are not usually the reason for people going to clubs (Biehl 13 CEU eTD Collection Missal 2019). Together with the music and space, the drugs also constitute a very important part of the culture. In the 1980s, a certain set of drugs like MDMA, Ecstasy, and Speed were introduced to the rave scene. These substances work on the human brain on a chemical level, which is usually experienced by users as feeling energetic, empathetic, euphoric, and happy (Kalant 2001). While alcohol and different kinds of so-called club drugs, together with consumer habits, definitely play a role in creating the specific "vibe" in the club, I would rather understand substance abuse as another set of technologies that not only became political but the main reason for organizing.

The historic and cultural implications of drugs give insights into their role in political agency. Certain set of substances like cocaine and cannabis became illegal in Europe and America not based on public health concerns, "but because they were associated with the cultures of non-white immigrant communities and of groups of young women enjoying unprecedented (for at least a century) degrees of social, economic, and sexual independence" (Gilbert & Pearson 1999:155). While humans have been engaging with various kinds of substances in different ways, some became illegal in specific historical moments of Europe, which defined their social meaning in relation to different kinds of authority that sought to regulate the bodies of the marginalized (Ibid). In the context of Georgia, it is primarily state regulation of the drug use that relates to the struggle of ravers; therefore, it will be treated as the politically charged issue around which the movement was built. The negative attitude of society towards drugs can be described as cultural constrain that acted against the movement.

It should be noted that the social organization of consumption also generates political meanings and subjectivities. Substance abuse at techno clubs is often referred to as "recreational" and relate to the abovementioned function of release and pleasure. The reason behind it is the overall idea of pleasure and release mentioned above. The techno culture in this sense transgresses the ideas of capitalist productivity and rationality with its dissociation of time, accent on pleasure, and feeling (Gilbert & Pearson 1999). However, the transgression is individual and does not imply collective mobilization at all. Quite the contrary, it encourages unapologetic escapism (Ibid). Paul Willis (2014) to some extent articulates the same criticism when speaking about Hippies and Punks. He claims that these subcultures only challenged the systems of oppression through symbolic solutions and never really mobilized against the underlying structural inequality (Willis 2014). But he sees the transformative capacity of cultural "politics through transformation of objects, style, <14 CEU eTD Collection> thought and consciousness" (p. 224). Willis (2014) understands politics as a dynamic ideology that catches its momentum in everydayness. Put this way, the portrayal of techno in relation to the local norms (or what is imagined as local mainstream) does constitute politics through everyday performative expression of that ideology. In the next section, I will elaborate how the ideology can be articulated not only through verbal, but also through performative embodiment that places the body as the central site of meaning inscription (Biehl-Missal 2019:19).

1.3. Cultural style, performative capacity of rave culture and modernity
"Freedom is not a potential that waits for its exercise. It comes into being through its exercise" (Butler, 2009, p. vi-vii). This very notion of freedom as exercise has been central in constructing the rave as a political project and ravers as political subjects. The frequent use of the word "Freedom" and the visually charged demonstrations of ravers make liberty something one has to "embody" - exercise corporeally. For example, freedom in this context is embodied through dance, consumption of drugs, relevant (usually gender-neutral) clothes that serve as cultural markers of these activities.

The meaning of these cultural markers is acquired contextually and reproduces cultural styles. The cultural style refers to "practices that signify differences between social categories" (Ferguson 1999:97), eg. In this case, raver/liberal/young/European vs. Old/conservative/traditional/pro-Russian are social categories that are produced and are recognizable as relevant cultural styles. I intentionally avoid referring to ravers as a subcultural style, because for it to act like one it has to challenge the "normalized" process of signification (Hebridge 1991). Such a vision would limit it to only local understanding of rave as resistance to the locally produced meaning of cultural styles, while globally rave is not necessarily transgressing the mainstream process of signification. Quite the contrary, as mentioned above, it has penetrated numerous spaces as the mainstream culture. However, as much as it constitutes a global cultural style, it varies from place to place. The reason for this is its performative capacity of the style (Ferguson, 1999:98).

In this sense, "performativity suggests a dramatic and contingent construction of meaning" (Butler, 1990:139). This definition of performativity was originally developed by Judith Butler regarding social construction of sex in "Gender Trouble," however, I would like to use it in a broader sense and apply it to understandings of subjectivity formation, particularly, production of ravers as political subjects. The cultural style of ravers is very tightly connected to body politics, which in turn involves gender and one's right to the body (in terms of drug consumption, dance), but by no means is limited to it. Following Butler's logic (1990), subjectivities are not merely expressed in performance but are rather constructed through the very performance. In order to be recognized as political actors, the ravers have to be able to understand the repertoire of what they see as politics and enact it in a certain way. If the struggle for freedom over the body is perceived as the political agency, the relevant performance should be in place. However, this is not a mechanical process in which one gets instructions and follows the script, but a creative production (Ferguson, 1999). Therefore, it cannot be reduced to a simple attribution of the rave as a political project with its toolkit of European narratives, but rather a complex process of creating Liberal subjectivities at the crossroads of the global and local. The core idea of Liberalism in this context can be defined as its belief in the natural freedom of the individual, which everyone has to aspire to (Jahn, 2012). “In line with this assumption, the demise of the Soviet Union, understood as a major barrier to the realization of this natural development, led to the expectation that democracy and freedom could now (be) spread unimpeded across the world” (Jahn, 2012:151). While these visions of modernity have largely been challenged, and the existence of multiple rather than one West-oriented understandings have been suggested. “We live in an age of modernity where proposals and counterproposals all use certain key, modern principles as reference points” (Furie, 2010). It means that different actors might be using various access points and categorizing logic for defining modernity. Even when explicitly they operate in the same framework of e.g. European modernity, the latter does not act like a unifying coherent discourse. I will argue that this relationship between local and global forces is more complicated than a simple imposition of meaning by the latter to the first. However, the context in which the ideas about modernity emerge plays an important role.

1.4. Geopolitics and respective project of European modernity

Since independence, Georgian cultural and political policies have been explicitly Europe-oriented. The interest in techno culture by international media, as well as the number of international articles and media pieces promoting Georgia as a party/tourist destination, has been a parallel trend as well. Especially after the 2003 Rose Revolution, the process of Europeanization and modernization was celebrated in multiple ways, starting with reforms, policy changes, and campaigns, and ending with such everyday symbols as flags of the European Union [16 CEU eTD Collection] above every governmental building in the country.

One of the important cultural factors has been the tendency to see Europeanization in connection to human rights protection, especially of queers. The reasons for the tendency to see Europe as the propagator of queer rights in Georgia is not arbitrary and has been supported by relevant reforms like the introduction of anti-discrimination legislation as a pre-requisite of the European Association Agreement. I will argue that when applied to Georgia, the idea of European modernity takes sexual transformation as its main accessing point. Puar (2013) calls this strategy homonationalism. The term originally was developed to describe the strategy of sexual “othering” of the racialized/ethnicized groups to serve the nationalistic and imperial interests of the USA (Puar 2013:4). For example, justifying violence and war in Iraq by producing the latter as homophobic and therefore dangerous and backward-minded (Ibid). Unlike the example provided by Puar, Georgia is not produced as non-European and “other” who needs to be targeted with force and excluded, but rather I will argue that Georgia is constructed as pre-European, pre-liberal country that has to politically (through reforms) and culturally (performance) meet certain criteria to become part of European culture through embracing this very queer modernity (Puar, 2013). Thus, the rave culture became a political project not only through collective or individual resistance, but as the one with specific Europe-oriented agenda. By contrast, the drugs have never really been a part of the Western modernist project. Quite the opposite, European modernity was "puritan" in relation to drugs due to the historical associations to minorities outlined above (Gilbert & Pearson 1999). In the case of Georgia, the police did not target minorities or only disadvantaged groups of users. The "zero tolerance" and "war on drugs" more typical to the US context (Wacquant 2012) were implemented and "sold" as European/modernist projects. The massive character of incarceration of the male population was quite arbitrary, and the police power promoted through several reality shows and live arrests of criminals. In this thesis, I will argue that the main demand of the rave movement was not limited to the freedom and the right to the body but exposed the repressive mechanisms of the state. The political agency of ravers emerged in the political context that placed their agenda in opposition to such "puritan" anti-drug modernity. The suggested version of modernity was largely contested and manipulated, taking some aspects (queer modernity) while rejecting the other (puritan modernity). Therefore, the relationship between the global (Western) and local (Georgian) should be understood in terms of "glocalization" - the process of merging the global 17 CEU eTD Collection products/ideas with the local and forming something new (Appadurai,1990). The interrelated ideas of Europeanness, freedom, and politics do not move only one way (from global to local), but merge and can be locally challenged as well. The possibility to transgress is related to political agency and largely defined as such. Butler (1990) sees the capacity to challenge the binary system of gender, through the subversion of this performance. The raver culture challenges the mainstream cultural styles of body and corporeality at the local level through drug consumption and gender expression, which is recognized as resistance both locally and globally. At the same time, it is complicit in terms of the ideas of what a proper liberal European modern subject means and should act like. Thus, resistance cannot be equated to political agency as it is relative to different forces. Therefore, I treat political agency not in absolute terms equated to resistance, but in relation to existing/created cultural and political opportunities and meaning production processes. Framing political agency proactively for something (queer liberation and drug policy) and reactively (against or in accordance to state and police, society and European ideas of modernity) will act like access points for my research. To cover the respective global and local processes of such attribution, I analyzed international media articles and conducted in-depth interviews with ravers. I will elaborate on my choice of units of analysis in the following section.

1.5. Methodology

The division of local and global understandings of politics in relation to techno is quite arbitrary, because in both cases I use the same access points to them. However, in my treatment of the data as well as positionality towards the units of analysis, I have been an outsider towards the media articles and an insider towards the ravers and leaders of the movement. The first required much less ethical considerations than the second one, as I had to negotiate my role as an anthropologist and activist (sometimes even friend). Instead of imposing meaning of what is rave, politics, and resistance, they were generated through 13 in-depth interviews with the ravers and leaders of the movement. 

Due to the pandemic, the interviews were conducted online, which affected the dynamics of the interviews, making them formal and uncomfortable. However, the respondents had more time and were more keen to talk. For reasons of confidentiality, their quotes will be presented with letters instead of their names. The respondents were far from being passive subjects who enacted upon ideas they 18 CEU eTD Collection had been introduced with, but rather produced and reproduced meaning in their own terms (Blaike, 2004). Their relationship with media articles and international representation was very much based on knowledge of the latter and intuitive, sometimes (in case of leaders) even strategic and academic approach to the subject.

The sampling of the leaders was intentional — people responsible for different aspects of the movement — club, queer parties, drug policy, media communication, etc. Such stratification allowed me to get multiple entry points into the structure of the movement and processes of different kinds of mobilization, but all of them somehow affiliated with the club. The club Bassiani was chosen since it contributed to the movement building and cultural production of rave most. All the leaders had been activists before starting the movement, were educated, well-traveled, and had some background in the creative industry and NGO sector as well. The respondents had discussed these topics in different formats before (interviews, international conferences) and gave very extensive information to each question, often using academic terms themselves.

The interviews with the ravers were based on more random sampling, and respondents were recruited through raver community groups on Facebook. Their age ranged from 18 to 35 and came from diverse ranges of socio-economic backgrounds. Most of them were students, worked at service jobs like bartenders, or were small entrepreneurs themselves. Some were into rave culture for years, while others had started it recently. In terms of political activism, except for two of them, had participated in some kind of activism — demonstrations, mainly, but only one had been very active, and the rest had participated only in the events associated with the rave movement or queer events.

A lot of people expressed their desire to be interviewed and spoke about their attitudes in very extensive manner, most of them knew about the history of techno and dance in general, and quite good knowledge of drug legislation as well. Another type of data source was popular media articles. The majority of these articles appeared in magazines about culture, art, and music, but I came across several big international outlets that made story-pieces on the topic. In this thesis, I thoroughly investigated 4 articles specifically (2 in The Guardian, 2 in The New York Times, and 2 in The Economist) about Georgia. I intentionally excluded magazines specifying in culture, art, music, because their perceived audience is supposed to be more familiar with the rave in Georgia and have a more niche audience. Since they are specialized in art and culture, they bring forth the political, creative, and consumerist components of rave to promote it as well. However, these articles did not offer any significantly different approaches to the topic either. By contrast, the magazines I concentrate on have a lot more readers and much more ambitious goals. For example, in the mission statement of The New York Times, they state: “We seek the truth and help people understand the world”. Similarity, The Economist, while specialized in writing about “business and world affairs”, sets their aims as the “advocacy of economic and political freedom around the world”. The Guardian goes further by not simply setting the mission, but their audience as “a global, progressive audience”. These outlets can definitely be described as liberal media in a sense of how much emphasis they place even in their mission statements on “enlightening” the world, the progressive, free audience. The key concepts that often repeat themselves in relation to rave culture as well.

Obviously, there are articles that produce a lot more extensive in-depth investigations and paint a more complex picture of political life and rave culture in Georgia. However, I concentrated on the tendencies that dominate international media rather than more marginal pieces. Overall, the articles provide quite a uniform vision of the techno culture and generally society in Georgia as well as Post-Soviet space.

The dichotomies generated by these articles would make Levi-Strauss jealous about. Therefore, exactly the division principles of these categories were assessed through discourse analysis. In the interviews, subjectivity formation and framing logic of arguments were analyzed with the same method, and both were coded in Atlas software. The analysis is limited to only a certain part of the community and the opinions cannot be generalized over the whole movement. However, certain dominant trends and narratives have been easily identified.

The concepts that had emerged in the interviews and ones from the international media articles have been put into conversation with each other. Codes generated by two sets of data have also been very explicitly similar. My position as an activist and part of the rave community gave me the access, but also challenged me as a researcher and interviewer.

On one hand, I had the trust of the community, but their familiarity with my views and ideological positions might have affected the interviews with leaders. Over the last 5 years I have been friends with some of them, co-organized demonstrations and talks, but also had conflicts over the privacy issues at Horoom events. This is why they often became protective when I asked about the political capacity of rave and often emphasized their openness to criticism.

On the other hand, since the grassroot movements are in decline in Georgia and the government has become a lot more violent in its treatment of political movements, the relatively insider positionality allowed me to get the information that they would not share with the outsiders. Those who did not know about my views on drugs and sexuality, were more prone to explain the situation at clubs as harmless and criticized the movement less.

While the interviews revolved around the term “politics” it was often implicit and required follow-up questions with ravers. For analytical purposes, I divided the discourses about politics, freedom, and culture in 3 categories:

1. the politization of the culture and respective movement building, which mostly deals with the interviews with the movement leaders;
2. The subjectivities that arise in relation to drugs and sexuality and define political agency of ravers. This part is the dialogue between the articles and interviews;
3. the geopolitical dimension of the techno and politics that is mostly based on the international media articles and generates the understandings of political agency in relation to Europeanization at the country level. The analysis will be divided into three respective chapters.

Chapter 2: Producing Political Meaning in the Club
"Music, dance, and drugs — when you put such potent substances together, a lot can happen." (Interview with B.)

On how exactly the leaders put these "substances" together to give them political meaning, leaders suggest "dancefloor activism," which, despite the interviewee's frequent exposure to clubs in Tbilisi, was still hard to understand. During the interviews, they elaborated on it and drew a picture of very intentional meaning-production processes, which will be explained in this chapter.

In its most literal sense, "dancefloor activism" refers to the communication, agitation, and socialization in the club during techno events. Clubs like "Cafe Gallery" and "Mtkvari" in Georgia had already been associated with queers and drug users before Bassiani. However, unlike the latter, they did not articulate an explicit political stance and agenda. Bassiani positioned itself as a safe space for marginalized groups of society, primarily queers and drug users, and to some extent, women.

"Society thinks we are faggots and junkies. Actually, they are right," says one of the founders of queer nights Horoom. Bringing together queers and users, and at the same time embracing these identities, framed ravers in relation to sexuality and drug politics from the very start. On the other hand, the society implicitly became the target of their activities and discourses. Their actions went beyond these formal activities like demonstrations, queer events, and online activism. Rather, it exploited the technologies of rave culture to its benefit.

The framing in the narrative of all leaders is largely defined as "meaning production," which exploited drugs, music, dance, and space to serve a bigger agenda of transformation. The leaders speak of these technologies of rave culture as a vessel that you can "fill in" with meaning.

The first step that distinguished rave clubs in Tbilisi from other famous clubs of the world was their relatively open-door policy. While the clubs often position as safe spaces for queers, women, and other oppressed groups, to make this space actually safe, clubs in Tbilisi did not impose strict face control. It was not "homophobes out," but rather the agenda was to let everyone in and change them.

"All marginalized groups started to unite at the dancefloor. People from suburbs and gettos, men with patriarchal mindset, all were in. But the difference was that we [queers] were setting rules. And these rules were based on care and respect culture. They were pre-set by us as a way of collective survival and organizing. This culture became habitual and naturally spread outside of the club setting." - says G., co-founder of the queer Horoom nights. The inclusion and transformation of different groups of society rather than exclusion of those became the main organizing principle. It is the behavior, the cultural style reflected in the ways "people relate to each other" (both ravers and leaders actively use this phrase) that had to be changed through active communication.

As claimed by ravers, the Tbilisi dancefloor really attracted people of different social groups among young people, which was also reflected in the interviews. However, the ticket in big clubs like Bassiani or Khidi usually costs at least 6 Euros, which is not necessarily affordable for everyone. While all respondents speak about the problem of economic inequality in the country, the fact that the club is the commerce and automatically leaves certain groups outside has largely been ignored. Although I still cannot say if the rave was an exclusively middle-class activity or not, it definitely was dominated by certain types of people: those who could afford the ticket or had social contacts to get invitations and who were let in by face-control. The people coming to the club were imagined as potential activists and targets to transform. The leaders frequently used words like “fighters” and “allies” in relation to clubgoers. However, both ravers and leaders admit that there was a limit to inclusivity. The face control at the club had to ensure that no one got hurt, harassed, or abused in the club. This is why queer parties had a very strict verification process to get in.

The ravers complain that the word “raver” has become very mainstream, and people who “do not understand the values of the culture and are homophobes” still subscribe to it (Interviews with L. and T.). Or “people go just to do drugs in the club” (Interview with the leader N.). This illustrates the conflicting aims of the rave as a culture that, to some extent, has to differentiate itself from the mainstream and maintain certain exclusivity (Jerrentrup 2000) and the aims of the rave as a movement to turn people into low or high risk activists (McAdam 1986). The club as a business and rave as culture with its values and ambition to differentiate itself clashes with the idea of unity and expansion that social movement aims for.

The relationship with the police decided this problem for the benefit of political movement building and mainstreaming and turned the culture into a political tool for achieving the goal. The conflict never disappeared, though. The connection between the drug policing and relevant political resistance to it derived from the nature of the repressive mechanism that started to target clubgoers (usually men) around clubs. “When the clubbing booms in Georgia since 2014 the police did not need to run after people on the streets. They knew that a lot of drug users gather here. The police would follow people going in or out of the club and arrest them. The area around the club became a convenient hunting ground. On the other hand, it became a convenient place for communication and indoctrination of victims of drug policy and general public as well. This movement was the result of synergy between clubs and activists.”

However, the latter went way beyond that. Even much earlier before the rave demonstration of 2018, the term “struggle” was often used in reference to the clubbing nights. For a long time as a clubgoer and supporter of the movement, I thought it referred to the kind of resistance that is drug consumption or transgression of gender roles, and/or to the transformation of people’s attitudes I assumed was happening on the dancefloor. As an ethnographer, I realized that it implied actual, aggressive (yet rarely physical) confrontation with the police.

“We barely managed to dance during raves. At every event, someone would get arrested, and we [activists and lawyers] would run to the police stations and drug testing centers. In the end, the policemen recognized us immediately and were sick of us and would let people go just not to deal with us.” — recalls one of the leaders B. P. describes it as a seek and rescue game. He says: “We would abandon the dancefloor, go rescue the arrested person from the police, and bring them back to the club to dance. This is what “We Dance Together, We Fight Together” stands for. This was turning the event into a catharsis, as P. explains the political meaning of dance. The catharsis here stands for the pleasure of victory rather than a hedonistic or escapist act of forgetting. However, it is not the only kind of pleasure experienced in the club. "unwinding", "leaving the problems behind", "self-reflecting", "zoning out" have been the terms often used by ravers to describe their conditions in the club. Only the most politically active ravers were involved in this part of dancefloor activism, but all of them attribute to dance, music, and drugs more complex qualities than recreation and hedonism.

The problem of police brutality and injustice is usually mentioned to explain the need for and pleasure from such recreation. The relationship with the police was prerequisite and mediatory with the relation to state. With the growth of the movement, as leader B. puts it, their strategies shifted from "police to politics" he says: "We started learning international practices. Our rhetoric also shifted from exposing repression to healthcare politics. Came up with the legislative project and suggested to the government. However, the main power still lay within the movement. They [government] saw it as social capital."

According to the leaders, the politicians called the project on legislative changes as "Bassiani project". Unlike many other civil society initiatives, the state started to take them seriously because of the grassroots power they had demonstrated during protests and in confrontation with the police. The shift from police to politics is framed as the transition from individual solutions (like rescuing the arrested people) to collective and institutional ones (like legislative change). This framing is reflected in the slogans of the movement as well: "Care instead of punishment."

Learning international practices to find a diagnostic frame implies the evidence-based political solution to the problem. Hence, the change expected is not simply at the cultural level, or address the problem of police brutality, or denounces state's regulatory politics, but expects the politics to be democratic and social.

Nevertheless, the right to the body is implicitly present in all interviews, mostly in relation to sexuality. It did not matter if respondents identified themselves as queer or not, all of them defined club as the space of interactions that they otherwise did not have, mostly in relation to gender and sexual minorities. The place was claimed to make people more tolerant and friendly because of its diversity. The latter often described in relation to people's looks and gender expression.

Drugs are ascribed an important role in this transformation. All respondents agree that drugs "amplify" the experience of enjoyment and pleasure, but also make people more "empathetic". At the same time, they differentiate between the "workings" of different drugs. "When MDMA was popular and available in Tbilisi we witnessed the best times of rave. This drug is most empathetic", - explains one of the leaders of the movement. By empathetic he means making one empathetic. This word repeats itself or the same concept is articulated as "solidarity", "understanding others", "openness to others", "tolerance", "help", "care"'. Club drugs are also believed to have certain qualities that make one more motivated and hence participate in activities outside of the club. One of the leaders B. The contrasts of club drugs with the previous generation's choices, such as heroin and morphine, are described as "uppers" and less addictive. The drugs are seen as having power but are not indispensable to the culture. The crucial aspect is the mobilization, which will be elaborated on in the next chapter.

Music is the uniting factor of the community, and it is seen as less political and more impactful on understanding the world. The quote, "The music was becoming better in the country and I was growing with it, with better music the relationships between people became better as well," exemplifies this belief.

Dance is the central term and symbol of resistance, which was used for peaceful protest. The accentuation of the body, specifically the dancing body, is related to freedom. The name of the queer event series, "Horoom," is a traditional Georgian military dance, and "Bassiani" refers to a battle in medieval Georgia. These associations integrate local cultural elements and capitalize on existing cultural possibilities.

The dancing body is considered a "weapon" of struggle, and its political capacity is amplified through empathy and unity with other dancing bodies. The absence of text in dance allows for a peaceful protest that does not hurt others. The quote, "Techno can easily be charged with meaning because of no lyrics," highlights the importance of dance in the culture. However, dance and music on their own are not considered political. Almost all respondents agree that for it to be political, it has to carry a political message and address the respective authority, namely the state and society. The leaders repeatedly stress that the policy papers suggested by other movements in Georgia usually would end up on some politician's shelves and forgotten. Human rights frames exploited by these entities (the leaders often refer to worker's movement, feminist, and queer movements) have been criticized because of their reliance on conventional ways of communication.

However, all leaders and some of the ravers think that rave as a movement has exhausted its possibilities. They think new ways of activism need to be invented. On how to proceed, most of them do not have the answer. In their assessment of achievements, leaders define unity and grassroots power against the state as the most important one. While the policy change did not happen in its suggested form, the policing and forceful testing on drugs decreased. The implementation of the anti-drug laws also involves less incarceration and usually results in probation and deals with prosecutors. Decriminalization of marijuana consumption also resulted in much less arrests. These observations are voiced by all respondents. Such framing mostly resonates with the framing of the problem as political and finding collective solutions to it.

The second and most considerable achievement, according to respondents, is the unity and increased awareness, which they report as transforming subjects and their relation to each other and their body. "People [attending raves] changing overnight" (usually explicitly or implicitly implying changing their attitudes towards queers) has been repeated a number of times by most respondents, especially leaders. This change and idea of transformation go deeper into the subjectivity construction, which is not limited to the raver, but targets the whole society. This discourse is articulated by international media and to an extent by respondents as well and will be discussed in the next chapter.

Chapter 3. Producing Political Subjectivities
3.1. "Junkies"

My interest in rave culture was originally triggered by the articles and documentaries about the techno scene that I was repeatedly confronted with. As a frequent club goer and supporter of the movement, I found these articles odd or even misleading. When comparing them to the narratives of the ravers, it became obvious that these articles also downplayed the role of drug policy and the struggle against the state and the police. My interviews with Georgian clubgoers, especially with the leaders, suggested that respondents were more than familiar with international media representation and referred to it before I even asked a question. Overall, the understanding of political struggle as well as culture was explicitly reflected on and criticized by respondents. In this section, I will discuss how the political subjectivities are fashioned in relation to drugs and sexuality in/through the narratives of local and international actors and explain how political agency is inscribed in these subjectivities through relevant performance and representation.

The common narrative that brings together the articles and differentiates them from the ones written about the Western techno-scene represents Georgian (as well as post-soviet) society in dichotomous terms: it appears divided along "progressive" and "‘liberal/social liberal" lines. The Economist, for example, states that “Tbilisi is getting hip, and traditionalists feel threatened” (17 May, 2018), and the Guardian that “‘in just a few years, Bassiani has become a catalyst for progressive politics in a conservative society” (January 22, 2019). The cleavage runs sometimes along generational lines, defining the younger segment as sexually liberated (accepting especially of homosexuality), westernized, future-oriented, in favor of freedom of expression and lifestyle. This segment is contrasted with a conservative, prudent, traditional side of society.

“The decriminalization of cannabis” says for example The Guardian, “has been a confusing development in the standoff between Georgia’s young, progressive generation and their conservative elders” (Guardian, January 22, 2019). Apart from the facts that these articles contain several inaccuracies and omissions, the language about techno culture in Georgia, and more generally about Post-Soviet countries, is strikingly similar to each other. Articles often come with photos of dark club pictures and demonstrations that often include young queer-looking people in leather, latex, or cross-dressing attires. Headlines and titles of the articles as well as picture already refer to the confrontation within the society, hint to the Soviet past and/or define party as political. These include for example: “Bassiani: the Tbilisi techno mecca shaking off post-Soviet repression” (Guardian January 22, 2019), “At This Techno Club, the Party Is Political” (New York Times, May 29, 2019), “Dance revolution: Young Georgians fight for their right to party” (Economist, 17 May,2018).

The raids on clubs, the reasons for the mobilization during the large rally of May 12th, 2018, and the roots of the movement in club and techno culture surfaces/may be alluded to here and 28 CEU eTD Collection there, but are never fully developed into a coherent conclusion of what exactly the protest were about. The only exception is a New York Times article (May 29, 2019) which dedicates a few sentences to the history of clubbing politics. Everywhere else, the aim of the struggle is defined vaguely as some “right to party” (The Economist, 17 May, 2018), and in all outlets the conflict is subsumed under some general confrontation between liberal and conservative forces, Western and Post-Soviet ways of living and relevant younger and older generations.

Police brutality and the organized politics of the party in power are rarely connected to the broader context of repressive drug policy and confrontation with the state. Most often, descriptions totally exclude context and present detention and raids as mere facts, as in in curt exposé in the Guardian: “In May last year, armed police raided Bassiani and made eight drug-related arrests; in response, thousands of clubbers protested outside parliament, sparking a dramatic weekend of counter-demonstrations and riot police intervention” (January 22, 2019).

By contrast, the symbolic epicenter of the struggle and major disappointment in ravers’ eyes is state policy and police. Respondents all agree about the brutal character of the drug policy, and reflect a profound understanding of how it is politically instrumentalized in order to control the population. As one respondent S. puts it: “The government needs to manipulate people. The terror gives politicians power”. Although ravers' attitudes towards drug consumption may oscillate dramatically between adamant refusal of consumption to a sincere embrace of drug culture, actors all support the view that the only adequate state response to drug problems is through care, prevention and information rather than punishment. They all have been victims of drug policy to some degree, either personally or through friends or family. Male respondents are likely to have been stopped by the police around the club, sometimes incarcerated for years for being caught with small amounts of MDMA, Ecstasy or any other substance. Many of them were on probation at the time I interviewed them. In other words, all have a pretty much direct experience of being treated like “criminals that need to be punished together with the murderers and rapists” — in the terms of a respondent once arrested for possessing two pills of Ecstasy. Such vision questions the state authority which uses police violence as control mechanism. The police violence is also often described as “cynical” (Interview with B.) and “humiliating” (Interview with A.). One of the ravers tells a story of how police strip-searched him in the street near club - “I was standing there in my underwear in the middle of the street.” The police brutality is not perceived unfair not only because of the positive meaning ascribed to drugs, but due to the ways it was done. Respondents implicitly and explicitly see it as the demonstration of power towards its population. The slogans of the movement “The War with the People Has to End” and “Violent Drug Policy Has to End” refers to this framing. Resistance is shaped as the bottom-up confrontation, while rave culture representative of the people. At the same time, the latter does not attempt to break in through to the top, but rather peacefully co-exist. Party politics is very sharply contrasted with the grassroots politics, the first one considered to be corrupt and something to be avoided. “I am politically active and protest everything I consider to be unfair, however, until it becomes party politics.” - says the respondent. This sentiment is very common among ravers who still are cautious when using the word “politics” and try to contrast the “honesty” of their protests with the formal politics. The respondents are not afraid of the word and use in variety of context to describe their everyday practices. The idea that the latter affects public and what is perceived as formal politics and the other way around is quite explicitly articulated by respondents. “Everything is more or less political. It has even become a problem. The dance is political if it sends a message to the society and state, if the action bears meaning beyond entertainment. For example, having a different space at the dancefloor, especially queer nights, is already a statement.”- says one of the respondents. The vision of the state and society as recipients of the message is common response to the question what makes rave political. Unlike articles, changing people’s attitudes to drug users and depriving the state of punitive drug mechanisms is the central agenda of the movement. It does not exist on its own in the confines of the clubs either. “Dance cannot be political in the club if it does not leave its settings. Art cannot be political if it is locked up and does not reach people.” - says another respondent. The political agency is largely framed as the capacity of “demonstration” be it protest in the streets or confrontation of the immediate communities like family and friends, or through style expressed in clothes and behavior. Thus, politics is not limited to the space and subjectivity, but ideology and ways of communicating it, which as mentioned above, does not have to be verbal. The argument against policing is not limited to the ideas about justice and right to the body. It is seen as a cause of the lack of information and access to drugs that eventually leads to higher fatality and incarceration rates. "When drugs are unavailable, you seek for something easy to get and might end up using something really bad for your health." - explains one respondent, referring to drug-related deaths in 2018. Such arguments [against repressive drug policy] are often voiced by respondents and are grounded in the public health needs. When ravers call themselves users, they not only refer to the consumption of drugs but also their drive to deprive the state of its control mechanism and assert power over their bodies. However, the latter is not seen as individualized and private but as a public entity that might need care and management from the state.

If the struggle against drug policy is so central to rave politics, why does the international media so eagerly omit the confrontation between the state and rave culture? It might have several reasons. However, as mentioned above, the grassroot movements against drug policy have never reached such huge support in the history. While there is a lot of exchange between clubs throughout the world, as the leaders of the movement say, "even in Europe they are trying to avoid speaking about drugs. The drugs are still stigmatized topic." In its quest to paint a positive picture of ravers, international media might intentionally be avoiding such a frame.

Subjectivities are strictly divided into dichotomous categories that fill in the pre-existing analytical categories of West and Post-Soviet, liberal and conservative, young and old. The subjects are deprived of the capacity to challenge these dichotomies or ascribe different meanings to them; there is nothing in-between. The society consists of these crystalized subjectivities that operate solely in the domain of culture, hence, the underrepresentation of the state and institutions like police that uphold the system of oppression.

Nevertheless, despite such under and sometimes misrepresentation the content of the struggle, political agency is by no means denied to the rave culture. Quite the opposite, the latter is assumed to embody a bigger, more fundamental and geopolitical struggle of liberation and modernization. And the most fundamental criteria of determining their capacity to do so is framed as transgression of the sexual and gender norms. In the following section, I will explain how queerness becomes the marker of political agency in the narrative of international media and relate it to the ways rave culture is gendered at local level.

3.2. "Faggots"
The articles in question do not always explicitly explain the reasons of the rave struggle, but in all of them, clubs are largely portrayed in opposition to the "traditional" ways of living (like extended families, prevalence of the Orthodox Christianity) as "rare space for sexual encounters" (Guardian, January 22, 2019), "rare islands of free expression" (New York Times, May 29, 2019). The control mechanisms of the club against the imagined danger from conservatives is also directly connected to the perceived need to create a safe space for queers in the club. Sexuality acts as a logic of both categorizing the society in abovementioned binaries and at the same time acquiring political agency. "After a police raid prompted mass protests, the defiantly queer nightclub became an emblem of a new, progressive Georgia. Its founders explain how they're standing up to conservatism." (Guardian, January 22, 2019) While queerness is not the reason for the police raid in question, as a conservative act is constructed against progressive and queer culture. The same is true for the headlines and titles that never really mention the state or police, and frame the struggle in cultural terms. The culture becomes political through queer performance against the conservative part of society. This vision is not necessarily contradictory, neither to the local discourses about politics and rave, nor to its perception by different groups of society and government.

The comments of local alt-right also very much resonate with these ideas: "Bassiani and Gallery are gay clubs, where drugs are being sold and the youth are recruited in illegal activities," quotes the Guardian (January 22, 2019). Dimitri Lortkipanidze, a leader of Georgian March, an ultranationalist group. Similarly, at the demonstration of 2018, the prime minister apologized to the ravers who were besieged by alt-right groups for the raid and promised that the police "would protect the safety and health of each citizen of Georgia, despite their [sexual] orientation, religion, and age"!

The existence of queer parties—as the only safe place for many "closeted queers who have never been out, and suffered a lot" (interview with the founder of Horoom G.)—is one of the important ways the club is constructed as a political space. Together with being a user, queerness and queer support are openly stated as one of the most critical components of freedom. In interviews, the struggle for freedom that involved the liberation of the clubgoers and the Georgian society goes hand in hand with transgressing gender and sexual roles. Homophobia and patriarchy are also mentioned as the major problems of society that the rave culture opposes.

While in articles, freedom is almost exclusively connected to queer sexuality and the right to party, the ravers paint a more complex picture of how the raver subjectivity is gendered and sexualized. To begin with, clubgoers describe "freedom" in the club as "liberty to be whoever you want" or "who you want to be at that moment" (interviews with ravers). One interesting point is that, more often than not, neither "freedom" nor "being" is defined in essentialist terms as something one discovers or expresses, but as quite fluid, not fixed in time, and largely related to solidarity, sexual/gender non-conformity, and drug use.

The sexual liberation is also not simply related to sex and homosexuality, but rather to the transgression of toxic masculinity. The transformation of "babuliki" (slang for the urban, masculine, macho type man in Georgian) and the absence of fights at the club are referred to by almost every respondent as an important achievement of the club. The transformation is observed not only through personal interaction but also the respective performance. For example, one of the leaders, G, quoted his friend: "When, as a man in Georgia, you get beaten up because of long hair and ear-piercing, you are queer; what the hell else are you then?" And added: "Queerness means different things in different cultures. Sometimes the earring can be a statement". Transgression is also connected with nudity, wearing drag or extravagant clothes, but above all the relationships produced by the culture. To the question "What is the basis of rave culture?" the respondents univocally answer: "The respect for each others' space." The club is also described as a place where one does not get judged for what they wear or how they behave, provided they do not bother others. As a frequent clubgoer, I definitely can testify against the first statement. The informally established dress code of techno clubs is being non-mainstream, embodying the cultural style of rave through all-black clothes, glitter at queer parties, exposing your body parts, wearing comfortable sport shoes and pants. This alternative normativity is not imposed as dress code in most clubs of Tbilisi, but encouraged by more subtle social ways like negative or positive comments on looks. However, overall, the cultural style seems to be still less based on what one wears, but how one acts.

The struggle is defined in the same sense as well. "The way people treat each other, the culture of behavior codes and etiquette — this is what united us" (interview with a leader G.). According to more experienced ravers, this is the culture that one might possess before club, but also acquires/learns by going to clubs. Once again emphasizing the flexibility to individually manipulate the style.

The door policy at Bassiani is not really based on dress code. This is one of the most important differences between Georgian techno clubs and ones in Europe. That is also the reason club owners and leaders do not agree with the comparison of Bassiani to Berghain, Tbilisi techno scene to the one in Europe, often made by the international media. "European clubs openly exclude homophobes, we say the opposite: come let's dance together and follow rules" (Interview with the founder of Bassiani N.). Another leader P. says, that unlike Berghain, where cutting a line into club through VIP lists, is considered to be cool, while in Tbilisi it would be unacceptable. "This is more than just partying for us. The privileges have to be abandoned at the entrance of the club. Everyone has to be equal on the dancefloor."

Obviously, this does not mean that the ravers do not define themselves in opposition to the society, especially conservative groups and alt-right, but their vision ranges from total hatred to understanding and self-blame. "Maybe we did not dance with them. Maybe they think we look down at them and that is why they hate us." - says one of the leaders. Another one says that the 2018 demonstration went out of their control. "We were totally demoralized and could not manage who was saying what. It was very spontaneous. Things were said that made people upset." The demonstration ended when the minister of internal affairs suggested the police would forcefully dissolve the counterdemonstration. "The counter protesters were not a lot in numbers, but very radicalized and aggressive. Some of them were affiliated with some groups in the government, but other were not." - says one of the leaders. Another one explains their solution to stop demonstration and take activists by government-provided buses "We could not allow the police that raided us the previous to do the same to the other part of society. So, we swallowed our pride and agreed to dissolve our demonstration". At the same time, not just the counter-actors, but the society is largely portrayed as homophobic and conservative by clubgoers and leaders. Lack of education, influence of the church and state are named as main reasons for it. Similar to the articles in question, they suggest that the confrontation in the society is generational. "The iron curtain lay over our parents' one. They [34 CEU eTD Collection] cannot perceive the progress. For example, the way they think about women." (Interview with T.) According to the interviews, even the drugs are gendered and belong to generation. "The older generation calls our drugs 'faggot' drugs", - says leader B. Another one, P, says that they [ravers] tried to demasculinize the drug use by framing the oppression of queers and victims of drug policy. Some attribute even more importance to the generation and suggest that the rave culture is a reaction to parents' culture. "This was the protest of the youth. The elder ones were there as well, but it is the young who initiated. It was a counter-action against older generation's culture from the people born in independent Georgia. It was kid's culture." - explains one of the leaders. While most agree that "This dance belongs to this [young] generation" (Interview with S.), their confrontation is largely framed as ideological. The conservative part of society is not limited to the older generation. In respondents' narrative, conservative ideology is framed as deprived of the political agency. "They are brainwashed" (interview with T.) or "were brainwashed", manipulated by church, state, institutions. The tendency to contrast themselves as belonging to rave culture somehow co-exists with their political agenda to transform their opponents. This conflict played out very dramatically during the 2018 "Rave-olution", when according to leaders, the speakers at the demonstration repeatedly framed the society as "backward-minded" and contrasted them with the ravers. According to the leaders, the conflict over how to handle the counter-action against the ravers led to the dissolution of the movement, and, consequently, loss of political meaning of rave culture as well. Put this way, the downplay of drugs and struggle against government at the expense of endogenizing queer agenda by international media seems to be negligence, rather than intentional decision. However, not when we look at the alignment of the queer with analytical categories of modernity and more global context of Europeanization. The strategy employed by international media is homonationalism. Which is actively reproduced by local actors as differentiating strategy. Therefore, rather than the purposes of "othering" as described by Puar in context of the Muslim subject, in this case queer modernity serves the purposes of making the subject intelligible and extend the boundaries of Europeanness through "transition" rather than exclusion. In the following chapter, I will elaborate the geopolitical dimension of the rave culture and explain how Georgia as "post-soviet" is constructed in Western imagination. Chapter 4. The European Gaze The categories of "conservative" and "liberal" articulated by international media can be grouped under respective geopolitical and ideological frames: the division between the West and Post-Soviet, and the construction of modern subject of developmental state. Since Georgia is not considered to be the East Europe, it is labelled as "New East", that is even "further than East Europe" (Guardian, September 21, 2016) and novel to what I will call the European gaze2. The New East is not limited to Georgia, but includes other countries of the Post-Soviet bloc - Ukraine, Armenia, Azerbaijan and sometimes Russia as well. Thus, Georgia is imagined as part of a larger geopolitical space that is separate from other parts of the world. The geopolitical division is largely based on the vision of Soviet history as determining and unifying experience of the region. Stuck in spatial and temporal transition, Georgia is constantly haunted by its past. 30 years and one revolution after it remains post-Soviet, but at the same time “pre-European”. I do not use the term "pre-European" in its conventional meaning—to describe times (usually Americas, New Zealand, Australia) before colonization, but rather as an ideological reference to subject formation (lexico.com).

The transition from the pre-European subjectivity to becoming European is not described as a continuous process, but rather as a painful "rupture" and revolution (the frequent use of these words in all articles being one indicator). Similarly, ravers largely perceive this process as the transformation of generations from Post-Soviet to modern, but rather than rupture, they see it as a continuum. Instead of confrontation, both literally and figuratively, they expand their ideas and "befriending" the perceived other part of society. The task the leaders think they have achieved to only a certain extent.

Once again, the need to transform society and communicate clashes with the logic of differentiating their culture. This very clash physically played out at the 2018 demonstration between the ravers and conservative groups, which the movement could not contain anymore and fell apart. While the leaders and ravers see transformation as a continuous process and present, media places the European and Westernized in the "future" against the present of Georgia that still lives in the Soviet "past." The future, on the other hand, spatially only exists in the West, but is not unattainable. It does not come with time, but rather with the ideological transformation to the liberal subject, even the drug policy is defined as "narrow-minded" (Vice, 19, 2019). Quite opposite to the words "repressive", "punitive", "non-human", "harsh" used by the respondents.

The problem of policing is turned into the problem of culture and society and that of the "mind" and mentality rather than the body. It is the latter that has to embody the mental transformation, though. And has to do it in a way that is intelligible to the presumed Western reader. Luce "European" and "Western" interchangeably, and the same goes for the articles in question, but I still prefer "European" to explain the specificity of the case. While the articles are not necessarily written by European authors, the Geopolitical quest of Georgia to belong to Europe constructs these subjectivities from the perspective of "European gaze" that not only decided (literally and figuratively) whether the subject belongs to the European family or not, but also sets the criteria of this judgement. Therefore, European Gaze is guided by the principle of intelligibility—the subject has to be articulated in the ways accessible to investigate by the writer. The tropes of difference, as mentioned above, come to being in relation to the temporal placement of the subject in the "limbo" of post-soviet. When looking at the connection between the sets of dichotomies and inaccuracies in the articles, these intentions become obvious. On Sunday afternoon, counter-protesters with shaved heads arrived, wearing masks, to spoil the fun (Economist, 17 May, 2018). Georgian alt-right does not usually have shaved heads. Skinheads that might be associated with alt-right neither were there, nor present among Georgian radical right scene altogether, but the representation of the alt-right in this case is adjusted to the visual understandings of the assumed reader.

The same principle of intelligibility guides the inner paradoxical connections created within the sets of dichotomies. For example, Soviet is associated with Orthodox that "still prevails" (Guardian, January 22, 2019), ignoring the fact that Orthodox Church rose in Georgia only after the collapse of Soviet Union. Once again, the vision of queer modernity as inherently secular (Puar, 2013) leads to the ahistorical connection of religion with the past to uphold the linear developmentalist temporality.

The ways in which struggle and transformation are articulated are much more diverse throughout articles. Different modes of politics are mentioned and emphasized at varying degrees. The collective mobilization, awareness raising, legislative change are covered at varying degrees. However, the political agency is largely determined as performative capacity of embracing queer modernity.

"A new, Westernised generation "want to express themselves not only by dancing, but through different lifestyle" (Guardian, January 22, 2019), quotes a popular political scientist from Georgia. The politics in these articles is defined as the conflict between the generations with different cultural styles. The narrative solidified with the selective quotes by local actors.

In general, the visual material, but also the way of writing is very much oriented to create a certain political and spatial landscape. The sets of categories are embodied by humans and non-humans — when e.g. describing "post Soviet pool" (NY times, May 29, 2019), mountainous landscapes, bodies and ways people dress lighting, and above all music make up the non-human agency of the New East in diverse ways. Sometimes they make the articles sound like tourist brochures in their efforts to create certain imagery of the urban and rural scenery.

"It has also helped make Tbilisi a dream destination for techno tourists, who complete their long weekends with a soak in the city's sulphurous hot springs and a few bracing shots of chacha" (Guardian, January 22, 2019). Clothes, space, mountains, but also other mainstream touristic clichés like chacha (Georgian name for grappa) are painted in a way to "sell" them to potential clients.

The construction of ravers in lines with modernity is largely associated with the ability to consume the culture. However, at the same time, it is a lot more than commerce. Its never-ending state of transformation from post-Soviet to modern resolved this paradox — the commercial character of the club as business, but at the same time it being the place of political struggle and individual transformation brings both the ideas of economic and cultural liberalism together. But its geopolitical "location" is not fixed and unchangeable. It can embrace the queer modernity through never-ending cycles of revolutionary "acts", like the "rave revolution." This is how dance in front of the parliament building in Tbilisi becomes geopolitical performance that goes way beyond the local transformation of youth culture and/or drug policy.

I do not assume that the discourses articulated by the international media were directly reproduced by local actors. As suggested by Anna Rekhviashvili (2018), instead of viewing them as passive recipients and practitioners of the pre-existing discourses, interviews illustrate how they negotiate, reinterpret, criticize, and use media attention to their own benefit.

When commenting on international media and the representation of Georgian techno culture as 1990s Berlin, the respondents hugely disagree with the comparisons. "Europeans could not understand our struggle. They cannot imagine people going to prison for 5-8 years for one Ecstasy pill. They have always had a hedonistic approach," - says P.

The movement leaders and the ravers who have more knowledge of the techno scenes of Europe say that the European rave culture has different values and emerged in the specific context that shaped it as "resistance against gentrification, loss of pleasure." Whereas the repressive policies in Georgia shaped it as a struggle against state and police. "Techno had lost its political meaning and was escapist and hedonistic in Europe," says the founder of the club N.

And yet, there is certain agreement among respondents that the techno inherently is based on the ideas of equality and care. Some ravers think that since this culture existed in Europe longer, it has similar history as a culture, but not necessarily as a political struggle. "Since Georgians were already good at dancing and partying they easily understood and embraced techno," - says S.

The performative capacity of the culture both literally and figuratively establishes techno as something that can be locally adjusted, or has already been mixed with pre-existing cultural opportunities and challenged by political constraints.

In narratives of respondents, the vision of modern subjectivity is not necessarily connected to Europe. While the word "development" often repeats itself in the interviews, respondents usually disagree with comparisons of Berlin and Georgian techno. Those who have been to Europe are even more skeptical of those connections articulated by international media.

Even though they never use the term, they describe the process of transformation as "glocalization" of the European techno project into Georgian. The trope of difference between Georgian and European is not constructed the same way by ravers and leaders of the movement. The ravers emphasize the longer history of techno in Europe, which for them refers to a more embedded culture and less constrained drugs. "Soon we catch up with Germany, but I do not know where Germany will be at that moment," - says S.

The vision of Georgia as developing, but also always in quest of catching up with Europe reveals another geopolitical trope that the development is not just linear, but a continuous process that always goes forward and which arranges countries in relation to each other. Another tendency of imagining European past in Georgian present is also articulated by ravers. "Probably it was the same in Europe, people started to organize in clubs and then hit the streets," - says L. The leaders also refer to the political meaning of the techno-acquired uniting of the post-Berlin wall city. Similar references have been made by Horoom founders in relation to the Stonewall Riots to justify the importance of entertainment places in political mobilization. At the same time, unlike media, they reflect on it not as history repeating itself, but as the part of history that they chose for reference. History becomes not something that happened, but a discursive frame they use for justifying their politics. Thus, the Berlin Narrative is consciously exploited for political goals.

However, the leaders speak of certain dependency on international media and the tropes produced by them. One of the leaders, P, explains how he immediately contacted international outlets after the raid of the club. International media plays a role in gaining negotiating power against the government, and hence such emphasis on it is implicit. According to the respondents, during and before demonstrations in 2018, the government actively targeted ravers, especially leaders through "troll factories." Support of international media allowed ravers to take informational war to the space where they believed the government had less power. And more importantly, it can be seen as leverage, since the Georgian politics in the last 17 years have actively been revolving around becoming part of the European Union.

Thus, the rave movement had to protect itself from policing and make political choices of alliance and confrontation in the hostile political settings, primarily depending on the grassroots power of the culture and international support. As a result, the movement selectively embraced some parts of the suggested project of modernity (like queer modernity), but reinterpreted the political agency of the subject in its own terms in other aspects (drug consumption and policy). While more or less aware of this process, there is a limit to their power to negotiate. As stated above, their capacity to challenge the state depended on triangulation of grassroots power and international media. This dependency puts them in a precarious position in terms of how much discursive power they can exercise.

Therefore, political dance is danced not simply in relation to each other, the society, and/or the government, but the imagined international (Western) society that is the consumer of the culture and political arbiter of these agents as well.

In my thesis, I treated the relationship between rave culture in Georgia as the analytical site of global and theoretical discourse formation about political subjectivity and agency. Two important aspects of body politics — sexuality and drug consumption — have determined the organizing logic of these categories at both discourse and practice level. The political agency has been shaped by the ideas of performativity of cultural style, which mostly takes transgression of gender and sexuality in relation to local cultural constraints as its central marker. However, I also demonstrated that while this tendency of defining the political agency in relation to sexuality is pronounced in the narratives of both local and global actors, the other aspect — the relationship with state and police and the respective struggle against harsh drug policy — has been severely underrepresented in the narratives of international media.

During my research, I could not find any examples of big grassroots drug policy movements and realized that the question of drug consumption is not simply downplayed because of the associated stigma, which still makes it a taboo even at discussions about nightlife and rave, but informs about the global imagination about Georgia. The post-Soviet country, labelled as 41 CEU eTD Collection, is in a transitional state towards European modernity. The ideas of linear progress and modernity are present in local discourses, shaped by the country's geopolitical drive to join the European Union. While local discourses embrace or reject certain aspects of modernity, they are still guided by the idea of modernist transformation.

Local actors criticize and challenge international representations and comparisons, seeking space for local interpretation. The local framing of political problems in relation to state and police control of the body exposes the repressive character of the state, reducing its politics to policing and instrumentalizing drugs as a control mechanism.

The political agency in relation to state and police is important to my analysis, but I chose to concentrate on the grassroots movement building through the club, rather than delving into the politics at the party level. This was motivated by my aim to uncover the most important aspect of the rave movement – grassroots mobilization around the culture that made it different from other political movements in Georgia and other rave cultures worldwide.

The limitation of access to events happening behind closed doors of the party was another reason for focusing on the club level. While ravers and movement leaders were open in sharing information on their immediate communication with the police and state, the more specific interests of state actors in drugs and possible connections to cartels, or inner struggles inside the party, require a level of investigation I am not equipped for.

Handling rave as a movement formed by framing the space, style, music, and above all dance as political allowed me to bring forward the relatively rare phenomenon of cultural politics turning into a collective politics. These findings can be instrumentalized for practical purposes of movement building and inform theory on cultural politics.

Unlike my respondents, I look back at those years of struggle with more optimism. The movements have ups and downs, and they inevitably disappear or change form. The political meaning that the rave culture in Georgia generated has helped thousands of victims of drug policy and demonstrated alternative ways of making politics. The possibility of culture to inspire and produce collective politics can be further investigated on a larger geopolitical level (e.g. 42 CEU eTD Collection Post-Socialism) and conceptually expand the ways of understanding Europeanization and ideas of modernity beyond cultural politics.


===============================\n\n\n

Jerri Daboo P| Ritual, Rapture and Remorse: A Study of Tarantism and Pizzica in Salento


There are many people who have been extremely generous with their time and sharing of their knowledge and experience, which have all contributed to this book. I would like to thank all of them, and apologize for any unintentional omissions in the following list. I offer my grateful thanks to all those within Salento who have been so helpful in my time there. Firstly, thanks to Antonella Rizzo, who acted as my research assistant in a field trip, and subsequently became a friend. This is in acknowledgement not only of her skill as an interpreter and intermediary when interviewing people, but also for the hours of travelling around Salento to find a person or attend a festival. Thanks are also due to Massimiliano Vellico for his friendship, and for offering to spend much time driving to different places, which was invaluable. I am very grateful to Antonio Rizzo, Giulia Erminio and Carmine Rizzo for so generously opening their home for me to stay in, and their wonderful hospitality. I would like to give particular thanks to Ada Metafune for her time in speaking with me, her skill as a dancer and musician, and her inspiration as a woman, and also to her husband Biagio Panico and their family for allowing me to visit their home. Thanks are also due to Pamela Maglie and Edoardo Winspeare for their time and thoughts, as well as to all those with whom I spoke, played and danced, formally and informally, over the years.

Special thanks are given to anthropologist Karen Liidtke for her generosity and helpfulness during the time of my research. It was her introduction to some of the material, as well as Salento itself, that made much of this work possible for me at the beginning. I greatly respect her own very deep field research which she has undertaken with such dedication in Salento, reflected in her recent publication Dances with Spiders.

Within the UK, Peregrine Horden was my first introduction to tarantism through three chapters in his edited collection Music as Medicine, which he allowed me to read before publication, and subsequently introduced me to Karen Liidtke. [I also offer thanks to Dorothy Louise Zinn for her painstaking work in translating Ernesto De Martino’s La terra del rimorso, and her suggestions concerning images.

For my archival research, I would like to thank all the staff at the Wellcome Institute Library, London; the Bodleian Library, Oxford; and the Exeter Cathedral Library for their assistance. In the spirit of ‘think local, act global’ I have been especially grateful to those many academics within the University of Exeter who have been so helpful and supportive during the years of my research and writing.

Within the Department of Drama, I would particularly like to thank Graham Ley, whose insightful and generous reading of drafts, as well as his answers to random questions ranging from fourth-century BCE Greek vases to the structuring of chapters, has been invaluable. Additionally, I thank Christopher McCullough for his thoughts on Gramsci, and all those within the Department who have offered advice and listened to me patiently through the good and difficult times, including Dorinda Hulton, Peter Hulton, Mick Mangan, Pam Woods, Rebecca Loukes, Sarah Goldingay and Gabriella Giannachi.

Special thanks to Chris Mearing for his time and help in preparing the images for this book. Thanks are also due to Nick Kaye and Michael Wykes for their help with grant applications. Within other departments, thanks to those who have shared their work, particularly Andrew Sparkes and David Brown from the School of Sport and Health Sciences for introducing me to the work of Chris Shilling. Elena Isayev in Classics and Tia de Nora in Sociology have been particularly helpful in interdisciplinary discussions, as have events hosted by the Centre for Mediterranean Studies and the Centre for Medical History. 1. Map of Salento
2. Introduction
3. A Traveller in Southern Italy
4. The Story of the Dancing Woman
5. The Dancing Woman and the Tarantula Spider
6. The Continuation of the Tarantella

In the book "A Traveller in Southern Italy," H. V. Morton shares a story about a dancing woman he encountered in a small town in Apulia, Italy. While stopping to visit a church, he hears music playing and stumbles upon a crowd watching a woman dancing alone. The woman's expression is entranced, and she holds a red cotton handkerchief in her hand, waving it as she danced. The gravity of the crowd is surprising, as they are not smiling and display a painful expression.

Morton recounts the story to a friend in Taranto, who reveals that the woman was "taken" by a tarantula spider, and she was dancing to expel the poison. The friend explains that this phenomenon is rare and most often occurs in villages and houses. The friend clarifies that the tarantella is still danced by hundreds of peasants in the region of Lecce who believe they have been poisoned by the spider.

When Morton asks what being "taken" by the tarantula means, the friend explains that it simply refers to being bitten by the spider. 

[...] Women are particularly exposed to tarantula bites because they work in the harvest fields after the corn has been cut, when these spiders are common. “But I have read that the tarantula is not poisonous, or that it is no more dangerous than a bee-sting,” said my friend. “Perhaps,” he conceded. “This has been going on for centuries. Who can say what is at the back of it?” (Morton, 1969: 180-1)

Introduction

Morton was later informed that the woman had danced all that night and the next day, before sleeping. When she awoke, she said that she felt well again. What Morton is describing is an example of the ritual known as tarantism or tarantismo in Italian. This ritual has been performed over many centuries as a cure for someone bitten by the tarantula spider (called a taranta in the Salentine dialect, or tarantola in standard Italian). The person who is bitten, known as a tarantato (or tarantolato) if male, and tarantata (or tarantolata) if female, falls into a state of illness as a result of the poison from the bite. Symptoms can include nausea, paralysis, lethargy, spasms, headaches, irregular pulse and breathing, and fainting.

If this happens, the family or friends of the tarantata will call for musicians who are skilled in playing an indigenous form of music called the pizzica. When the musicians arrive, they try out different melodies, rhythms, and types of songs until they begin to see a response from the ill person, such as the hand beginning to move in time to the music. Sometimes they will also respond to certain colors such as red, green, or yellow. The particular melodies and rhythms, as well as the specific colors which affect the tarantato, are supposedly connected to the type and nature of the spider that bit them, so that in this way, the symbol and embodiment of the spider becomes the agent of both the illness and the cure.

The musicians continue to play in a crescendo, as the tarantato gradually becomes more and more active, seeming to “wake up” from a state of trance, crawling along the floor, beating the ground in time to the rhythm of the zamburello (tambourine), sometimes arching into a bridge position, imitating the movements of a spider. As the music rises, the tarantato gets up from the floor, and begins to dance in hopping, skipping, and circling movements, the musicians encouraging them to keep going. They may continue this for many hours before resting, and then beginning the dance again. The ritual can last for three days, until the tarantato feels well again, and does not need to dance any longer.

The bite led to the tarantato being “possessed” by the spider, and the cure is one of a fight with this possession which leads to the expelling of the spirit of the spider from the body. If this does not happen, or if the music and dance cure is not undertaken, then the tarantato may die from the effects of the bite. In this way, the ritual is often described as being one of both possession and exorcism. As well as this private ritual, there was a more public and collective display caused by the symptoms of the condition reoccurring, usually during the summer months, and often around the period of the festival of St Paul on 29 June. As discussed in Chapter Two, St Paul is associated with the ritual of tarantism. The chapel dedicated to him in Galatina became the focus for the annual repetition of the cure, where the /avantati (male and collective plural) would be brought by their families from surrounding areas to relive the dance of the ritual cure within the chapel. Oral, written and film records give examples of tavantate (female plural) dressed in white, symbolically becoming the brides of St Paul, dancing in the chapel, climbing over the altar, crawling on the ground, and sometimes attacking the crowds who gathered to witness the spectacle during the annual repeti- tion. In the same way as the spider is the cause and cure of the condition, so St Paul also becomes a magical-religious symbol who both curses and heals the tarantata.

Chapter One contains an ethnographic ‘moment’ of my experience of the festival of St Paul in Galatina in 2008, where the 3 Throughout its history, there have been cases of both men and women undertaking the ritual. In Chapter Two, I discuss the ‘feminisation’ of tarantism, with an empha- sis on the women who became saranztate. Partly because of this discussion, and also due to the particular changes in socio-cultural circumstances for women in Salento, there is a tendency for this study to focus on the tarantate. However, this does not deny or ignore that men have become farantati, and this will also be seen during the discussion of the historical documents in Chapter Two.

4 Introduction sacred and secular intersected, and the brief glimpse of a former tarantata affected all those watching, bring-ing the past histories into collision with contemporary identities and practices. Throughout its history, there have been questions as to whether the condition of tarantism is ‘real’ or not, and if the sarantata is ‘faking’ rather than being genuinely ill, or even in a state of madness or hysteria. Although there is often no evidence of an actual bite from a spider,’ the ‘bite’ and subsequent illness and cure can be seen asa culture-specific means of coping with socio-cultural and economic difficulties found within Salento. As Horden states, the spider’s symbolism is more potent than its bite [...]. We are dealing with a culture- bound syndrome, or folk illness; with social and psychological ‘poisoning’ rather than a biological threat. (Horden, 2000: 250) In this way, it is important to frame tarantism as beinga culture-specific phenomenon. There have been records of the use of music to cure the poison from the bite ofa tarantula dating back to the fourteenth century.’ These records, 4 The dialect word ‘la taranta’ can be used to describe not only a tarantula, but any type of spider or scorpion which inflicts a poisonous bite. It can even include other types of biting insects, such as ants, as well as snakes and vipers. There have been recorded incidents of tarantism being induced by all these types of venomous bites. ‘There are two types of spider that have been prevalent in Salento which have been discussed in relation to tarantism. One is the /ycosa tarantula, or wolf spider, which is considered to be harmless. The other species is the much smaller Latrodectus tredecimguttatus, or European black widow spider. While less fearsome in appearance, its bite can cause symptoms similar to those found in tarantism. The Lycosa appears larger and more menacing, but its bite would not result in the same adverse effects as the Atrodectus. In this way, the symbol of a taranta can be seen as a combination of the appearance and effects of both Aycosa and Latrodectus (Bartholomew, 2000; Lewis, 1991; Liidtke, 2009; De Martino, 2005).

Although this study focuses on the phenomenon of tarantism in Apulia, it also occurred in other locations, particularly in the South of Italy. Some of these cases are discussed in Chapter Two, with various perspectives from doctors, scientists, ecclesiastical figures, and curious visitors. These records offer a fascinating debate on shifting discourses of the body, medicine, science, religion, and philosophy over a period of seven hundred years. The voices of the tarantati themselves are not heard, as their stories and personal experiences are appropriated and debated by writers to expound their own framework of thought.

The ritual began to decline during the nineteenth century, and by the middle of the twentieth century, there were only a few instances of performances. According to anthropologist Karen Liidtke, there were only five or six former tarantati still alive in 2006, though these are not seen publicly performing the ritual anymore. However, the occasional glimpses of one of these prior tarantati can recall a past into the present, offering a glimpse of a vestige from older times that has a strong resonance for the younger generation of Salentines today.

Although the ritual as such no longer takes place, there was a revival of interest in pizzica music and dance beginning in the 1970s, gaining momentum through the 1980s and 1990s. This, along with an increasing amount of research and publications on tarantism, has led to a growth in both tourists and researchers visiting the region, as well as the development of music and dance festivals, sometimes under the label of the so-called ‘neo-tarantism’ movement. This resurgence, which is discussed in Chapter Four, offers an example of the revival or reinvigoration of a form of ‘folk’ or ‘traditional’ music and dance, which raises questions of authenticity, ownership, and performance forms as cultural products. The case study of both historical and contemporary Salento shows the complex relationship of past and present, and a multiple layering of times, places, practices, and identities in each of the ‘moments’ explored in this study. The history of tarantism and the contemporary phenomenon of neo-tarantism and performances of pizzica in Salento today are closely interconnected, offering valuable insights into the development of ritual and performance forms. This book aims to provide a comprehensive overview of both the historical and contemporary aspects, focusing on the discipline of performance studies. By adopting an interdisciplinary approach, this work combines historical and ethnographic research with a focus on performance forms, providing a unique perspective on the embodied experiences of those participating in the music and dance.

The book's emphasis on embodiment and the interconnection between the inner and outer environments of the performances offers new insights into the experience of both historical rituals and contemporary expressions. This perspective can be beneficial to those working in the social sciences, providing new frameworks of thought that can be applied to the study of tarantism and pizzica in Salento and beyond.

The remainder of the Introduction contextualizes the land of Salento, its history, mixture of cultures, and its positioning within Southern Italy in relation to the idea of the "Southern Question" and magic and superstition. The book also discusses pizzica, describing the dance and music of the social form, the pizzica pizzica, as well as the differences between this and the "tarantella." The book is divided into four chapters. As the intention is to provide an interdisciplinary approach to its subject matter, Chapter One offers an examination of the methodological frameworks that will be used. Based in performance studies, and drawing on other disciplines including anthropology, sociology, and cultural studies, there is a discussion of the importance of exploring tarantism and pizzica through the embodied experience of the participants, while also having an understanding of how the specific socio-cultural positionings of the individual and community will have an impact on this experience. Culture is seen as something that is inscribed on and in the body, as well as in the process of the embodiment of the ritual in the past, and the contemporary experiences of playing and dancing pizzica. The chapter ends with an ethnographic ‘moment’ of my observation and participation in the festival of St Paul in Galatina in June 2008, to illustrate the points made.

Chapters Two, Three, and Four are a chronological examination of the history of the ritual of tarantism, and the revival of interest in pizzica music and dance leading to the ‘neo-tarantism’ movement in the late twentieth century. Chapter Two is an extensive historical overview of the many and diverse writings on tarantism by doctors, scientists, and travel-writers from the fourteenth through the twentieth centuries. These writings demonstrate the appropriation of both tarantism and those who perform it in a gradual medicalization, feminization, and Christianization of the ritual. The documents discussed offer a fascinating account of the changing attitudes towards the body, religion, medicine, and science over the periods examined, most particularly from the vast paradigm shift brought about by the Age of Enlightenment.

Chapter Three focuses on the work of Italian historian Ernesto De Martino, whose book La terra del rimorso [The Land of Remorse] is so significant in the history and changing views of tarantism in the twentieth century. De Martino conducted an ethnographic study of tarantism in 1959 for which he gathered an interdisciplinary team to examine features of the ritual. The title is a play on words, for ‘torso’ is the Italian word for ‘bite’ hence ‘ri/re-morso’ has the sense of both ‘remorse’ in a religious context, and ‘re-bite’ in terms of the sarantati re-experiencing the symptoms of tarantism and needing to repeat the cure each year. This book has been of great importance in reframing the understanding of tarantism and cultural practices in Southern Italy; however, it has also been criticized more recently for its reductionist approach, despite De Martino’s own development of the notion of ‘critical ethnocentrism. This chapter examines some of De Martino’s key ideas, and how these were framed in his writing on tarantism, as well as ways in which his work has been used by others in different contexts, and some of the critiques that have been made of his approach. I then offer an examination of the experience of the ritual through aspects of performance studies. The purpose of this is to suggest ways of exploring the ritual through the body and the processes of embodiment, and aims to provide a framework to discuss such issues as ‘presence’, ‘liveness’ and ‘embodied experience’ in relation to forms of cultural performance, while also needing to take account of the particular socio-cultural features of tarantism in its specific context. Chapter Four is an examination of the revival of interest in pizzica music and dance, which began in the 1970s, and the development of the neo-tarantism movement. This covers a range of areas including the sense of local identity in relation to the music and dance, as well as the history of Salento and its connection to the land, and how these are manifested in the present. The notion of ‘neo-’ traditions, the development of new music and dance festivals as part of the burgeoning tourist industry, and the debate between authenticity and contamination, which is often central to the idea of ‘revival,’ are also discussed.

There is also a discussion of the pizzica scherma and its performance at the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli. Although this may not be seen as necessarily having a direct connection to tarantism, this unique form of dance contributes to the overall debate on contemporary Salento. It is a fascinating combination of martial arts and dance, performed by different communities, and can be a means to resolve disputes through the space of the ronda, the circle in which the dance is performed. There has been very little written about this in English, so this section investigates the history of the scherma, as well as analysing some of the movements of the dance.

The Conclusion brings together of some of the ideas and themes from throughout the book, questioning what the notion of ‘healing’ might mean in the different contexts discussed. With a book of this nature, which offers both an historical and ethnographic study of a specific location over a long period of time, there are many considerations which are involved.

The author first encountered tarantism as a practitioner in January 2000 when making a piece of dance-theatre, and this initial interest led to further research and visiting Salento for the first time in 2001. This research, both documentary and field trips, has continued over the years and contributed to the writing of this book.

Having been initially introduced into Salento as a practitioner, and then occupying a shifting role into being a researcher, there have clearly been ethical issues which the author has had to address. In the context of the research and writing of this book, when undertaking field studies, the author sees themselves as a participant-observer, and has been very fortunate in their encounters with local people who have been immensely generous both with their time in conducting interviews, as well as their skill and openness with playing and dancing the pizzica.

There have been times when the author has felt that being seen as a practitioner as well as an ‘academic, thereby joining in with the playing and dancing, as well as sharing their own practical work, has perhaps led some informants to being more open with them than might have been the case otherwise. Therefore, it has also been important to be clear about the times when the author is gathering information for the book, and how they are going to use this material.

The shifting position between practitioner and researcher has proved both interesting, and at times difficult: when do the author put down the camera at a festival and join in the dance? It is the author's hope that their understanding of music and dance from both an academic as well as practical perspective will offer an interesting viewpoint to the discussion.

In Chapter Two, the author notes that during the time of the early Christian Church, the playing of music became separated from its study and understanding. The author suggests that within academia today, it is possible and useful for this division to be reconsidered, and that it can be acknowledged that a practitioner can think and write, and that an academic can engage with practice. With an increasing number of practitioners entering academia in the fields of performance, there seems to be a great opportunity for this form of interrelated dialogue, understanding, and approach to be undertaken and accepted. Although I have conducted field research at points over a period of eight years, there is never a sense that this is ‘enough’ either in terms of time, or the range and breadth of people I have interviewed, and the places and events I have visited. Nevertheless, I trust that the amount of time I have spent in Salento is sufficient for the purposes of this book, and that the field work will continue, leading to further discoveries.

The historical research for this study has encompassed the whole of Apulia, including ThaveaBA in Drama and Music from the University of Bristol, and an MA in Physical Theatre from the University of Surrey and Royal Holloway, University of London, which included studying dance anthropology. I have trained in and practiced a range of forms of theatre, dance and music, and therefore move between and across these performance forms in my academic and practical work.

Introduction to the important sites of Taranto and Brindisi in the history of tarantism. However, my field research is centered on Salento, partly in order to create a focused area for study, and also as this is where so much of the contemporary revival has taken place. In terms of language, I have chosen mainly to use English translations of Italian places and words, for example, Apulia for Puglia. I have also decided to place the Italian text of quotations first, followed by the English translation. This seemed very important in relation to using material from interviews with informants; I wanted their voice in the original language to be heard first, and for the sake of consistency, this practice is followed throughout the book.

Therefore, the English translations are placed in square brackets afterwards. Unless otherwise stated, I have undertaken these translations myself, with help from Bianca Mastrominico, John Dean, and Antonella Rizzo. However, I have made the final decisions on the English versions myself, and I take full responsibility and apologize for any errors or misunderstandings with the translations as a result.

‘The study of tarantism and pizzica, and the research and writing for this book, have embraced and engulfed me for the past nine years. I hope that this book may spark interest in the reader for further research of their own, and encourage the first-hand reading of the texts discussed, as well as personal experience of the music, dance, culture, and people of Salento. I have only been able to offer my own glimpse into this rich world, and many other views are available.

Context and background: Salento and pizzica in perspective

Where worlds collide: Salento as a site for study
In this land whose name means ‘never-ending silence’ and ‘land between two seas, the ancient and the modern blend together. Land of sea, land of different peoples, dialects, voices that cover the echo of other voices, other sounds. [...] We must find the right time, the right shades of colors in the sky where the crescent Turkish moon 12 Introduction is a white, dazzling comma on a carpet of lights, and when the north wind blows the horizon is clear on the coast looking over the East. (From the tourist brochure ‘Salento: all year round, produced by Viaggiare and the Azienda di Promozione Turistica di Lecce, Apulia, 2008)

Salento is indeed the ‘land between two seas’, and one that faces and inhabits both “West’ and ‘East’ in its geography, history, and culture. However, this is far too simplistic a duality for the complexity and layerings found within this comparatively small area. The region of Apulia covers the ‘heel’ of the ‘boot’ of Italy, and Salento lies in the bottom half of this ‘heel’ (see Illustration 1). It is also known as the Province of Lecce, which, along with the Provinces of Brindisi, Taranto, Foggia, and Bari, make up the region of Apulia. This is part of the South of Italy, also known as the Mezzogiorno, Italia Meridionale, or Meridione. Salento covers an area of approximately 2,500 square km, a narrow peninsula at the tip of Western Europe, with 200 km of coastline, ending at its bottom point in the town of Santa Maria di Leuca, also known as Finibus Terrae, or the end of the earth. To the east is the Ionian Sea, and to the west, the Adriatic. The coastline is a combination of rocky cliffs, sandy beaches, and deep caves, some of which contain the remains from previous civilizations. The land in-between the seas is mainly a flat plain, home to the region’s main traditional industry of agriculture, with an abundance of olive groves, grape vines, and almond trees. Hundreds of kilometers of dry-stone walls snake the landscape, interspersed with masserie, farm buildings, and more glimpses of past inhabitants in the shape of dolmens and menhirs. As well as rural hamlets and villages, Salento hosts some larger towns and cities, including the region’s capital Lecce, also known as ‘the Florence of the South’ for the splendor of its seventeenth-century Baroque architecture, designed by Francesco and Giuseppe Zimbalo, and Cesare Penna, amongst others. As the former Roman settlement of Lupiae, the centro storico also contains a large amphitheater, only part of which has been excavated, as well as a smaller Roman theater where performances still take place. The statue of one of the city’s patron saints, San Oronzo, stands on a tall column that was once part of the Appian Way, which ended near Brindisi.


As well as agriculture, one of the other important Salentine industries, that of fishing, is found along the coastline, and the two ports of Gallipoli on the west and Otranto on the east act as both gateway and guard to the two-way facing peninsula, which has seen many invasions from both directions. Otranto lies only 70 km by sea from Albania, and contains evidence of the many cultures that have lived there, with a Norman cathedral which has a Romanesque facade, an Aragonese Castle, a Byzantine Church, and white-washed houses reminiscent of Greek villages amongst narrow streets, winding up from the harbor. It was in Otranto in 1480 that Mehmed II’s Ottoman soldiers landed and attacked the city. When eight hundred of the inhabitants refused to convert, they were decapitated on top of Minerva Hill. Alfonso of Aragon managed to liberate the city the following year, and the bones of the martyrs now lie for viewing in the chapel of the cathedral. This cathedral also houses an extraordinary mosaic floor, made by the monk Pantaleo in the twelfth century, which covers the aisle and transepts of the building. The central feature which runs along the middle from the doorway to the altar consists of the image of the Tree of Life. Branching out from this are a mixture of images taken from Greek mythology, the Bible, mythological legends such as King Arthur, the signs of the Zodiac, and real and fabulous animals including elephants, lions, centaurs, and unicorns. This floor seems to symbolize the merging of different peoples, cultures, and stories that are so much a feature of the land of Salento and the Mediterranean itself. The Mediterranean has operated as a linking point, the central passageway between different lands. The Romans called it Mare Nostrum, or "Our Sea," and for Horden and Purcell in their extraordinary history of the Mediterranean, The Corrupting Sea, this "claim of the Romans to 'their' sea was part of a political and cultural process by which they progressively defined the place of Rome at the heart of the Inhabited World—an Oecumene or Orbis Terrarum with the Mediterranean at its center" (Horden and Purcell, 2000: 12).

Certainly, for the many empires and cultures that have been based on its shores, the Mediterranean acts as the connector and travel-way between not just countries but continents. For Horden and Purcell, in "the ancient geographical tradition the sea shapes the land, not the other way about" (ibid.: 11). Abulafia states that this "fundamental geographical feature of the Mediterranean is thus the enormous complexity of the region. Complexity means richness, diversity in a very positive sense, facilitating exchanges over short and long distances" (Abulafia, 2003: 19).

The region of Salento shows just such diversity, partly due to its geographical location as being a "territory of passage," a stepping-stone between East and West, as well as North and South. As such, throughout history, it has been vulnerable to attacks and colonization, becoming a battleground for warring countries and rulers attempting to gain power and control of passageways and territories. The many invaders and settlers in the land of Salento have each left their mark on the landscape and culture, as well as in the memories and identities of the people, through to the present.

Evidence of megalithic civilizations is found in the stone structures of menhirs, dolmens, and specchie, or funeral cairns, as well as the prehistoric cave paintings seen in some of the caves, including those in the Grotta dei Cervi, the Cave of the Deer, in Porto Badisco, one of which has been appropriated as a symbol of the neo-tarantism movement, which is explored in Chapter Four. A significant group of early settlers were the Messapians, who possibly came from Illyria, and whose name means "land between two seas," which was adopted by the tourist brochure cited earlier as the name for Salento as a whole. The word "Messapi" itself is potentially an essentialist term for what were actually many tribal groups, and as Edward Herring suggests, they were seen as one collective by the later Greek inhabitants, and thus the term represents "an etic perspective" (Herring, 2007: 271) which places them in opposition to the "civilized" world of the Greeks. They were also known as the Iapyges, and the region was called Iapygia or Messapia. The Messapians left behind an array of artifacts, including pottery with distinctive geometric patterns, statues, and jewelry. In addition, there are the remains of some large-scale settlements, including the vast stone walls outside Ugento, in the south of Salento. The Messapians are perceived as being part of the land and identity by many Salentines today, with some of the geometric patterns being repeated on contemporary artworks. In Ugento, one local pointed to the great walls, telling me that they had been built by the ancestors of the land, and that today people walk in the footsteps of those former giants who are part of their history and culture. The famous fifth-century large bronze statue found in Ugento is often attributed as representing Zeus, but the local informant insisted on pointing out that instead, he considers it to be Poseidon, the god of the sea, which is such an important feature of the surrounding area.

The next main civilization to invade and settle in Salento was the Greeks, from around the eighth century BCE. This colonization lasted much longer in Salento than in other parts, which will be seen in the history and discussion of the origins and manifestations of tarantism in Chapter Two. The Roman Empire replaced the Greek, and this, in turn, was followed by the strong influence of the Byzantine Empire from the East. Additionally, during the Iconoclastic Wars, monks from Greece and Eastern Europe fled to Salento for refuge and founded monasteries in the region. The impact of this Greek and Eastern infiltration held sway until the arrival of the Normans, bringing Catholicism with them, in the early eleventh century. However, the Greek influence managed to continue beyond this and was found in a swathe of towns and villages across Salento from Gallipoli to Otranto, which became known as the Grecia Salentina. Today, this area still exists, but has been reduced to consisting of nine small towns situated south-east of Lecce. This area still holds particular festivals and rites that show the Greek influence, and many of the elders speak Griko, a dialect that resembles modern Greek. Although this language had been dying out, its survival has been strengthened recently in part as a response to the revival of interest in pizzica and traditional songs in Griko.

Remains from the Greek era have been discovered throughout Apulia, one example being the red-figure vase-paintings found especially in the Greek city of Taras, later called Tarentum by the Romans, and now known as Taranto. It is this city that supposedly gives its name to both the taranta ox tarantola spider and the condition of tarantismo. Taras became an important city for the Greek diaspora, and there is evidence of many plays being performed in its theatres, whether imported from the homeland or adaptations that became popular in the colonies, sometimes creating new dramaturgical forms. In Apulia (notably Tarentum and other towns nearby), another comic theatrical form came to enjoy great popularity in the early fourth century, the so-called phlyax farces, perhaps derived originally from Laconian tradition in the Peloponnese. Several scenes from these plays are preserved on vase-paintings. With padded, phallus-wearing actors wearing grotesque masks, as well as some straight heroic-looking characters too, these plays were performed on temporary wooden stages which could be set up quickly and transported from one town to another. In any case, it is clear that the language in which these plays were performed was Greek; and from c. 300 Rhinthon and others produced written versions of some phlyax-plays, as the genre adopted a more highbrow tone, combining farce with more serious mythological themes. (Griffith, 2007: 28-9)

After the demise of the Roman Empire, theatrical performances still continued until theatres were closed by Justinian in 526, and the Byzantines were defeated by the Lombards in 568, which ‘spelled the end of classical drama in the West for the next eight hundred years or more’ (ibid.: 33). In the early part of the Christian era, Salento was fought over by the Roman (Western) and Byzantine (Eastern) Empires as an important landing-place between both, eventually being won by the Eastern Empire. The influence of both Greek and Byzantine, along with later invasions by the Saracens, Arabs and Turks, have resulted in Salento being identified as a place of being between, and also embodying a mixture of, both West and East, Occident and Orient. This was seen as much in religion as in culture, which became a mixture of Christian and ‘pagan’ a feature found in the writings of tarantism in Chapter Two, as well as between Roman and Orthodox forms of Christianity:

In Puglia, e in Salento in particolare, si ¢ verificata per lungo tempo la prevalenza della civilta cristiana bizantina, che, nonostante in conflitti culturali con il cristianesimo romano ¢ le alterne supremazie politiche, ha connotato il territorio con una serie notevolissima di giacimenti culturali. (De Giorgi, 1999: 255)
[In Apulia, and particularly in Salento, the civilization of Byzantine Christianity prevailed for a long time and, in spite of its cultural conflicts with Roman Christianity and successive political supremacies, defined the region with a very notable series of cultural deposits.]

Introduction
De Giorgi describes this meeting of Orient and Occident in Salento as being a ‘concordia discordante’ (ibid.: 256), in that the different worlds live together in both unity and tension. The blending of East and West is found in the food and culture, with the Greeks spreading the cultivation of olives for oil and grapes for wine, both of which are now such a fundamental part of Salentine industry and identity; Arabic influences in some foods, particularly sweets; the architecture of Greek, Byzantine and Arabic features and buildings; and the festivals and rites with the Springtime carnival processions in some parts reminiscent of those found in Greece today, alongside those of the Roman Catholic processions of religious statues around towns at Easter. Later invaders and settlers have likewise influenced culture, language and practices in their adding to the melting-pot of Salento. These include the Lombards, Visigoths, Swabians, Normans, Aragonese, French and Bourbons, up to the time of the Risorgimento and the unification of Italy in 1860. This was also reflected in the changing names for the region, which at various points has been known as or part of the Terra d’Otranto, the Kingdom of Naples, and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. The many battles fought over the territory of passage of Salento, the different rulers, and traces of the cultures left behind, have both contributed to the identity of Salentines, whilst also leading to a strong sense of regional pride and independence in their being ‘Salentine’, rather than Italian. The Salentine dialect is still spoken throughout the region, though today mainly Italian is commonly heard, with Salentine phrases or words being included in a conversation, with the exception of the elders who often still tend to speak Salentine rather than Italian. There are actually many different variants of the dialect in local areas, such as Leccese in Lecce, and this is sometimes reflected in the singing of pizzica and other traditional songs, which in their modern transcription can have several different versions of the lyrics.

The identification of being Salentine is not just with the language and culture, but also with the surrounding environment of the land and sea, which is discussed further in Chapter Four. This can lead to a romanticising of the idea of local and community identity and the relationship to the land, as was seen in the description of Salento by the tourist industry brochure cited above. However, this has also been a means of local resistance to the many invaders of the land who have threatened this identity, and more recently has been used as a way to bring together the younger generation of Salentines.

This is seen in the work of Salentine poet Antonio Verri (1949-93) who has become a symbol of Salentine identity and creativity. He is known for writing on the notion of ‘i sibilo lungo’, or the ‘long’ or ‘deep murmur’ or ‘hiss’ which is heard in the sound of the sea and land, as well as the sibilant ‘s’ sound in speech, thus connecting the people to the echo of the land. As Del Giudice explains, this extract of Verri’s writing focuses attention on the land, on man’s communion with that land, and on the silent, barely audible sound of the bond:

"Cambia, cambiera di molto il volto della campagna, degli aggregati umani, di interi paesi ... quel che non cambiera mai sara idea del dialogo con la terra che 'uomo ha stabilito dal tempo dei tempi, il grosso respiro, il “Sibilo lungo” che si pud udire solo di mattina, mirando nella vastita dei campi, con accanto sentinelle silenziose gli alberi d’argento ..” (‘It changes, it will change much, the face of the land, of gathered humanity, or entire towns ... what will never change is the idea of dialoguing with the earth, that humanity has established from time immemorial, the long breath, “the deep murmur” which can be heard only in the early morning, while looking out over the vast fields, while standing next to the silver trees, the silent sentinels ...’). (Del Giudice, 2005: 264-5, fn. 68)

If, as is suggested in Chapter Two, myths were used as a means to unite the diaspora during the time of the Greek colonisation, then the identification with the sound and pulse of land and sea, as well as the music and dance as will be seen in Chapter Four, are the ways through which Salentines today may find a sense of unity both within the community, and to the terra, meaning ‘earth, ‘land’ and ‘country’ of Salento, with all its diversities as a point of passageway in the wider territory of the Mediterranean.

The ‘Southern Question’: orientalism, politics and magic

In his Introduction to La terra del rimorso, Ernesto De Martino discusses the perception of Southern Italy found in the writings of some of the Jesuit missionaries sent to the Mezzogiorno during the sixteenth century. They described this part of the country as being the ‘Italian India, and De Martino cites some examples from correspondence by the monks who had been sent to this seemingly remote and foreign land: Branca, replying to Nadal, considers it opportune that the college be established there ‘for the needs of this Italian India? Giovanni Xavier [. "Bemoans the condition of the people: These people are so accustomed to evil, so licentious, arrogant, without justice and government, it is as if they were all from the backwoods. As for the priests, I do not want to even begin on the subject: word of mouth will be sufficient to give our brothers the chance to come to this India. (De Martino, 2005: 4)

Michele Navarro suggested that those missionaries who were due to travel to the Indies should be sent to Southern Italy first as a testing ground, as “anyone who proves himself worthy in these Indies of ours [Indias de por aca] will also be suited to those across the Ocean, and that he who finds it difficult to travel and endure in these Indies will not find it very easy in the others” (in ibid.: 5).

The correlation of the South of Italy, despite being part of Western Europe, with the ‘dark lands’ of the Indies, is representative of some of the ways in which the South has been perceived and defined, particularly in relation to the North, that has become known as the ‘Southern Question’ Although this term usually refers to the period around and after the Risorgimento, the origins of the division between North and South existed much earlier.

The idea that the North was the place of learning, culture, industrialisation and modernity, whereas the South was the land of poverty, the rural peasant, corruption, the Mafia, and a world filled with superstition and magic, has contributed to some of the ways in which the practice of tarantism has been discussed. The South was the place that contains the ‘primitive’ evidence of an older world, often the classical world with the remains of the Greek and Roman civilisations. It was also a place seemingly at the very outer perimeter of the known world, its people and way of life equated more with Africa and Asia than Europe.

Goethe, in his Italian Journey (1786-1788) stated that: “To me Sicily implies Asia and Africa’ (Goethe, 1962: 212), and the well-known Italian saying reinforces the view that ‘at the end of Naples, begins Africa’ It is the land that western civilisation has seemingly not reached, seen in Carlo Levi’s book Christ Stopped at Eboli, the very title defining that religion and civility have not Introduction 21 reached the small village in Lucania to which he was exiled, and that for Levi, it was ‘that other world, hedged in by custom and sorrow, cut off from History and the State [...] where the peasant lives out his motionless civilization on barren ground in remote poverty, and in the presence of death’ (Levi, 2000: 11).

The South was the place of the hot sun, where the temperament of the people was reflected in the landscape and climate. They were people of nature, as opposed to those of cultured learning from the North. They were also people who were seen as being inherently, and some believed racially, different from those of the North.

Mary Gibson discusses the work of the late-nineteenth-century criminologist Cesare Lombroso, who based his theories on the reasons for a greater criminal tendency by people in the South to their racial connection with those groups who were from other places. In his work Criminal Man from 1896-7, he states:

Iv is to the African and Eastern elements (except the Greeks), that Italy owes, funda- mentally, the greater frequency of homicides in Calabria, Sicily and Sardinia, while the least occur where the Nordic races predominate (Lombardy). (Lombroso, Vol. 3: 30, in Gibson, 1998: 99)

Gibson points out that Lombroso’s ideas on positivist criminology were based in social darwinism, and he divided the people of the North and South between lighter and darker colourings." In this way, he posited that the ‘darker’ people of the South had greater criminal tendencies and levels of immorality in comparison to the ‘whiter’ and more civilized people of the North (Gibson, 1998: 102). He analyzed these differences in facial features, and even in skull measurements, to show that those from each side of his divided Italy had racial origins from different regions. Gibson states that the ‘attempt to identify race based on the measurement of skulls was typical of the period throughout Europe’ (ibid.: 103), and this is also an uncomfortable presage of what was to come in Europe during the succeeding decades.

The notion of the ‘Southern Question’ is inherently relativistic, as the South is seen in relation to the North, thereby reinforcing the perceived dichotomy between the two. After the time of the Unification of Italy, this division was highlighted by the claim that the modernized North was being held back and drained by the impoverished and backward South, which still held remnants of feudalism, as well as organized crime, along with a lack of education and infrastructure. This perception continued, and was further increased during the twentieth century with mass emigration, particularly to America, as well as increasing unemployment, causing further poverty.

Despite efforts during the 1950s to help develop the South, this view by the North never completely left, and in the 1990s, the Northern League began an anti-Southern campaign, wanting to create a separate North from the South that was seen to be draining its resources. Not only is this binary view relativistic, it is also essentializing of the ‘South’ which, as Petrusewiczm suggests, should be seen instead as being many ‘Souths’ rather than one (Petrusewiczm, 1998: 28).

In addition to those from outside the South having such opinions, there have also been instances of some from within and sympathetic to the South, most particularly from the political left, who have also contributed to the division in terms of suggesting that it should be the peasants who create a socio-political revolution, and empower and free themselves. The discussion in Chapter Three on the work of Gramsci and De Martino illustrates such views. However, it was a disappointment to many of the Marxist-influenced writers supporting the South that it appeared that the peasants were incapable or not energized into such a revolution, thereby effectively aligning themselves with seeing the South as a primitive and impoverished ‘other’ and reinforcing the stereotype.

The work of Pasquale Villari, particularly in his Lettere Meridionali (1875), is an example of someone who is both situating themselves within the South, and yet is an intellectual élite who is also highlighting the poverty and problems of the region, thus contributing to the reinforcement of the idea of the ‘Southern Question.’ Carlo Levi likewise suggests that the inherently passive nature of the peasant, unlike the active and engaged people from cities, leads to a political powerlessness:

This passive brotherliness, this sympathy in the original sense of the word, as suffering together, this fatalistic, comradely, age-old patience, is the deepest feeling the peasants have in common, a bond made by nature rather than by religion. They do not and can not have what is called political awareness, because they are literally pagani, ‘pagans,’ or countrymen, as distinguished from city dwellers. "They live submerged in a world that rolls on independent of their will, where man is in no way separate from his sun, his beast, his malaria. (Levi, 2000: 78-9) For Levi, the downtrodden subaltern of the peasant had the ability, but not the will, to create a Marxist overturning of power: “Unless there is a peasant revolution we shall never have a true Italian revolution, for the two are identical' (ibid.: 239). One of the key features which was part of the view of the South as 'other' and even 'exotic' was the practice of magic and rituals, of which tarantism was a part. Examples of this include the notion of the evil eye (malocchio), studied and written about by De Martino, as well as the use of magical charms, spells, amulets and potions. Some of this will be discussed in Chapter Two through the historical records of tarantism, which became a battleground between magic and medicine. Levi notes that in his small village in Lucania, magic was used to 'cure almost any ill, and usually by the mere pronouncement of a spell or incantation' (ibid.: 225), the most common spell being 'abracadabra, written in the geometric pattern of a triangle on an amulet. Barbara Littlewood, who conducted field research on practices of magic in Apulia in 1969, tells of witnessing cases of locals who were described as being affected by the evil eye, or by being given a magical potion. She frames these practices, as well as that of tarantism, as being part of a particularly female world dominated by Catholicism and clientelism (Littlewood, 2007: 236). Both these, she explains, foster concepts of misfortune, victimhood, and the establishment of notions of honour and shame, particularly in relation to women, which will feature in this study in the history of tarantism. The language and ideas of magic can still be found in some of the discourses surrounding the performance of tarantism and pizzica today: many informants spoke to me about the 'magic' that can take place within the circle, the ronda, in which the dance takes place, even if the notion of 'magic' has perhaps changed in meaning and context. However, the perception of the world of magic found in the South, even if understood somewhat differently today, reinforces the idea of Southern Italy as a place of alterity. Bearing in mind the notion of the 'Italian India from several centuries before, it could indeed be suggested, as Schneider states, that 'Italy was certainly affected by Orientalism' (J. Schneider, 1998: 5), and that this has been a feature of the history of tarantism. Pizzica: a way of seeing the world The form of music and dance which is commonly perceived to be connected to the ritual of tarantism is the tarantella. The very word appears to imply an origin in the city of Taranto, the taranta which bites, and the tarantata who is bitten. There are many forms of the tarantella throughout Southern Italy, each with regional variations, the most famous being found in Naples. The final section of the Introduction will discuss some of the ways in which the tarantella has been perceived and used by writers, musicians and choreographers, but it is important to make a distinction between this dance and the particular use of music and dance within Salento, both socially and in connection to the ritual of tarantism. In Salento, the word 'tarantella' is hardly heard. Instead, it is the pizzica which is the basis of the ritual of tarantism, as well as being of great significance in the revival of music and dance in Salento as part of the neo-tarantism movement." The term 'pizzica' is used to describe a genre of popular traditional music and dance found within Salento. There are many different kinds of pizziche, such as songs connected to work, love, and religion, including funeral laments, each with particular characteristics. There are other traditional forms of music within Salento, but the pizzica is significant as being the music and dance used within the ritual of tarantism. It has become common practice to talk of there being essentially three forms of pizziche: the pizzica pizzica (sometimes called the pizzica de core [pizzica of the heart]): the social form of the dance, which will be discussed in this section; the pizzica tarantata: the particular music and dance used therapeutically within the ritual of tarantism, which are analysed in Chapters Two and Three; and the pizzica scherma: a fighting form of the dance seen particularly at the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli, which will be examined in Chapter Four. These three categorisations are usually attributed to the ethnomusicologist Giorgio di Lecce (1953-2003), and although potentially being a reduction of the complexities found with the broader genre of the pizzica, also offers a convenient way to discuss the forms through these divisions, even whilst acknowledging that this is artificially imposed on the variety of music and dance that can be found.

The word 'pizzica' comes from the verb 'pizzicare', which means to bite, nip, sting or pinch. The movement implied within this translates into the fast hopping and skipping movements within the dance, and the rapid rhythmical beat found in the music. The movement of a violinist performing a pizzicato plucking of the strings also gives a sense of this light, fast, uplifting dynamic. The most common instruments used in playing pizzica today are the violin, guitar, flute, pipes, bagpipe (zampogna), accordion (organetto), and probably the most important, the tamburello. This is essentially a large wooden frame drum with bells, variations of which can be found throughout the Mediterranean. The tamburello has come to represent the essence of pizzica music, and for Salentine historian Aldo D'Antico, its physical structure as well as its sound is the symbolic representation of life itself. He describes pizzica as being 'a way of seeing life' (D'Antico, 2001), in that it reflects the play of human life as moving between order and chaos, an idea found within classical Greek philosophy. He states that this can be seen within the samburello itself, with its circular structure representing order, and the bells as chaos. Likewise, the beating of the hand on the drum skin is the sound of order, and the shaking or rattling of the bells is that of chaos. The rhythmic pattern which the tamburello player makes is the rhythm of life, the heartbeat, which increases when someone is faced with the chaos of a state of crisis, and returns to normal when order is restored. This is reflected within the ritual of tarantism where the condition that arises from the crisis of the 'bite' results in an irregular pulse, which is then altered by the dancing in response to the rhythm of the music to an increased rate,° then finally returning to a normal, regular pulse-beat when the cure has taken place, leading to a state of order within the bodymind. For D'Antico, 8 Kay Gardner suggests that the time signature of such music used in the ritual of tarantism is dotted crotchet equals 216, which corresponds to the pulse-rate of someone who is in a high fever (Gardner, 1997: 99). The introduction of the zamburello both represents and expresses this way of seeing life, of the movement between order and chaos, wellness and crisis. The specific rhythmic beat of the samburello contributes to the particular quality of pizzica music. The rhythmic pattern is usually in 6/8, with the accent on the first and last beats of the sequence, a lighter accent on the final beat and a heavier one on the first, matching the pattern of the heartbeat. This 6/8 or triple rhythm often accompanies a melody that is essentially in 4/4 or duple beat, thus leading to an ambiguity within the rhythmic framing.

The regular ostinato beat of the tambourine contrasts with a much freer, often improvised melody with varying accented beats, whether sung or played by an instrument. This also leads to a feeling of order and chaos, or structure and freedom within the music, which will be discussed further in Chapter Three in relation to the experience of the dance within the ritual. Ambiguity is also found within the melodic and harmonic nature of the music, which is mostly tonal, ‘though sometimes revealing a modal origin of a vocal character (diminished fifth, augmented fourth, tritone, etc.)’ (Carpitella, 2005: 299). This leads to a play between major and minor keys, and the use of the interval of the tritone, which is often heard within pizzica music, can be sustained for a length of time before being resolved into a diatonic chord, giving a poignant, and what is often described as a painful or sorrowful quality to the music.

Chapter Two observes that the songs used within tarantism were often noted as being in the Phrygian mode, which is sometimes seen as the most ‘Eastern’ sounding of the modes, particularly when turned into the Phrygian Dominant which is used in flamenco, Arabic and Jewish music, and this play between “Western’ and ‘Eastern’ sounds is also a feature of pizzica. The melodic lines within the songs are often freely improvised with particular forms of ornamentation around the basic notes of the melody. Salentine musician Roberto Raheli states that when he first heard the local elders singing the songs, he observed that their style of singing contained ‘many grace notes and embellishments, rhythm which was very changeable, and singers who often did not express some notes, but defined the notes by circling around them’ (Raheli, 2005: 125). This particular vocal quality is created by singing from the throat rather than the chest, which Raheli suggests is due to the songs being sung by workers in fields who were bending over, leading them to sing from their throat rather than the chest. However, this particular style of singing is also found in parts of Eastern Europe, as is the tendency to embellish notes in a similar way to that found in pizzica.

The movements of the dance found within the pizzica pizzica are strongly connected to the rhythms of the music. The pizzica pizzica is a social dance, traditionally performed at weddings and festivals. As these events were some of the few occasions where women were allowed to be seen dancing in public, this has led in part to the pizzica pizzica becoming a particular form of expression for women. It is often a couple-dance between a man and a woman, though also sometimes danced between two women, and very rarely two men. When danced by a man and woman, it is seen as a dance of corteggiamento or courtship, with flirtation and enticement between the couple. Although the dance is improvised, there are some established steps and movements which are often used. 

These mainly reflect the triple and syncopated beat of the music, with the foot-work embodying a contrast between both stamping firmly onto the ground and light hopping or skipping movements that move away from the ground. There is a promenade step which consists of one foot stamping flat, followed by the other stepping lightly on the toes, mimicking the triple accented and unaccented beat. The skipping movements include one foot hopping in place, while the other leg crosses over and back with the toes lightly touching the ground; one foot crossing over the other with the whole body turning to the side, and back; as well as skipping and hopping in place and in circles. In addition, there are turning, circling, and spinning movements using the whole body. The woman will often lift up and swirl her skirt, and hold a fazzoletto, a handkerchief or head-scarf which she uses to tease and entice the man. Her arms can also be held above the head, sometimes both waving together from side to side; alternating with one arm up, the other down at the side or behind the back; outstretched in front of her, the hands moving from the wrists; or else with her hands on her hips. The head will sometimes shake from side to side while dancing. The posture of the man is quite unusual, in that it often consists of him leaning forward from the waist with bent knees towards the woman, with his arms outstretched to her, while performing the hopping and skipping movements. He moves in circular patterns around the woman, while she stays in the middle, 28 Introduction thus both encouraging and supporting her to dance (see Illustration 4). Traditionally, they would never touch each other, as this is a dance of flirtation and seduction rather than resolution, although today it is possible to see couples who will take each other's hand or dance in closer proximity to the other than would have been the case in the past. Salentine dancer and musician Ada Metafune describes the relationship between the movements performed by the man and woman by stating that the woman must be like a flower, which the man as the bee dances around (Metafune, 2001). This image reinforces the aspect of courtship, as well as providing a space for the woman to express herself through the dance at the center of the circle. Ada explains that the music of the pizzica pizzica, by its very nature, makes a person want to dance. She uses the verb scazzicare, a word from the Salentine dialect which will be discussed further in Chapter Three, to explain the excitement and enticement that the music produces in the body, which leads to an irresistible urge to dance in response: ““pizzica-pizzica’ penso che significhi questo, una danza che senti dentro e ti spinge a saltare, ti “scazzica”’ (in Tarantino, 2001: 89) [‘I think that “pizzica-pizzica” means this, a dance that you feel inside and that drives you to skip, to “scazzica” yourself’ ]. In other words, the body is excited or urged (scazzica from scazzicare) to dance by the music. The dance takes place in the configuration of a circle, a ronda, usually defined by the musicians and onlookers at the circumference, with the dancers stepping into the middle of the ronda to perform, and then stepping out afterwards to allow for new dancers to enter. These ronde are seen as being transformed into ‘magical’ spaces through the action of the dance in response to the music. As Liidtke explains, in ‘the Salentine musical traditions, such rounds, Daniele Durante writes, “were attributed with a magical valence, which assured a cure from any kind of illness to all active participants” (Liidtke, 2005: 46), thus connecting the social form of pizzica to both magic and efficacy. Liidtke states that some elders in Salento today feel that this element of magic has been lost in the different types of performance contexts in which the pizzica is played (ibid.: 46), and this will be examined further in Chapter Four. The inherent joy and freedom of expression that can be found in playing and dancing the pizzica pizzica forms an important part of the embodied experience of those taking part, as well as potentially creating a sense of liberation and efficacy, particularly for women, in the movements of the dance in response to the urgings of the music.

The Tarantella: secularising the sacred

In the published proceedings from the Congress held by the International Folk Music Council in Venice in 1949, the summary of Paolo Toschi’s paper is titled: ‘A Question about the Tarantella’ In this, he states:

Almost all students of the matter have confused the Tarantella with a dance which, on therapeutic grounds, is danced by those who have been bitten by the tarantula, a large, poisonous spider of the Apulian countryside. It is therefore necessary to point out some of the differences. The Tarantella is a courtship dance with all the figures inherent to this, its character. It is danced by a couple and is graceful and elegant. It is, furthermore, of fairly brief duration and has its own music. On the other hand, the dance of those who have been bitten by the tarantula has the character and object of being curative, in that it is supposed to neutralise the effect of the poison. It is danced by one person alone and has a very agitated, sometimes violent movement in accordance with what it is proposed to achieve. It has a duration not only of several hours, but often of whole days. Then, also, the music is quite different. One is therefore bound to ask whether these are not two completely different dances. The confusion which has arisen up till the present comes from the fact that both the courtship Tarantella and that of the ‘tarantolati, or person bitten by a tarantula, derive their name from the city of Taranto. (Toschi, 1950: 19)

Toschi points out that there is a difference between the dance that has become labelled as the ‘tarantella, found throughout the South of Italy” in 9 Ithasbeen suggested that the tarantella possibly originated in some forms of Spanish dance, particularly the fandango. With the influence of the Spanish occupations in Southern Italy, there may well have been a level of impact of Spanish music and dance on the Italian. However, there may also be some confusion caused by the fact that there is a form of song accompanied by guitar within the genre of flamenco from Andalusia called the ‘taranta. This is quite different to the tarantella and pizzica, but the name may have implied a connection. Additionally, the Spanish ‘taranta’ is 30 Introduction various forms, most particularly in Naples, Sorrento, Sicily and Calabria, and the form of pizzica music and dance used in the ritual of tarantism. De Giorgi describes the pizzica pizzica and pizzica tarantata as being ‘un tipo arcaico di tarantella’ (De Giorgi, 1999: 88) [‘an archaic type of tarantella’}, whereas ethnomusicologist Diego Carpitella distinguishes between what he proposes should be called the ‘liturgical’ tarantella which is used in tarantism, and the ‘profane’ version which he suggests is probably the origin of the modern-day tarantella (Carpitella, 2005: 286). This establishes a ‘sacred’ and ‘secular’ division between the forms of the dance and music, depending on the context. The Toschi posits that part of the confusion that exists is due to the name. "Tarantella" means "little taranta" or "little spider," which appears to establish a connection to the symbol found within the ritual. However, the tarantella is essentially a social dance, usually understood as relating to courtship, rather than being used in a therapeutic context in the way that the pizzica is within tarantism. As previously indicated, there is a social form of the pizzica, the pizzica pizzica, however, musically and choreographically, it is very different from the Neapolitan, Sicilian, and Sorrentine forms, which are the most commonly recognizable styles of what is now called the "tarantella." De Giorgi gives a range of examples in his book to indicate these musical differences in terms of rhythm, melody, and harmony (De Giorgi, 2004: 245-52).

It is not completely clear at what point a dance called the "tarantella" became established as something separate from the music and dance used within the ritual of tarantism or when a distinctive form that came under this generic label, covering dances from the different regions of Southern Italy, became common use. Chapter Two indicates that the word "tarantella" was used in relation to the ritual from the seventeenth century; however, the word is used within the songs to indicate the spider, the "¢aranzta," rather than the actual music or dance. It is possible that this word was then used by "derived from or similar to the fandango" (Katz, 2001: 922), so this might also have resulted in the assumed link between tarantella and fandango. Although there are some external characteristics that may appear similar, such as the arm positions and circling movements, the two forms are also quite distinct.

Introduction 31 the range of writers on the ritual to describe the particular music and dance within the ritual. Whether it was through this that this type of dance spread throughout the South, or if the name, derived from Taranto as Toschi suggests, became attached to previously existing traditional social dance forms found in variations throughout the South in 6/8 time and incorporating hopping and skipping movements, is not clear.

What is apparent is that by the end of the eighteenth century, a dance called the "tarantella," found particularly in Naples, Sorrento, and Sicily, had become widely known for its nature as a courtship dance, which extended into often being perceived as erotic, and particularly licentious in relation to the exhibition of women within the dance. The "story" of the bite of the tarantula may still have been known in these regions outside Apulia, but the performances of the dance were not for reasons of efficacy, but rather for social enjoyment at festivals and weddings, and increasingly, as performances for travelers and tourists as part of the Grand Tour.

Henry Swinburne, in his Travels in Two Sicilies, recounts his experience of witnessing a performance of the tarantella in Naples in the late 1770s:

They do not even dance to music, but perform the Tarantella to the beating of a kind of tambourine, which was in use among their ancestors, as appears by the pictures of Herculaneum. The Tarantella is a low dance, consisting of turns on the heel, much footing, and snapping of the fingers. It seems the delight of their soul, and a constant holiday-diversion of the young women, who are, in general, far from handsome, although they have fine eyes and striking features. (Swinburne, 1790: 94-5)

He later describes seeing an example of the ritual of tarantism in Lecce, quoted in Chapter Two, which gives a very different description of the movements and music, even if what he observed appears highly staged. He does not use the word ‘tarantella’ to describe the dance in this ritualistic context, but instead states that the woman danced the ‘tarantata’ (ibid.: 304), thus naming the dance after the word given to the person who has been bitten, indicating a difference between the two forms which he saw. Swinburne’s reference to Herculaneum was very much part of the sensibility of those undertaking the Grand Tour. This became a feature of the education of the aristocracy from the North, mainly Britain, but also France and Germany, touring to and around the South, particularly Italy.

32 Introduction

Travel for leisure was still a very expensive activity during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and bearing in mind the retinue which often accompanied them, was essentially the domain of the wealthy. Chloe Chard indicates that the most common features of the Tours were that they were undertaken by a member of the British aristocracy, following an itinerary that could last for several years, always included Rome, and moved in the direction of travelling from North to South. This was part of the Enlightenment idea of the need to know and understand through seeing and observation. In this case, the knowledge to be seen and witnessed was the remains of the Classical world which could be found in Italy and Greece. It was a land that was ‘other’ to the educated and modern North; it was instead a place of rural civilisation, where the character of the people matched the landscape and climate (Chard, 1999: 14-38). The Northerners came to see the past in the present, or as Horden and Purcell explain: ‘At the climax of their Grand Tour, travelers from the North came upon a world hardly industrialised in comparison with their own, and therefore perhaps inevitably more redolent of an earlier age’ (Horden and Purcell, 2000: 29). Thus the Grand Tour was both a geographical and historical journey, travelling back in time by visiting places which held the remains of the past.

It was as part of this travel experience that writers such as Swinburne and Goethe observed performances of the tarantella in Naples and Sorrento, and the beating of tambourines and free expression of the women within the dance seemed to bear a resemblance to not only a Classical world, but also one dominated by the excesses of the erotic and wine, connecting it to the followers of Dionysus. Women in particular became the representation of the South, as creatures of sensibility and emotion rather than the intellectual and objective ‘male’ world of the North.

It was one woman in particular who gave performances of the tarantella in Naples that entranced her audience, and became the emblem of the act of bringing the past to life. She was not an Italian, but rather an English woman who had reinvented herself throughout her life, and when in Naples at the end of the eighteenth century, was married to the British Ambassador, and had the title of Lady Emma Hamilton. The Hamiltons were living in Naples in the period following the excavations of Pompeii and Herculaneum which had revived interest in the Classical past, as remains of its prior civilisations were revealed. Travellers came to see not only the ruins of buildings, but also the images found in mosaics, paintings, sculptures and vases. After seeing these, some would then travel to the home of the Hamiltons, and observe Emma dressed up in imitation of the images, performing what became known as the ‘Attitudes, where she would animate the statues and vase-paintings in her presence and movements. One of those visitors who became part of her captive audience was Goethe, who traveled to Naples in 1787 and found the acme of these delights in the person of an English girl of twenty with a beautiful face and a perfect figure. [Sir William Hamilton] has had a Greek costume made for her, which becomes her extremely. Dressed in this, she lets down her hair and, with a few shawls, gives so much variety to her poses, gestures, expression, etc., that the spectator can hardly believe his eyes. He sees what thousands of artists would have liked to express realized before him in movements and surprising transformations—standing, kneeling, sitting, reclining, serious, sad, playful, ecstatic, contrite, alluring, threatening, anxious, one pose follows another without a break. She knows how to arrange the folds of her veil to match each mood and has a hundred ways of turning it into a head-dress. The old knight idolizes her and is enthusiastic about everything she does. In her, he has found all the antiquities, all the profiles of Sicilian coins, even the Apollo Belvedere. This much is certain: as a performance, it's like nothing you ever saw in your life. We have already enjoyed it on two evenings. (Goethe, 1962: 199-200)

He uses the word "attrattiva" to describe the magnetic force that a person such as Emma can exert in drawing someone towards them, a notion of magnetism that will also be found in Kircher's philosophy in relation to tarantism in Chapter Two. However, when not performing, her brightness soon tarnished, and later Goethe candidly said: "I must confess that our fair entertainer seems to me, frankly, a dull creature. Perhaps her figure makes up for it, but her voice is inexpressive and her speech without charm. Even her singing is neither full-throated nor agreeable. Perhaps, after all, this is the case with all soulless beauties. People with beautiful figures can be found everywhere, but sensitive ones with agreeable vocal organs are much rarer, and a combination of both is very rare indeed." (ibid.: 312)

Whatever Goethe might have ultimately thought of her, Emma still held sway over her own court in Naples. The Attitudes were her fanciful 34 Introduction reconstructions of the poses seen in the images amongst the remains, thus seeming to bring to life what had long been buried. As well as the Attitudes, she was renowned for her rendition of the tarantella. According to Kate Williams, Emma went on a trip to Apulia in 1789, and when in Brindisi, she watched the women in the town perform the tarantella, a dance inspired by the energetic movements of a tarantula. The performer shook a tambourine as she twirled and danced in a circle. She became more and more frenzied and sometimes collapsed at the end. When Emma returned to the Palazzo in May, she incorporated the tarantella into her Attitudes, much to the delight of her audience. The Comte d Espinchal decided that the beauty and voluptuousness of her performance could inflame the 'most insensible man'. (Williams, 2007: 145)

These performances of the tarantella became famous, and she was painted as a Bacchante doing the dance by the artist Elisabeth Vigée le Brun, and sketched in various poses of the tarantella by George Romney. After she returned to London, Emma continued to perform for the aristocracy, though she eventually died in poverty and loneliness. However, she left her own traces on the performance of the tarantella, and even if not a direct influence, over one hundred years later, the dancer Isadora Duncan also dressed in imitation Greek tunics embodying poses from the Classical past, which became the beginnings of modern dance. The tarantella, originally a rural dance, was adapted for social and court dances, becoming a stylized and choreographed version of the traditional folk dance. This transformation occurred during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, when dance was considered an essential accomplishment for the upper classes. Madame Michau, a dance teacher, created a choreographed version of the tarantella, including steps such as gallop steps, jetés, and chassés. Michau herself was the Maitresse de ceremonies at the court of George IV and William IV, based in the Royal Pavilion in Brighton.

Later in her life, Michau was still teaching the tarantella to daughters of wealthy families at schools in Brighton. Debra Teachman, in her book Understanding Jane Eyre, quotes from the diary of Frances Power Cobbe, describing her experience of taking dancing classes in an expensive school in Brighton. The quote illustrates the transferring of these traditional dances to social and court dances, stylized and choreographed, removed from their local performance and transformed into set forms.

An example of the stylized version of the tarantella in literature is found in Madame de Staél's 1807 novel Corinne, ou [Italie | Corinne, or Italy]. The book's protagonist, Corinne, is a 'genius, a free spirit, imaginative and proactive, one of the first female characters to embody this duality of both male and female qualities. Corinne represented the sensibility of the Italian South, although she actually has part-British ancestry and, like Emma, has reinvented herself. In the novel, she dances the tarantella in a ballroom in Naples, entrancing the British Northerner, Lord Nelvil, with her passionate and exotic dancing. They are, as it were, poets in their dancing, expressing so many different feelings by their ritual steps and the charming tableaux they presented to the eye. Corinne knew so well all the poses depicted by the ancient painters and sculptors that, with a slight movement of the arms, placing her tambourine now above her head, now in front of her with one hand while the other ran along the bells with incredible skill, she brought to mind the dancing girls of Herculaneum and aroused, one after another, a host of new ideas for drawing and painting. (De Staél, 1998: 90-1)

Just as Emma had been painted by Elisabeth Vigée le Brun, so the artist also did a portrait of De Staél in the guise of her character, Corinne. The process of the feminisation of the dance, which is seen also in the ritual of tarantism discussed in Chapter Two, includes the freedom of expression by a woman dancing the tarantella, which was also found in one of the most important plays of the late nineteenth century, often seen as the first feminist and modernist play, Henrik Ibsen’s A Doll's House. Ibsen spent some time travelling to and writing in Naples, Sorrento and Pompeii, and it is possible that whilst there, he witnessed performances of the tarantella, and Nora herself says that she dressed up as a Neapolitan fisher-girl to dance the tarantella which she had learnt in Capri (Act II).

It was whilst he was in Rome in 1878, that Ibsen wrote ‘Notes for a Modern Tragedy’ which became the beginning points for A Doll's House:

There are two kinds of moral laws, two kinds of conscience, one for men and one, quite different, for women. They don’t understand each other; but in practical life, woman is judged by masculine law, as though she weren’t a woman but a man. [...] A woman cannot be herself in modern society. It is an exclusively male society, with laws made by men and with prosecutors and judges who assess feminine conduct from a masculine viewpoint. (in Meyer, 2004: 321)

It was this aspect of a woman not being able to be herself that makes the dancing of the tarantella by Nora so significant. When practicing with Torvald, she drapes herself in a shawl and uses a tambourine. Her fast and frenetic dancing alarms Torvald, and after her hair falls free and she dances even faster, he stops the performance, saying that she has forgotten everything that he has taught her. However, after Nora has performed the dance publicly, and she and Torvald arrive home, it becomes clear that through the embodiment of the dance, he has a transformed view of her from little girl to woman: ‘And as I watched you darting and swaying in the tarantella, my blood was on fire ... I couldn’t bear it any longer ... and that’s why I brought you down here with me so early’ (Ibsen, 1981: 70 (Act III).

It was through the dance that Nora expressed who she is as a woman, leading to the moment of her being able to finally leave her husband. Issues of shifting power structures in relation to the position of women in society will be prevalent throughout this study, as the embodied presence of women both within the dance, and within their community, creates a space where their voices are heard and their faces are seen, leading to a temporary sense of agency. Whether or not this can create a more permanent change is questioned in Chapters Three and Four. As well as in literature and theatre, the stylised version of the tarantella was used by classical composers, including Chopin, Rachmaninov, Tchaikovsky, Mendelssohn, Verdi, Rossini and Debussy. 

It also became incorporated into classical ballet and popular dance. The ballets range from the performance of a tarantella within the ballet Napoli, created by the Danish choreographer August Bournonville in 1842, through to George Balanchine's famous Tarantella first performed by the New York City Ballet in 1964. In addition, there were some classical ballet versions which influenced stage-dance performances, one of the most renowned being that by Fanny Elssler (1810-84) in her dance La Tarantule, which inspired the notorious Spider Dance created by Lola Montez (1821-61), where plastic spiders would fall out of her skirt as she performed what was in effect a striptease. These exotic and provocative dances were seen as the embodiment of the Italian South. Smith cites from La France Musicale which, on 30 June 1839, noted that ‘Elssler’s way of dancing a tarantella in La Tarantule was said to portray “with wonderful intelligence that ardent character only found on the volcanic soil of Italy”’ (Smith, 1997: 301).

Introduction

The performances of the ‘profane’ tarantella still take place for tourists in Southern Italy. With the advent of mass tourism, which has enabled a greater number of travellers to the region to enjoy the weather and culture, these dances can be found taking place in hotels, clubs and restaurants, most particularly in Sorrento. Tourists will go to see performances of the tarantella in the South of Italy just as they would expect to see the flamenco in the South of Spain: it is still on tourist itinerary for those heading to the deep South to see that which is ‘exotic’ and ‘other.’ However, the differences in the form of what is now known as the tarantella have arisen, this has to an extent clouded the understanding of the therapeutic use of pizzica music and dance in the ‘sacred’ form within Salento, which is the focus for this book. The elements of the erotic, of sexual and licentious expression by women, and the use of tambourines, ribbons and castanets, have become the dominant understanding of the notion of the tarantella, with the mysterious story of the battle with the spider which has bitten the dancer. Although it is important to acknowledge these versions of the tarantella, it is the long history of the culturally conditioned use of music and dance as a form of efficacy within the ritual of tarantism that is the subject of this study. This emphasis will hopefully enlarge the understanding of ways in which the dance of the little zaranta has developed and been embodied by those from Salento.

CHAPTER ONE
Embodying Pasts and Presence

In discussing such a complex cultural phenomenon as tarantism, both from a perspective of the historical writings concerning the ritual, and an ethnographic study of the revival of pizzica music and dance through the development of neo-tarantism in contemporary Salento, it is both useful and necessary to draw on a selection of writers and methods within the fields of anthropology, sociology, history and cultural studies. However, I feel that there are some limitations within these disciplines which I can address through incorporating aspects of my own field of performance studies to establish a focus on the centrality of the body, and the body in/as performance, in terms of the lived experience of the body or bodymind,* and both body and performance as being process and event, rather than object. This perspective encompasses notions of ‘self’ and identity at a personal level, as well as an embodiment of socio-cultural values, and in relation to the surrounding geographic and cultural landscapes. In this chapter, we will explore the interrelationship between the body and performance, examodstrates how both the body and performance can be seen as the embodiment of past and present, and how the process of the engagement with the act of performance creates a sense of presence in the specific spatial-temporal location. In this way, it concerns the interrelationship between the experience of the bodymind and the social function of the music and dance, and the mutual dependency and inseparability of the two, in and through the action of the performance. The efficacious potential lies in the way in which the embodiment of the dance and music operate together in the specific socio-cultural space. It is the experience of the performance which acts as the agent in the process of transformation or efficacy within the bodymind.

This chapter will also discuss the use of the term 'bodymind' to indicate a psychophysical unity of body and mind. The study of historical records and field research in the contemporary revival within Salento will be used to investigate the music and dance. This investigation is necessarily situated within the fields of both history and ethnography. The bringing together of these two disciplines in the study of dance has recently been explored in the groundbreaking and timely collection Dancing From Past to Present: nation, culture, identities, edited by Theresa Buckland.

Buckland points out that in the twenty-first century, the neat division into mutually exclusive territories [history and ethnography] no longer holds. She states that such an approach demonstrates the interrelated nature of the study of a performance form, and an interdisciplinary approach in that ethnography and history's 'theoretical and methodological frameworks are located in anthropology, ethnology, cultural studies, social and cultural history, performance studies, sociology, ethnomusicology, and folklore studies' (Buckland, 2006: 4).

In examining a form of performance which has a focus on its efficacious potential, and where the extensive historical writings themselves are based in a range of disciplines including philosophy, medicine, science, religion, and travel writing, the relationship between past and present is of immense importance in understanding 'embodied cultural knowledge as temporally and spatially dynamic, situated in its meaning, and creative in the interstices of personal and communal histories that reach across the experiences of the researcher and the researched. Such departures of inquiry are often inextricably, though not exclusively, linked with issues of identity' (ibid.: 14). Both historical documents (whether textual, visual, dance and music notation, etc.), and the means for conducting field research (interviews, recordings, participant-observation, etc.), need careful consideration in terms of the situated position of each author and researcher. History itself needs re-framing, as Adrienne Kaeppler suggests in Buckland's volume, to be seen as abstracted 'moments' rather than a linear and absolute approach to knowledge: The term 'history' evokes the idea of a linear knowledge of what happened in the past that has been recorded in writing. But even in the best of times, written history records only select ‘moments’ when someone happened to write down what she or he saw or was told. Instead of confining myself to the paradigm of linear written history, I want to enlarge our historical purview to suggest that dance history does not depend on accounts that were written down—usually by outsiders—but on a wider variety of historical sources that includes written history, oral history, and cultural memory, ethnohistory, and ethnographic research. Even with this variety of sources, sometimes we can know only about specific ‘moments.’ Moments, however, can be extended to represent a particular stage in something’s development, or a stage in a course of events. As a construction here, a ‘moment’ is essentially a historiographic abstraction, which can vary from a single written description of a specific performance, to a period of years with intensive observations and numerous written sources. (Kaeppler, 2006: 26, 29)

Despite using different research methods, these questions and concerns are equally vital for both history and ethnography, and demonstrate the interconnection between them. The historical writings on tarantism offer ‘moments’ which are situated within their specific disciplines; philosophical, religious, and moral contexts; the socio-cultural positionings of writer and subject; and the individual viewpoint of the author. Likewise, ethnographic research can only offer ‘moments,’ specific events in time and place. My field research consisted of ‘moments’ of visiting certain festivals; speaking with a range of chosen subjects; observing and filming excerpts of music and dance performances in different contexts; and participating in dancing at festivals and concerts. These individual ‘moments’ make up a picture which will be presented in this study, but this is offered from my particular perspective and experience.

As Lynn Maners questions: [W]hen we write ethnography, are we writing facts as they appear on the ground, or are we writing fictions, essentially pleasant and entertaining memoirs from our time in the field? Are we recording an ethnographic reality, or is the field a palimpsest upon which we place our own constructions? The answer, of course, is that we are doing something of both. We see the culture under study through the lens of our experience, our memory, and our theoretical orientations. Emic and etic (insider’s view and outsider’s view), both past and present, exist in constant interpretation. (Maners, 2006: 92-3)

History and ethnography both offer ‘moments’ of a viewpoint in a specific spatial-temporal framework, which become part of the ‘past’ or ‘history’ in their manifestation due to the ephemerality of the event. In this way, it is questionable to suggest a binary of past and present, of history and ethnography, but instead, as Kaeppler proposes, a glimpse of ‘moments’ through the appropriate method can offer a way into seeing and understanding how a cultural form develops in a particular place and time, and the length and breadth of the ‘moment’ is as flexible as it needs to be. Thus, ethnography becomes part of the study of history, and history is made present in the ethnographic moment of the researcher’s observation and experience. For Dils and Cooper Albright, in their Introduction to Moving history/dancing cultures: The study of the past, whether that means studying a dance form from a thousand years ago, a choreographer working a hundred years ago, or a dance concert seen last week, is simultaneously of and about past and present. The ultimate reward of dance history is that it is useful. This does not mean that we ‘use’ the past, unfairly plundering or misinterpreting past lives and events and misrepresenting history in order to validate our own agendas. Dance historians study the past to illuminate people’s lives, explicate past dance practices, and understand the complex interconnections between bodies, movement, and other social practices that are a result of specific cultural beliefs and epistemological frameworks. Dancing is a way of knowing the world. History helps us to understand that. (Dils and Cooper Albright, 2001: xiv)

The connection between past and present, with a present that reflects, embodies and reframes a past through its own manifested ‘moment in time and place,’ is seen in the historical writings on tarantism. Though they will be presented in this study in a linear manner in terms of time, what can be seen through them is an almost continual reflecting back to a historical past, or pasts, in terms of claiming that the present cultural form is rooted in past practices and ideas, though often re-working these ideas through present philosophies and forms of knowledge and performance.

Thus, whether it is the Neoplatonist Marsilio Ficino in the fifteenth century taking ideas of the nature of music and dance from classical Greece and combining this with his own views on astrology to create an iatromusical approach to tarantism, which was developed further by the Jesuit priest Athanasius Kircher in the seventeenth century; or historian Ernesto De Martino in his seminal study La terra del rimorso, published in 1961, positing that the origins of tarantism lie in the Corybantic rites of ancient Greece; or some Salentines today who speak nostalgically of pizzica and tarantism as being part of a peasant-culture now lost; in all these cases it is the appropriation and often romanticising of an idea of history-in-the-present that creates a non-linear view of compound ‘moments’ which both act and re-enact a sense of identity and positioning in the present.

In this way, rather than a linear history, there are instead many ‘histories’ of the complex phenomenon of tarantism, and the past and present are combined in both the writings about it, and the embodiment of its performance in each of these ‘moments in time and place.’

Ritual and performance in anthropology, sociology and performance studies

Ritual performances have often been an object of study within the fields of anthropology, history, sociology, and cultural studies. The vast variety of methodological and theoretical frameworks found within these writings can offer much useful information and understanding of the function and process of these types of performances within a culture. However, over the past forty years scholars and practitioners working within the field of performance itself have also been examining these phenomena within the developing area of performance studies, sometimes in various forms of collaboration with the other disciplines. What this has highlighted is a difficulty within the social sciences of finding ways of approaching rituals as acts of performance: live events which operate in a specific time and place through the presence and embodiment of those taking part. This notion of embodiment — of body as process rather than object — is one that has, until relatively recently, been largely overlooked within the fields of anthropology and sociology, and indeed even performance studies. It is my intention to examine the process of embodiment and a sense of presence in tarantism and neo-tarantism, which connects the past and present, history and ethnography. This will explore how ideas relating to the body and performance have been utilized as a means to expound on the particular views of each writer in their own context through history, leading to a shifting discourse of appropriation, distortion, and often a silencing of the voices of the subjects being discussed. Naturally, I have to declare my own positioning within this as being yet another in the line to re-frame tarantism and pizzica through a different lens, but it is my hope that this focus may complement and further the writings on the subject within the fields of history, biomedicine and anthropology.

Since the influence of anthropology and sociology has been so significant in the development of performance studies as a discipline, this section will examine a selection of these writings in relation to ritual, performance and the body, to address some of the advantages of and limitations to the confluence of dialogues that have operated between the disciplines, leading to mutual borrowings of ideas, terminology and metaphor within both a blurring and defining of the boundaries between the fields. The vast array of writings on ritual performances within the field of anthropology and more recently ethnology and ethnography reflect shifts in methodologies and thinking about cultures, behaviors, identities and practices, defining and redefining what people do, and why they do it.

There has been a tendency through much of this writing to focus on analysis through a representational approach to performance which does not necessarily include an understanding of its nature as performance, and that it is through the experience of the action of the performer that the effects of the ritual, in whatever form, may be actualized. However, as anthropologist Edward Schieffelin indicates, there has been a change in the anthropological study of ritual, by which he refers to the broader concept of 'cultural performance' offered by Milton Singer (Schieffelin, 1996: 84, n. 1), from 'seeing these kinds of enactments in terms of structures of representation to seeing them as processes of practice and performance' (ibid.: 59). Bruce Kapferer, writing on Sinhalese exorcism rites, states that anthropologists 'have given insufficient attention to the significance of aesthetic form in ritual' (Kapferer, 1991: 245-6). However, moving beyond aesthetic form, there has been less attention to the nature of performance as embodied action and presence. Schieffelin highlights a potential reason for this lack:

The performative perspective is also fundamentally concerned with something anthropologists have always found elusive and hard to deal with: the creation of presence. Performances — whether ritual or dramatic — create and make present realities vivid enough to beguile, amuse or terrify. They alter moods, attitudes, social states and states of mind. Unlike texts, however, they are ephemeral; they create their effects and then are gone, leaving their reverberations (fresh insights, reconstituted selves, new statuses, altered realities) behind them. It is the process of 'performativity creating reality' found in many events of interest to anthropologists, that has become increasingly a focus of attention. (Schieffelin, 1996: 59-60) Although Schieffelin opens up this significant question, he does not fully address it in his highly interesting investigation of ‘failure’ within ritual performance. He attributes the failure of the medium Aiba during a séance among the Kaluli people of Papua New Guinea in 1976 to a lack of performance skills. Schieffelin's description of Aiba's shortcomings is based on his observation of external factors, such as Aiba's inability to engage with the audience through his lack of range in singing and movement. Schieffelin compares Aiba to the shaman Walia, who was able to 'attract and hold the audience's interest, [which] enabled him to create and dominate the performative space much more skilfully and less heavy-handedly than Aiba' (ibid.: 78).

Schieffelin's approach in attempting to base his analysis on performance experience is flawed, as it focuses more on the reading of texts rather than understanding the process of embodiment and transformation. Reading skills as text does not necessarily offer a full understanding of the performance event or the real ability of the subject to create the intended effect.

A highly skilled performer does not necessarily equate to an effective performance. Some of the Salentines who were critical of the 'concert' performances of pizzica, preferred the 'amateurs' playing and dancing in the ronde on the streets, saying that this is the 'real' pizzica because they were feeling the music and dance inside. They believed that 'professional' performers did not have the same connection, even if they appeared more technically accomplished.

The efficacy of a tarantata undergoing the ritual of tarantism lies in her embodied experience of and engagement with the process of the dancing in the specific socio-cultural context. Certainly, the musicians need to have a level of skill and sensitivity in finding the appropriate song for her and performing it in a way that enables her to dance for as long as needed. However, this is not about 'technique' but rather again an internal connection with the music which is communicated through their playing to the tarantata. There is more to "Embodying Pasts and Presence" than an ability in skills as such, but Schieffelin was not able to fully address this. It may well be the case that Aiba was less effective in creating a performance that engaged the audience, thus leading to a culture-specific sense of "failure" in terms of the séance, but there are perhaps other ways, or a broader framework, to approach asking why this happened than in the reading of a set of skills.

Thomas Csordas acknowledges that a synthetic approach to performance [...] offers analytic purchase on experiential specificity by allowing us to ask in what manner participants in religious healing become existentially engaged in the healing process. Performance thus invites us — though we do not yet always accept the invitation — to go beyond the sequence of action and the organization of text to the phenomenology of healing and being healed. (Csordas, 1996: 94)

Despite these issues, anthropology has clearly played an important part in the research and examination of cultural performances, and the two-way flow between anthropology and other social sciences, and performance studies, has offered a significant contribution to the development of these fields. Marvin Carlson, writing on performance studies, notes that the "field of anthropology has been a particularly rich source for the discussion of performance in recent years" (Carlson, 2004: 12). Even if, as Csordas suggests, the "invitation" from performance has proved a challenge for anthropologists, a desire to understand the efficacy of a ritual performance through its nature as performance is seen increasingly as having greater importance, particularly in the field of medical anthropology.

Two of the key influences on the emergence of performance studies as a discipline in the United States came from the social sciences of anthropology (most particularly Victor Turner), and sociology (Erving Goffman on the presentation of the self, and role-play, Gregory Bateson on play and games, and later Judith Butler on performativity, amongst others). Turner's notions on the liminal and "social drama" as well as his collaborations with theatre practitioner Richard Schechner, who is usually attributed as one of the main influences of the founding of performance studies as a theoretical discipline (ibid.: 17), have been well documented (Turner, 1982). Turner's symbolic approach to the organizational structure of ritual performance, and his interest in play, became a fundamental model for Schechner during the 1960s and 1970s. Schechner was also greatly influenced by the work of Erving Goffman, particularly during the 1970s. Goffman's significant contribution within the field of sociology has been through his discussion of the performative nature of social behavior, and the notion of "role-play, presentation of the self, and the interaction between "performer" and "audience". Thus the notion of "performance" is removed from its place in relation to a specific cultural event, and is instead situated in any and all activities of social life, examining how the "self" is presented and played as a "role" in any given moment (see Goffman, 1955 and 1956 for an elaboration of these ideas). Goffman's use of metaphors taken from performance, such as "actor; "role", "setting", "stage props, etc. 

, has now become established as a practice amongst many sociologists and also anthropologists, who use this kind of language from performance to discuss their social subjects and their practices. Goffman’s sociological approach also had a strong influence on performance studies which was ‘at least equal to, and perhaps even greater than Turner’s in the anthropological study of performance’ (Carlson, 2004: 32). It is interesting to see that today the metaphors from performance are often used very freely within the social sciences, to the extent that looking at this from the perspective of performance studies can lead to a sense of frustration. Is everybody really an ‘actor’? Is it appropriate to use this terminology in the context of ‘everyday life’, with all its socio-cultural complexities? Carlson questions this in relation to Goffman’s definition of performance, as “all the activity of an individual which occurs during a period marked by his continuous presence before a particular set of observers and which has been some influence on the observers” (ibid.: 35, citing Goffman, 1959: 22). He states that it ‘is important, however, to note that even this seemingly very general and calculatedly neutral definition reflects certain assumptions and biases’ (ibid.: 35). From the perspective of a field which is attempting to address complicated questions of performance and presence, the way that these metaphors are used can at times seem to offer a somewhat superficial understanding of the nature of performance, still not fully encompassing the embodied experience of the process.

Within ritual performance, it can certainly be the case that these metaphors may be used in a blurring of boundaries between performance and social behavior, protagonist and actor. During the 1960s in America and Europe, there was a great increase in the interest of these phenomena by both those working on cultural performances within academia, and also by theatre, dance and performance practitioners, who sought to bridge a gap between ritual and theatrical performance. This complicated history involved a dialogue with anthropology and ethnology, as well as sociology, cultural and folk studies, and psychology, all of which left an imprint on the theoretical development of performance studies, which still utilizes these other disciplines as a means of articulating performance practices.

Performance practitioners who began to explore and use ritual within their work included Jerzy Grotowski, Eugenio Barba, and Peter Brook in Europe, all of whom were influenced by the writings of Antonin Artaud, while in America, as part of the dynamic avant-garde performance movement, there were practitioners such as Schechner and Joseph Chaikin in theatre, and Anna Halprin in dance. In part, this was fueled by an increasing interest in, and awareness of, performance forms from Asia such as Kathakali from India, Noh and Kabuki theatre from Japan, and Peking Opera from China, which encompass ritual elements in various ways. This play between ritual and theatre meant that at times the ‘actor’s experience was described as analogous to possession rituals and shamanistic journey which evoke imagined truths in the experienced immediacy of performance, thereby making them “real”. Actors were encouraged to see themselves as shamans’ (Kendall, 1996: 19). This process was not without its own issues, not the least of which was a tendency towards a ‘mystification’ of the actor’s experience; the accusation of appropriation of performance forms, aesthetics and training practices from other cultures; and an interest, sometimes at a superficial level, in spiritual traditions, particularly from Asia, which were drawn into an attempt at the blurring between______ This was also bound up with the connection between past and present, with the identification of the roots of theatre originating within ritual. David George points out that it is because textbooks tell us so, that '[e]veryone knows the theatre originated out of ritual' (George, 1998: 1), citing from Phyllis Hartnoll's Concise History of Theatre: "The origins of thea- tre go back far into the past, to the religious rites of the earliest communities" (Hartnoll, 1967: 7, in ibid.: 1). This, George goes on to discuss, highlights some of the problems linked to the notion of 'origins, which can lead to an over-simplification and evolutionist view of the development of the range of types of performance practices around the world and, harking back to the earlier problematising by Kaeppler, a linear approach to history:

The relationship between ritual and theatre has traditionally been approached historically — the former identified as preceding and (it is argued, 'therefore') being the source/origin of the latter. Much in this approach may be objected to on methodological grounds - its 'fallacy of emergence', its cultural universalism, porous causalities, and — not least — the evidence that the sequence depends in the end on ideological assumptions. (ibid.: 12)

The desire to connect to a sense of 'roots' and 'origin' in theatre can lead to a romanticising of both actor-as-shaman, and theatre-as-ritual, which blurs the distinction of motivation between these types of practices. However, it has also led to constructive and innovative developments in the fields of performance which can offer great possibilities towards understanding the efficacious potential of the experience of the performative nature of ritual. Some practitioners have used ritual as a means of creating different performance forms, particularly through the idea of 'participatory' performance (Grotowski, Halprin, Nicholas Nufiez), where the relationship of performer-spectator is altered, leading to a greater sense of 'communitas, to use Turner's expression. In addition, the line between what may be considered to be 'art', and 'life' also became less distinct, seen, for example, in the Life/Art Process developed by Halprin at the Talmapa Institute in California which sought to 'investigate the complex and potentially transformative relationship between artistic expression and life experience' (Worth and Poynor, 2004: 35).

It is also certainly important to acknowledge the difference in intention between an actor or dancer on stage, and a participant in a ritual performance with a focus on efficacy through culturally determined practices. However, even though this intention — the motivation, choice of process, and desired outcome — may be different, there are experiential qualities inherent within theatrical or dance performance that may be useful as a way of approaching the experience within ritual performance, bearing in mind its nature as an act of performance, of engaging in an embodied action to create a process of transformation within the bodymind and socio-cultural space. This may be helpful, particularly as a means to address Schieffelin's concern stated earlier about anthropologists' problems with approaching the 'creation of presence' (Schieffelin, 1996: 59). Theatre practitioner Michael Chekhov, speaking on the motivation for acting, suggests that the desire for characterisation is actually the desire for transformation (Chekhov, 1996: Tape 1). The process of the actor playing an 'other' is one of the transformation of the bodymind in the space of the stage during the time-frame of the performance. The actor's desire to experience this transformation of 'self' leads them to engage in the activity of creating and playing a character. For actor Yoshi Oida, "you are completely yourself and at the same time you are aware of watching yourself" (Oida and Marshall, 1997: 18).

For Konstantin Stanislavsky, an inspiration for many practitioners such as Chekhoy, Grotowski, and Barba, there is a unity of actor and character, developed through what he calls the 'creative state'. He describes this state using the Russian term 'ja esm,' or 'I am Being.' According to Jean Benedetti, "[t]his is a case of Stanislavski inventing or rather revising a lost word. The verb 'to be' now only exists in Russian in the infinitive, 'est.' Stanislavski uses the first person singular, 'ja esm,' which no one would normally use. 'I am being' is a way of conveying this unusual message" (Benedetti, 1998: 6, fn.).

This state of 'I am Being' is the 'actor's sense of being fully present in the dramatic moment. A term that functions in the System as a synonym for "experiencing" (Carnicke, 1998: 174). Through development of both outer action and inner life, the actor can, as Benedetti suggests, enter into a heightened, creative state of being:

"By following this process methodically I become involved in the action. The situations take on a reality for me, I believe in them, my mind begins to accept them as true. There comes a point when the borderline between me and the 'character' is blurred. I am in the state Stanislavski called 'I am Being' At that point a kind of creative spontaneity occurs. The subconscious takes over. I behave with the same immediacy as I do in life but with the difference that my behaviour is selective, shaped, aesthetic and transparent." (Benedetti, 1998: 9)

The state of 'I am Being' of experiencing and 'being fully present in the dramatic moment' may begin to offer a way into questioning the notions of liveness and presence that for Schieffelin can be a stumbling block for anthropologists. This sense of presence is significant for ritual performances, which need to take account of how to make present, and to be present, in the specific time and place of the performative act. This is present-ing rather than representing or representation, which is the way that ritual has often been discussed by social scientists. Present-ing, being present, is not representing something, but is rather being. This sense of 'I am Being, of being fully present in the moment, can offer a useful way to approach complex concepts such as 'trance' found within cultural performances, and important within a study of the phenomenon of tarantism. The notion of ‘trance’ is a vastly complex area of study, and while acknowledging the difference in intention and process between ritual and theatrical performance, and the danger of correlating actor with shaman, there is a value in examining the trance state through performance and theatre studies to offer an embodied approach to understanding the experience of performance.

Trance is defined as an altered state of consciousness that consists of a deep absorption leading to a dissolution of subject/object duality, and a ‘forgetting’ or ‘removal from’ an everyday awareness of ‘self’. Bruce Kapferer states that trance is "the dissolution of any subject/object distinction. [...] A process is established in which there is a loss of a distance between the ‘T’ and the ‘me’" (Kapferer, 1991: 269, 275). For psychologist David Wulff, trance "should be understood to refer to a state of profound absorption or lack of mental content during which the individual is experientially cut off from the outside world" (Wulff, 2004: 399).

Within tarantism, the subject experiencing both the ‘illness’ of the condition and the ‘cure’ of the dance is often described as being in a state of trance. Performers and musicians today describe the experiential quality of performance, offering a similar description of the process:

"When you let go of your hand, the tambourine starts playing, when you let go of your voice, the song starts singing; and when you let go of your body the pizzica starts dancing. [...] Even I find myself asking myself at times how I managed to reach a certain rhythm, how I managed to hit the tambourine so strongly without my hand feeling anything." (informants’ accounts in Liidtke, 2005: 37)

It is important to acknowledge that these types of experiences, whether in the context of a healing ritual or concert performance, are culturally determined, and the specific nature of the experience will be particular to the individual depending on their bodymind condition and their socio-cultural positioning and heritage. As Liidtke points out:

"Just as the efficacy of tarantism rituals cannot be reduced to the impact of music and dance alone, without reference to the larger historical, cultural and spiritual context within which this tradition was embedded, the effect of ‘neo-tarantism’ performances cannot be reduced to the notes and steps of the pizzica." (ibid.: 52)

This is of immense importance in the dialogue between performance and anthropology. It is necessary to have an anthropological approach that examines the particular cultural circumstances that create the specific nature of the experience in the context in which it occurs. Performing pizzica music and dance will not produce the same type of experience for everyone, and the significance of the ‘larger historical, cultural and spiritual context’ is vital to avoid reducing the experience to being "the same" across all cultures and forms. This is the potential danger within performance studies when discussing these experiences without reference to the specific historical and socio-cultural determinants of the individual. However, anthropologists have tended to omit examination of the experiential nature of the performance itself, in terms of its nature as performance, which includes the embodied experience of ‘presence’ and ‘liveness’ in the action of the performance. In approach­ing "trance" as a performance and theater studies concept, one can examine the embodiment and experiential aspects. This book focuses on the ritual of tarantism and contemporary performances of pizzica in Salento, but the nature of subject-object dissolution and "forgetting of self" in performance provides a helpful examination.

In the quoted text by Liidtke's informants, the experience demonstrated was a "letting go" of the sense of "doing" within the action of performance, leading to the dance dancing and the song singing without the "I" of the performer "doing" the dance or the song. This experience has often been viewed as an "ideal" or "optimum" state by performers, and training methods have been developed to attempt reaching this state during performance.

Stanislavsky used the term "I am being" to describe the process of being fully involved in the moment of the action, leading to a state of merging actor and character, or self and other, and being fully present with complete bodymind attention and absorption in the here-and-now moment on stage. Carnicke states that Stanislavsky describes this state as "experiencing": "He compares it to the sensation of existing fully within the immediate moment — what he calls 'Iam' and what Western actors generally call 'moment-to-moment' work. [...] [It is] the term he chooses to describe what actors feel when his 'entire set of exercises' successfully releases their full creative potentials'" (Carnicke, 2000: 17, and 1998: 107).

The Russian word for "experiencing" is perezhivanie, from perezhit, meaning "living through." Carnicke explains that there have been problems with this word being translated into English by Elizabeth Hapgood as "feeling" or "to feel," instead of "to experience." It is not about feelings in terms of emotions, but instead the experience is a complete psychophysical engagement with the action, the "actor's deep concentration on stage and absorption in the events of the play during the performance" (Carnicke, 1998: 110).

To experience is to live, to be present, to be fully in the moment. This experience of presence or "living through" occurs in a psycho-physical unity, that is, a state where body and mind operate together. Carnicke points out that the "first and most pervasive of [his essential ideas] is Stanislavsky's holistic belief that mind and body represent a psy-chophysical continuum" (Carnicke, 2000: 16).

Likewise, for his student Michael Chekhov, who developed his own system of bodymind exercises for the actor: "All our physical exercises will be considered and done as psychophysical exercises. We want to fill, to permeate our bodies with psychological values. Therefore, while doing all our bodily exercises, it is good to have in mind this side of the exercise. [...] Everything like the development of our imagination or using of the psychological gesture, all such means makes physical exercises to psychophysical." (Chekhov, 1996: Tape 4)

This unity of body and mind is of importance in the ritual of tarantism, with an understanding of the ways in which the music and dance operate on and through both mind and body to effect a psychophysical transformation. It is through this type of transformation that Chekhoy believes that the performer can reach a state of "creative inspiration," which is a loss of the sense of "me doing this," but instead the performance is being performed, without the performer trying to "do" it, achieved through the complete absorption and engagement with the image through the embodied action. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi uses the term 'flow' to describe a state of consciousness where one becomes totally absorbed in what one is doing, to the exclusion of all other thoughts and emotions. This harmonious experience involves a mind and body working together effortlessly, leaving the person feeling that something special has occurred. (Csikszentmihalyi and Jackson, 1990: 5)

The idea of the 'flow state' can be connected to the subject-object dissolution found within definitions of trance. This experience can be seen in the late Formula One driver Ayrton Senna's description of taking pole position at the Monaco Grand Prix in 1988: "I suddenly realized I was no longer driving the car consciously. I was kind of driving it by instinct, only I was in a different dimension. [...] It frightened me because it was well beyond my conscious understanding" (in Moran, 1996: 74).

This relaxed yet dynamic state of 'effortless effort' can be experienced during performance, where the everyday self-consciousness of the performer is 'forgotten' in the moment of absorption in the action of the performance. The experience of self-awareness and absorption with the embodied skills resulting from training can lead to a 'forgetting' of the self in the action of the performance, manifesting the dissolution of any sense of duality between 'self' and 'world.'

Roberto Raheli, a Salentine musician, explained the experience as follows: "In my experience, I can say that when we play the pizzica tarantata in concert, at times we are captured by the music. But a spider did not bite us and we are not ill due to sarantismo. Yet sometimes our minds go to strange places and we forget we are performing in a concert" (Raheli, 2005: 127).

Raheli emphasized the importance of both 'inner' and 'outer' in understanding the particular experience that is taking place. He stated that it is essential to operate from within a Salentine mentalité, as it is this Salentine world-view that precedes the music and makes it possible. Technically sophisticated musicians may play a form of this music, but without this deep understanding, they will never be capable of playing it properly. Raheli concluded that without this understanding, all one can play is the music of the pizzica tarantata, but never the Pizzica Tarantata. (ibid.: 128)

This statement is bound up with notions of personal and collective identity in relation to contemporary performances of pizzica, which will be explored in Chapter Four. However, it is important to acknowledge, as Liidtke stated previously, that the socio-cultural context is vital in understanding the particular nature of the experience. This also needs to be seen within the realm of the experiential potential of performance to lead to a 'forgetting of the self' and psychophysical transformation through an embodied engagement with the action. The themes of embodiment, with both body and 'self' as process rather than object, and a unification of 'inner' and 'outer', of the lived experience and socio-cultural environment, have been examined through performance and theatre studies to reveal how the notions of presence and embodied action may be understood in relation to tarantism and pizzica in this study.

The interconnection between performance studies and the social sciences noted earlier can offer a fuller way of approaching these themes, and the next section will investigate a selection of theories from anthropology and sociology which have similarly addressed issues of embodiment and experience, which will be woven together to present an analysis of an ethnographic 'moment' that demonstrates the complex interaction that results in the embodied experience of a cultural performance in a specific spatial-temporal location.

Body, 'self' and process in/as performance
The notions of 'presence' and 'liveness' within performance inherently involve examining the processes of the body, and embodiment of action which leads to a transformation of 'self' and environment in the 'moment' of the performance. However, questions of the body and embodiment have been largely overlooked in the social sciences, and indeed performance studies, until the last few decades. This is due in part to problems concerning language, particularly finding ways to verbally articulate an experience which happens and is understood through the body.

According to Farnell:

Scholars suggest that the curiously disembodied view of human beings that until recently has permeated the social sciences is due to a longstanding bias against the body in that tradition of thought we call Western (i.e. European and European derived). This precluded social theorists from attending to physical being and bodily actions in their definitions of social action. (Farnell, 1999: 345)

In part this has been due to Cartesian dualities of mind and body, and more recently, as Farnell points out, a Darwinian understanding of the verbal and written as being 'real' knowledge, and the nonverbal as part of our evolutionary past, which 'has produced a radical disjunction between verbal and so-called nonverbal aspects of communication in our meta-linguistic discourse' (ibid.: 346).

This problematic issue of language has been discussed by Penelope Gouk in relation to the work of Stephen Friedson examining music and trance in Tumbuka healing, and Cheryce Kramer's study of the use of music in nineteenth-century German psychiatry, where she suggests that [for the communities which Friedson and Kramer are describing, the only viable way of grasping the connection between music and healing is through embodied knowledge; that is a way of knowing expressed through bodily actions rather than discursive speech. Long accepted in anthropological discourse, this performative dimension of human understanding has recently come to the attention of sociologists and historians interested in the 'tacit' skills which are constitutive of scientific and medical knowledge. In trying to analyse such skills, they are confronting exactly the same problem encountered with musical healing: that is, the struggle to translate non-verbal and embodied practices into suitably academic language. As scientists probe deeper into space and explore the human body, they too are accepting the limits of rational analysis and seeking alternative modes of understanding. (Gouk, 2000a: 22) This challenge of finding language to discuss the process of ‘knowing’ through the body has been part of the development of performance studies. Zarrilli points out the need to examine language and assumptions behind it in discourses about acting:

Too often, when we think and talk about acting, we do not examine our language or the assumptions that lie behind it. [...] Languages of acting, like other propositional modes of linguistic construction, mark not only their positionality and ideology but also their referential, signifying nature.

As well as language, there are concerns with finding appropriate theoretical frameworks. Chris Shilling states that there have been two main theoretical threads in approaching the body within sociology since the 1980s. One focuses on the external environment, or the place of social action (e.g., Bryan Turner drawing on the work of Hobbes, Talcott and Foucault). The other focuses on the internal environment, where the body is central (e.g., Arthur Frank and Thomas Csordas, drawing on phenomenology and existentialism). Shilling suggests that it has proved difficult to bring these two environments together in an interconnected theoretical approach.

Shilling himself has attempted to incorporate the two in his fascinating and unusual use of pragmatism, which he develops from the work of the Chicago School of Sociology in the early twentieth century, as a theoretical framework to examine identity and transformation through the body. He utilises pragmatism due to its recognition and explorations of the distinctive properties of, and the dynamic relationship that exists between, the external and internal environments of human action. This tradition of inquiry can also inform substantive studies of embodied subjects in their social and material contexts, as evident in the work of the Chicago School, thus helping to address the relative lack of empirically informed work in the field of body studies. 

As stated previously, the interconnection between embodied experience and socio-cultural environment is of major significance in the study of tarantism and pizzica. Shilling's work has proved useful in offering a framework within sociology. However, I disagree that Csordas was working only within the realm of the internal environment as Shilling suggests. Instead, in accordance with Deirdre Sklar, I would contend that Csordas 'weaves together Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenological analysis of perceptual processes and Pierre Bourdieu’s socio-political analysis of collective practice. Csordas recognises that the phenomenologist’s “lived experience” is never merely individual and subjective, but develops as relational and cultural constructions in social space. He understands that the sociologist’s “practice” is not only a collective sedimentation passed on through generations but an opportunity for individuality, agency, and somatic awareness' (Sklar, 2006: 100). In this way, Csordas has developed an approach that combines the lived experience of the body with an interconnected relationship to the socio-cultural environment. In his influential essay from 1990, ‘Embodiment as a Paradigm for Anthropology,’ Csordas' approach to embodiment "begins from the methodological postulate that the body is not an object to be studied in relation to culture, but is to be considered as the subject of culture [and so] the body is a productive starting point for analyzing culture and self" (Csordas, 1990: 5).

Drawing on Merleau-Ponty's ideas of perception, and Bordieu's discourse of practice, Csordas states that there needs to be a "collapsing of dualities," including those between subject and object, and of the body-mind itself. He proposes that the body is "non-dualistic, that is, not distinct from or in interaction with an opposed principle of mind" (ibid.: 8). He develops this further in his 1993 essay ‘Somatic Modes of Attention,’ which begins with the statement: "Embodiment as a paradigm or methodological orientation requires that the body be understood as the existential ground of culture — not as an object that is 'good to think,' but as a subject that is 'necessary to be'" (Csordas, 1993: 135).

He draws a distinction between body and embodiment, which he likens to Barthes' distinction of word and text: the body is a biological, material entity, while embodiment can be understood as an indeterminate methodological field defined by perceptual experience and mode of presence and engagement in the world. As applied to anthropology, the model of the text means that cultures can be understood, for purposes of internal and comparative analysis, to have properties similar to texts (Ricoeur 1979). In contrast, the paradigm of embodiment means not that cultures have the same structure as bodily experience, but that embodied experience is the starting point for analyzing human participation in a cultural world. (ibid.: 135)

Csordas stresses the importance of attention, in Merleau-Ponty's terms, to the experiences of embodiment, and that the processes of attention themselves also require investigation. He describes these processes using the term 'somatic modes of attention, which he defines as being 'culturally elaborated ways of attending to and with one's body in surroundings that include the embodied presence of others' (ibid.: 138).

As with Shilling, there are aspects of Csordas' work that are useful to draw on for the purposes of this study, including the unification of body and mind, the combination of lived experience and socio-political environment and analysis, the use of modes of attention, and embodiment as process, rather than body as object, which reflect those discussed previously through performance studies. To connect these theories, I suggest that a way of approaching embodiment and presence within performance is to see the body in terms of being process rather than object. It is this process that leads to the sense of embodiment, which contains within it the lived experience of the body, as well as identity of the 'self,' and socio-cultural positionings. However, not only is the body seen to be a process rather than object, leading to the paradigm of embodiment, but the nature of performance itself can likewise be understood as process rather than object. Body, performance, and indeed the sense of 'self' are, by nature, in continual emergence, rather than being fixed objects. It is this process of emergence that gives rise to the potential for transformation and efficacy, as well as presence, within performance. The understanding of performance as process is connected to the notions of the ‘presence’ and ‘liveness’ of the performer. The term ‘presence’ has been a much contested area within the field of performance, with continuing debates over what this might actually mean. As a succinct approach to understanding presence as a quality, Allain and Harvie in The Routledge Companion to Theatre and Performance state simply that this is ‘where the performer appears to be notably focused or “in the moment” (Allain and Harvie, 2006: 193). As well as the performer being present, the performance itself can also be understood to be ‘present’ in that it is made present ‘in the moment’ through the manifestation and embodiment of the performer. For David George, ‘A performer exists only and ever in time. It is therefore always about “presence, presentness and presenting”’ (George, 1999: 14, citing R. Corrigan, The World of the Theatre, Glenview IL, 1979: 24). Peggy Phelan points to the ‘eternal presence’ of performance, in that it is ‘[p]oised forever at the threshold of the present’ (Phelan, 1993: 27). It can only exist in its moment of performance, due to its nature of ‘liveness’; therefore, performance ‘continually marks the perceptual disappearance of its own enactment. [...] Performance’s only life is in the present’ (ibid.: 115, 146). In its ever-present and non-fixable nature, performance can be seen as event and process, rather than object, as Nathalie Crohn-Schmitt states, ‘performance makes clear its nature as event rather than object’ (Crohn Schmitt, 1990: 231-4). Furthermore, as in the discussion of history and ethnography, the past and present are interconnectedly manifested through the bodymind of the performer in the event of the performance, thus performance itself also becomes a manifestation of past and present in the process of the moment. The performer embodies their own cultural past and present, and thus as Csordas suggests, becomes the subject rather than object of culture. As stated previously, the body is both inscribed with a culture through conditioned habitual patterns, but also itself inscribes the culture through the liveness of the performance process. Thus it is not just about the embodiment of culture, but embodiment as culture. This embodiment of the past is itself a complicated issue. Buckland suggests that "It can be argued that dance has a particular propensity to foreground cultural memory as embodied practice by virtue of its predominantly somatic modes of transmission. Indeed in traditional forms of danced display, it could be argued that longevity of human memory is publicly enacted, demonstrating the ethereality of human existence and the continuity of human experience, as successive generations re-present the dancing." (Buckland, 2001: 1) She also points out that ‘[n]ot all traditional forms of dance ceremony can be interpreted in this way’ (ibid.: 1), and in the discussion of neo-tarantism in Chapter Four, what will be seen are ways in which this embodied culture is not necessarily a direct linear transmission of a form, but rather ‘more often than not a speculation often accompanied by inter-connected assertions of ancientness, purity, legitimacy and evolutionist notions of pagan origins’ (ibid.: 1). Once again, the compound ‘moment of the present’ encompasses the pasts in complex ways. The live presence of the performer connects the inner and outer, past and present, the lived experience of the body with the socio-cultural-political positionings in which the performer is situated, revealing how these mutually generate each other. Csordas’ view on this phenomenological ‘attention’ and engagement leads to an awareness of the interconnection of both the internal processes of the body, and the external surrounding situations:

"Because attention implies both sensory engagement and an object, we must emphasize that our working definition [of somatic modes of attention] refers both to attending ‘with’ and attending ‘to’ the body. To attend to a bodily sensation is not to attend to the body as an isolated object, but to attend to the body’s situation in the world. The sensation engages something in the world because the body is ‘always already in the world’ Attention Zo a bodily sensation can thus become a mode of attending to the intersubjective milieu that give rise to that sensation. [...] A notion of somatic mode of attention broadens the field in which we can look for phenomena of perception and attention, and suggests that attending to one’s body can tell us something about the world and others who surround us. (Csordas, 1993: 138-9)"

Shilling’s use of pragmatism likewise acknowledges that the central focus of the body also encompasses the external world:

"[Pragmatism recognises] action was undertaken by individuals always already within a social and natural context yet possessed of emergent capacities and needs that distinguish them from, and also enabled them to shape actively, their wider milieu. In this context, action, experience, and identity arise from the ongoing interaction and transactions that occur between the internal environment of the embodied organism and its external social and physical environment. [...] Thus pragmatism’s insistence on the human potential to ‘make a difference’ turns what sociologists have sometimes treated as exclusively socially determined organisms into phenomenologically aware, active body-subjects whose corporeal properties enable them to intervene creatively in the world. At the same time, pragmatism’s recognition that embodied actions are shaped in part by the distinctive properties of the social and natural world also avoids the dangers of viewing actions as emanating from monadic subjects who are hermetically sealed from other people and from the material contexts in which they live. (Shilling, 2008: 4)"

What can be observed through these theoretical frameworks is the potential of the bodymind in the action of performance, when engaged with the use of awareness of both the internal processes of the bodymind and in relation to the surrounding socio-cultural positionings and relations to the world, to effect a transformation of bodymind and ‘self’ through the lived presence of the performer in the specific time and space of the performance. This interconnected relationship between ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ can be seen to operate both ways. Not only is the bodymind transformed in relation to the outer environment, but also the surrounding environment can be transformed by the presence of the action within it. Thus the space of the performance is as much in a state of process, rather than object, as is the performer and performance, and indeed these are mutually generative of each other and the overall experience. A particular site or place can contain within it multiple readings and meanings relating to personal, social, and political identity, depending on the presence — or presences — of the nature of the embodied actions being performed within it. 

These theories have examined the interconnection between ‘inner’ and ‘outer’; how shifts in bodymind actions create shifts in the nature of the space and vice versa; and also that there can be multiple performances, sometimes in apparent conflict, operating together in multiple spaces with different experiences of embodiment. In order to examine these in relation to tarantism and pizzica, I here discuss an ethnographic ‘moment’ of the celebrations for the festival of St Peter and St Paul in the town of Galatina as I experienced them on 28 and 29 June 2008. This ‘moment’ lasted for a period of twelve hours, during which the particular site of the Piazza San Pietro contained shifting patterns and identities of sacred and secular per- formances which both informed and were formed by the psychophysical actions and transformations of those taking part in a range of activities. This ‘moment’ demonstrates the way in which history was made present in the lived experience of the embodied actions and reactions within the space. These performance activities generated spaces or sites of contesta- tion of ideology and practice which shifted and transformed throughout the ‘moment; within both the space of the bodies within the Piazza, and the range of geographical spaces and configurations created and re-created through the embodied actions.

Embodying Pasts and Presence 

Galatina lies approximately 21 km south of the Salentine capital of Lecce, and was formerly part of the area known as the Grecia Salentina, or the Greek region of Salento which was referred to in the Introduction. It has a strong connection to tarantism due to the small chapel of St Paul in the corner of the Piazza San Pietro, which also contains the large church dedicated to St Peter and St Paul, known as the ‘Mother Church’ The affiliation of St Paul with tarantism will be discussed more fully in Chapter Two. But for present purposes, and as was mentioned in the Introduction, St Paul is historically the patron saint of the tarantati, who are both pos- sessed and cured by him, and after being healed may make a pilgrimage to the chapel in Galatina to give thanks and leave an offering. From the eighteenth century, the annual recurrence of the symptoms of the condi- tion would often happen around the time of his feast day, and the tarantati would travel to the chapel to re-enact the ritual, and then celebrate mass in the church. Due to this association, the festival is often attended by those interested in the phenomenon of tarantism, as well as those coming for the religious events or the market which is set up throughout the main streets of the town. The fame of the festival was greatly increased through De Martino’s book La terra del rimorso and the documentary film La Taranta (1961) which captured dramatic scenes of the tarantate (the film focused mainly on women) dancing within the chapel and square outside. The instances of tarantate returning to the chapel in this way have declined in recent years,” due partly to the now very small number still left alive, and also because of the feeling amongst some locals that the event has lost much of its spiritual significance. Yet the history and mythology of tarantism still acts as a draw for a range of visitors to the place and time of the festival and, as some of the people I spoke with stated, whether they were locals 7 Local legend states that both St Peter and St Paul stopped off in Galatina on their various travels. St Peter supposedly arrived on his way from Antioch to Rome, evan- gelising the local community in the process. One of the earliest recorded names for the city was 'San Pietro in Galatina'. For an account of some of the events that occurred during the festival in Galatina over the last few decades of the twentieth century, see Di Lecce (1994) and Chiriatti (1995).

During the festival, people from other parts of Italy, journalists, or researchers came to record events, hoping that a 'favantata' might appear. Others, mainly Salentines, said their reasons for attending the festival were for the performances of pizzica music and dance, or to enjoy the market and socialize with friends. Over a 12-hour period, from 7 PM on June 28th to 7 AM on June 29th, the author observed and experienced various performances of pizzica music and dance, as well as other forms of music and cultural performances connected to the church.

Through the evening, the nature of the activities within the space continuously shifted, creating different sites and boundaries that moved and transformed throughout the 'moment.' These sites sometimes conflicted with each other in terms of sacred and secular, private and public, creating a contested space of performance practices embodying different socio-political and cultural ideologies and presences.

The religious aspect of the festival began at approximately 8 PM when the statues of St. Paul and St. Peter were carried out of the main doors of the church, followed by ecclesiastical figures in robes. Crowds surrounded the linear route of the procession on both sides to watch. Once the statues emerged from the church, carried on the shoulders of men, they paused. At this point, the local brass band began playing well-known popular opera tunes, and the bells of the church started ringing at the same time, creating a cacophony of secular and sacred music. When the band finished, the priest chanted the verses of the liturgy for the saints with sung responses, following which the brass band, now part of the procession, struck up again, and they all continued in a straight line with the statues at the head through the Piazza and out into the rest of the town. The processional route went through the main streets, stopping in front of other churches, where prayers were sung, the bells sounded, and the brass band played. The procession of the statues around the town took approximately two hours. Meanwhile, the many thousands of people visiting the festival, including children of all ages, were strolling through the stalls of the market, which extended throughout the center of Galatina. These stalls were selling a wide range of goods, including a large variety of foodstuffs; clothes; toys; household goods; CDs of music; and carvings and knick-knacks from parts of Africa, which were being sold by migrant stall-holders. There were also some items and stalls related to pizzica and tarantism within the space of the Piazza San Pietro. Several elder women were selling the colored ribbons (zacareddhe) which are worn by pizzica musicians and dancers, and often adorn the ¢amburelli, as well as being used to wrap around the pictures of saints such as St. Paul or the Apulian saint Padre Pio, which were mounted on sticks and also sold at these stalls (see Illustration 7 for an example of this type of stall at the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli).

'The significance of the use of both colors and ribbons within tarantism will be discussed in Chapter Two. The chapel of St. Paul was open, and many of the crowd walked into the small space, taking photographs, talking, looking around for glimpses of parts of the building they may have seen in books and films. In front of the chapel was the stall held by musician and dancer Ada Metafune and her husband, the renowned tamburelli maker Biagio Panico, who live in Torrepaduli in the south of Salento, and are both significant figures in the development, study, and practice of traditions of pizzica music and dance within contemporary Salento (see Chapter Four for further reference). The stall sold a selection of Panico's hand-made tamburelli and other instruments, as well as CDs and DVDs by artists within the neo-tarantism movement, such as Officina Zoé, Alla Bua, and Metafune's and Panico's own organization, Novaracne." There were also tambourines and CDs of pizzica music being sold on some of the other stalls in the Piazza, and throughout the town. Many people had come to the festival solely in order to attend the market and buy goods, rather than having a particular interest in the religious rites.

At approximately 10 pm, the procession of the statues returned to the Piazza San Pietro. As it entered the Piazza, there was a firework display, as well as the sound of church bells and the playing of the band, again all taking place at the same time. After some more prayers, the procession re-entered the church, along with the ecclesiastical figures and local dignitaries, to the sound of the band playing the Triumphal March from Verdi's Aida. Soon after this, the concert performance of pizzica music groups commenced on the stage which had been erected to the left of the cathedral (see Illustration 3). The concert consisted of four groups from Salento playing pizzica piz- zica music, finishing with the Tamburellisti di Torrepaduli, one of the most renowned and well-established pizzica groups who were formed in part to conduct ethnomusicological research and performance of local musical traditions. The concert was particularly poignant, as it was also dedicated to the memory of the legendary samburello player Pino Zimba, who had died earlier that year. The concert took place on a fixed stage, erected for the purpose of the festival, with the crowd of spectators watching in an end-on configuration. There was a fluidity of spectators, as people watched for an amount of time and would then leave to wander around the market or go home, and others would arrive to fill their places. As well as playing the music and songs, some of the groups also had dancers who performed pizzica pizzica dance on the stage in front of the musicians. These were most commonly male-female couples, but also some solo female dancers, and for one band, four young girls who danced as a group. These performances appeared mainly choreographed, demonstrating a range of pizzica pizzica steps and movements often with a good degree of technical skill.

CHAPTER ONE

The concert finished at 4am. At this point, there were still large crowds of people in the city, but gradually the numbers began to diminish as the market stalls closed. Throughout the night from about 10pm, in addition to the concert, there had been a number of ronde forming in various parts of the Piazza, with musicians playing pizzica pizzica songs, and people stepping into the centre of the circle to dance. After the concert finished, the ronde were concentrated in the area immediately outside the chapel of St Paul. The mainly young people in this area were drinking wine, laughing, talking, and watching or joining in the dancing until 5.30am, when the remaining ronda was stopped by machines arriving to wash the streets. The hundred or so people left were sitting down, or going into the nearby bar for a drink, as gradually others started to arrive to go into the main church for the Mass at 6am.

At 5.40am, a black car drew up in the Piazza and stopped just outside the chapel. The cry went up: a farantata had arrived. There was a sudden swarm of people surrounding the car, many with cameras, trying to see into the windows. A man got out of the car and went to the chapel, but the door had been locked earlier in the night, and was still locked. There was a moment of confusion, until a policeman explained that the door would not be opened until 6am. The man quickly got back into the car, and drove it a little way out of the Piazza, still in view of the crowd. There was outrage amongst many of the people waiting that the woman was not able to go into the chapel. Several shouted out: ‘Open the door! Open the door!’ An atmosphere of tense anticipation came over those waiting, looking towards the car parked nearby. Finally at just before 6am, a man arrived with the keys, accompanied by two policemen. The car reversed back to the chapel, and was again surrounded by people pushing to get a view. The policemen forced a space in the crowd, and together with the woman’s family, quickly got her into the chapel, and closed the door behind. She stayed in there for about ten minutes, and on coming out, was accompanied by some of her family in the walk across the Piazza and into the church for the Mass. There was almost complete silence as she came out, a very small figure swathed in black, looking the size of a child compared to her family (see Illustration 4). After she had disappeared into the church, people began to go into the chapel. There was a great difference in the embodied behaviour in the 

Top right: former farantata entering the church. Bottom left: example of a presentational performance of pizzica dance. Bottom right: example of a participatory performance of pizzica dance in a ronda outside the chapel of St Paul. (Photographs: Jerri Daboo)

The chapel at this point compared to earlier in the evening. Moving into the space of the chapel which the woman had just left, people walked around the small site in silence, gazing about them as if trying to see the effects of what had happened in there, and others were praying in front of the altar. The transformation of the quality of embodied actions in the space, and the shift in the nature of the space itself formed by the presence of the woman who embodied the past, was highly palpable.

The woman had been a farantata in the past when she was younger, and had come to give 72 CHAPTER ONE thanks in the chapel. Some of the people I spoke with afterwards said that they had been moved by seeing a visible reminder of both the suffering which she had endured, and that she was amongst the last remaining Salentine from that era, which had now almost passed, and was soon to be lost for good.

Despite being not as 'dramatic' as some of the appearances by the ¢arantate in previous years, her physical presence, even though in visual terms this was just a glimpse of a black-clad figure, made real for a moment all the histories of tarantism, bound up with the identity of the people and the land.

The complex 'moment' of the twelve hours of the festival in the Piazza San Pietro contained within it contested spaces of embodiment and performance, which were in a state of process, leading to shifts in the experience of space, body, and identity through the many presences that were created by the embodied actions. The seeming conflict between the sacred and the profane was evident throughout the event.

The history of the festival and the connection of St Paul with tarantism, with the enculturation of the Catholic Church with the ritual, was reflected in the multiplicities of actions, sense impressions, and embodiments. The space of the Piazza contained the building of the 'mother church', with its Baroque architecture; the small chapel of St Paul with its associations of the 'pagan' ritual of tarantism; the bandstand; the concert platform, and some market stalls. Each of these sites were embedded with particular associations of religious, cultural or social life, which were reflected in the actions of those within them. But this was not fixed, and shifted in relation to the changing activities which occurred over the time period.

When the procession passed through the centre of the Piazza, many of the people lined on either side crossed themselves as the statues passed them, whilst also taking photographs. Once the procession had passed, the same space became filled with actions of socialising, drinking and buying goods from the market. There was a continual shift in the configurations of the activities, with the movement of people who were watching the concert performance, and a shift of the formation, size and dynamics of the ronde which were formed, then dissolved when the musicians were tired, and then re-formed when the next musicians began to play.

Embodying Pasts and Presence 73 The aural sphere was often a site of contestation, with the church bells and brass band sounding together in a sensory multiplicity of sacred and secular. It was possible to stand either in front of the concert platform, or the ronde at the opposite corner of the Piazza, and hear the spill of music from the other infiltrating the space of each performance mode. 

Outside the chapel of St. Paul in the early hours of the morning, the smell of spilled wine overwhelmed that of the food from the market stalls and the incense from the church. Inside the chapel of St. Paul after the tarantata had left, and people were praying and responding to the space with a much greater sense of the sacred, the sound of the samburelli still playing outside became part of the sensory experience. The movements of the pizzica pizzica dance occurring on the concert platform and the ronde in front of the chapel, contrasted with the embodied actions of the religious practices of those entering and moving around the church, paying respects at the statues of St. Peter and St. Paul, and also again taking photographs. This blending of the sacred and secular through the enculturation of tarantism with the Catholic Church, will be seen in the history of tarantism in Chapter Two. This blend is also very much part of Salento, and the ambiguity creates its own meanings and identities for the Salentines. Although leading to contestation of the sites within the space of the Piazza, the contradictions resulted in an overall unity of experience. None was given a sense of greater importance or meaning than the other, but the embodied actions and responses to the event of the festival became a nondualistic process of moving through and between the sites without an epistemological dislocation of incongruity. As well as contested spaces, there were different forms of performance and experience of embodied practices according to the type of engagement with the action and spatial configuration. In particular, this was seen in the two approaches to pizzica pizzica dance that took place in the Piazza, with both the concert performance, and the dancing within the ronde. These two types of performance can be understood through the categorisations proposed by Andriy Nahachewsky as being participatory and presentational dance, in that the first happens within social contexts, and the second in a more formal presentation on some form of stage: 74

In participatory dances, the focus tends to be on the dancers themselves. The process of dancing is important. A good dance differs from a less successful performance based on how it features. Presentational dances tend to be perceived more as a product than a process. The success of a particular performance is judged by how it looks. Participatory dances take place at social events where a particular community comes together to celebrate. This may be on the village green, at the house of a key participant, in a ballroom or in a dance bar. Presentational dances are often performed on formal stages and in other locations where the physical and cultural distance between performers and audience is greater. (Nahachewsky, 1995: 1) Nahachewsky points out that these categories are 'idealizations, and that they can be usefully seen as 'opposite poles' on an axis, and traditional dance can operate at any point along this axis (ibid.: 1). This definition of the difference between participatory and presentational dance is very useful in examining the different performance forms of the pizzica pizzica during the festival. Within the space of the Piazza, both forms occurred at the same time at points during the evening, at diagonally opposite ends of the square. The presentational dance took place on the specially erected stage next to the church, with invited performers, and an audience who were separated from the elevated stage watching the musicians and dancers in an end-on configuration. The participatory dance took place in the ronde outside the chapel of St Paul, with anyone who wanted to participate as a musician or dancer. The ronda was formed with musicians on the edge of the circle, the crowd of spectators close behind them, and a couple dancing in the middle. Dancers would change after being in the centre for varying lengths of time, and the ronda would break up when the musicians were tired or no one entered the circle, then reformed by new musicians in the same or slightly different place. There were times when two or three different ronde happened at the same time in close proximity to each other.

The configuration and focus of the spectators are significant, as the presentational dance performance creates a separation of performer and audience, with the focus on the audience being in a linear direction towards the stage. In the ronda, the spectators were closer to the dancers and musicians, and could switch roles between being performer and audience. The direction of focus was inward towards the centre of the circle.

In the concert performances, the music groups were the primary attraction, with dancers considered 'extra.' The movements of the dance were choreographed to respond to the music, and the dancers wore similar costumes. The intention was to 'show' the dance in a presentational context, rather than for personal transformation through the experience of taking part.

The participatory dance within the ronde fits Nahachewsky's definition, involving a community-based experience where the dance was not choreographed but improvised and spontaneous. The focus was on the dancers themselves, with the audience's attention directed towards the centre of the circle. As referred to in the Introduction, the ronda is seen by Salentines as being a 76 CHAPTER ONE created space of ‘magic, partly because of this concentration of focus on the center, which contributes to the efficacious experience of those dancing and watching. In this way, it is also the case as Nahachewsky suggests, that what constitutes as being a ‘good’ dance is based in how it feels, rather than how it looks. The dancers entering the space of a ronda were mainly less skilful than those performing in the presentational dances on the stage, but their process of engagement in the action was more important to them in terms of the experience of dancing, rather than a focus on how well they ‘looked’ to be dancing from the outside. This again reinforces the point made earlier in relation to Schieffelin that being technically skilful alone does not necessarily account for a successful performance, depending on the context.

One young Salentine woman who danced in a ronda with her boyfriend, explained to me afterwards that she chose to enter the ronda and dance with him because this was the way in which she wanted to express her love for him. This created a very special experience for her through the action of the dance, which was based both in her embodiment, and the surrounding socio-cultural environment. The event was made special for her because it happened on the night of the festival, in front of the chapel of St Paul, with all the related history of tarantism and pizzica bound up with this. The music of the pizzica pizzica itself is connected to the identity of the people and the land, and therefore all these aspects made the space of the ronda, for the short time it existed, into a very specific culturally determined site. Yet it was through her embodied experience of the dance with her boyfriend in this site that led to her process of transformation: it could only occur through the action and process of the dance itself, in the socially constructed space. The space alone would not have had the effect without the lived presence of her body in the process of the dance, and the dance in another socio-temporal framework would also not have created the specific sense of transformation that she expressed feeling in that particular time and space.

In addition, the experience of being seen in the ronda was also important: it is a public, shared, and community space. Not many people knew them, but the fact that their presence in the dance was being witnessed by the community was also important, even though it was not presentational in the same sense as the performances on the stage. It was the participatory understanding of communitas that enhanced the Embodying Pasts and Presence 77 experience of ‘being’ rather than ‘showing’ through the action of the dance in response to the music. The potential of pizzica music and dance to enable this transformation is in part connected to the identity of being Salentine. This identification with pizzica will be discussed further in Chapter Four, but demonstrates the inherent connection between the socio-cultural constructs of identity, and the embodied experience of transformation and presence in the action of the dance. Nahachewsky’s comment about the categories being ‘idealizations’ is also relevant, but rather than a linear axis, I would suggest instead seeing this as interconnecting helixes, in that there was an element of presentational and participatory performance in each of the opposite spaces. Towards the back of the audience for the stage performances, rather than conforming to the focus of looking in a linear direction towards the stage, some people instead formed ronde, and danced in the configuration of the circle, thus creating a contested space with both linear and circular formations, leading to a conflict with direction of focus for participants and audience. Likewise, within the ronda outside the chapel, there were some dancers entering the circle who gave the appearance of being more skilful, and performing choreographed sequences, rather than spontaneous and improvised responses to the music. I have observed some of these same dancers appearing at other festivals over previous years, and they will tend to dance with the same partners, demonstrating an accomplishment and knowledge of steps and sequences which offers a level of presentational dance within the space of the participatory, thus again leading to a complex interweaving of contested sites and embodiments within the overall space.

The final point to make about the ‘moment’ of the festival, was the emergence of the female body in performance, and the manifestation of past and present hegemonies of female embodiment within spatial-temporal sites. The position of women has changed greatly in Salento over the past thirty years, and this was demonstrated in the contrast between the embodiment of the young women dancing in the festival, and the appearance of the former tarantata at the end of the event. The history of tarantism shows how women have often been repressed within the society, coping with difficult socio-economic circumstances, and an attitude towards them which has resulted in their voices being rendered silent, and their embodied presence hidden. This is a complex subject, and will be explored throughout this study, but previously women were not seen dancing in public in the way they are today. They may have danced at weddings or social festivals within their village or town, or out in the countryside, but this was limited in terms of a visible presence.

So within the ritual of tarantism, the act of presence within the dance was part of the nature of its efficacy, as the women who had been at the margins of society became present and visible for the space of the ritual. As Karanika states: the ¢arantate [...] are women whose social role is marginalized, and whose psychological problems find a bodily expression in the symptoms they experience and wish to heal through their ecstatic dance. It is through this dance that they become protagonists in a public ritual, and therefore turn their position of marginality to center stage in their local societies. (Karanika, 2005: 35)

However, the public display of dance within the ritual, even if acceptable within Salentine society as a culture-specific form of efficacy, has in part led to many of the writings throughout its history removing the act of the dance from a sacred context, and placing it instead in the realm of the erotic, labelling the women as wanton or mentally unstable, leading to both a ‘feminisation’ and ‘hystericisation’ of the women, and the nature of the ritual, as will be seen in the history of the medical writings discussed in Chapter Two.

Even if they were not to be seen dancing in public, women were still sometimes able to experience the efficacy of pizzica music and dance in a private space of transformation. One Salentine man spoke to me of remembering when he was a young boy, living in a house very close to the sea on the Ionian coast in the south of Salento, he would sometimes go down to the beach on the night of a full moon with his father and an older couple, who were their neighbours. There, under a tree, his father would play the guitar, and the husband of the couple would sing for his wife, who would dance on her own in this private space out of the need to express herself in this way through the process and experience of the dance, which became the site of transformation and efficacy within her embodiment and presence in the specific place and time. Another Salentine woman told me that she felt that the experience of the dance had been better in the past, when it was more closely connected to a private expression, whereas today in the festivals it is about noise, drink, and the bustle of a lot of people in a very public space. She feels that the quality of pizzica being about a special, healing, private and releasing experience has been lost, along with the connection to the land, with instead now there being a focus on urban life. There is a tendency for some Salentines today to speak of pizzica in relation to the ‘peasant’ culture of the past, of the worker on the land who understands the real nature of pizzica through contact with the earth. One Salentine said that pizzica is about ‘lavore la terra’ [‘working the earth’], and that it was born in the countryside. He felt that ‘pizzica è sudore, sole, terra e verde’ [‘pizzica is sweat, sun, earth and green’], and that only those who live in the countryside and work the earth can understand what it really means. For Ada Metafune, ‘la pizzica è legata all’animo del contadino’ (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [‘pizzica is bound up with the soul of the peasant’]. She feels that the peasants have a stronger connection to the earth because they work the land, therefore having a similar stronger connection in the stamping movements of the pizzica: ‘questo battere era talmente forte perché c’era un forte legame con la terra’ (ibid.) [‘this stamping (or beating the ground) was so strong because there was a strong connection with the earth’]. Mariella Pandolfi’s exploration of the embodiment of suffering amongst southern Italian peasant women offers an insight into a culture-specific relationship to the body, and an inscription of cultural values through the body, that relates to the particular circumstances of a woman in a ‘peasant’ environment: Maria [Pandolfi’s subject in the field] tells us about a world of subjective identity — a ‘minimal’ identity that finds in the body, in the experience of the body, the locus of existing and expressing herself; describing herself by way of the body establishes a phenomenological identity. Second, a phenomenological identity, in the sense of being present in the world via the body, is also set forth and defined by the way of social structures that for centuries have defined cultural roles and forms that, in the last analysis, served to control and ‘normalize’ the female world of emotions. [...] 

The speaking of the subjective story through the presence of the body is manifested in the embodied dancing of the ¢arantate within the history of the ritual. This made the moment of the appearance of the prior tarantata at the festival at Galatina in 2008 so strong, particularly in comparison to the very public display of dancing by women which had occurred during the previous night. The clothing of some of the presentational dancers on the stage, including a bare midriff and a lightweight skirt that exposed the legs, made a stark contrast with the tavantata shrouded in black, her head covered, ushered in and out of the chapel hidden from the crowd, wanting a private space for her personal time of devotion, rather than the public space of the crowds at the festival. And yet it was her embodied presence, with the story and history inscribed in her body, which drew the crowd to her, and created the transformation of quality of presence within and outside the chapel. She was a reminder of a past way of being for women, which made clear the great change there has been in a relatively short time for the whole culture of Salento, and for women in particular. As the embodiment of a past now almost lost, of a connection to the land, and a private, sacred space of healing, her presence and actions in the site of the Piazza that morning had a profound effect on all watching.

In this sense, she manifested a residue of an older hegemonic order, discussed by De Martino in his view on the women as being 'subaltern' referred to in Chapter Three, in the same spatial-temporal site as the new socio-cultural positioning of women in society, marked by their differences in embodied actions. The contrasts, contradictions and contestations within the 'moment' of the festival of St Peter and St Paul in Galatina highlight many of the aspects which will feature in the rest of this study: the mixture of sacred and profane; culturally specific forms of healing and ritual performance; the past embodied in the present; shifting views and discourses on the body, and attitudes towards the women who became farantate in the many centuries of writings about the ritual.

The next chapter will focus on these historical writings, examining the appropriation and different viewpoints of the ritual and those who undertook it, demonstrating changing attitudes towards the body, healing and the natural world which took place during the centuries of recorded histories and stories concerning those who have been bitten by the taranta.

CHAPTER TWO
Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism

The challenges to the discipline of history over the past four decades, particularly from feminism, postmodernism, and post-structuralism, have led to a questioning of the hegemonic voice which decides and defines what history is, and whose history it is. Such questions and challenges are at the forefront in writing this chapter on the history of tarantism, based in a selection of the historical records of the ritual that are available. Firstly, of course, it is not 'the history' but 'histories, and it is also my own narrative based on both the choice of which documents are included, and how they are interpreted. As discussed in Chapter One, whether writing history or ethnography, it is the particular situation of researcher and author that creates the picture that is presented. An investigation of how 'past' informs and relates to 'present' is, as previously stated, not a linear or evolutionist path, but instead a series of compound 'moments, each of which need to be understood in their particular context. Although the dangers of a linear approach are acknowledged, this chapter will take an essentially direct route through the 'moments' of the histories concerning tarantism. The main reason for this approach rather than a thematic one, is in order to clarify the specific theoretical and socio-cultural positioning of each writer in their particular period and context. The potential problem with a thematic structure is that specific details can be lost, and in the case of my choice in writing about tarantism, it is these particular contexts that are of great importance in exploring how notions of the body as object have been appropriated and defined by various sources through shifts of thinking and practice over six centuries of records. Even De Martino's writing of La terra del rimorso, despite taking a thematic approach to his chapters, which incorporates extracts of historical writings, still at points offers a linear perspective to contextualize the ideologies of the authors. In choosing to approach the historical 'moments' in this way, there are still clear themes that emerge and are identified in the process, most notably the gradual medicalization, Christianization, and feminization of the ritual, as well as the ways in which music and dance are valorized or dismissed as means of therapeutic efficacy.

The development of these themes within the historical records is bound up with the theories, practices, and culture-specific views of the particular writer, and needs to be contextualized in this way. Hopefully, the thread of these themes can be traced through the narrative, leading to a picture that offers both a linear and thematic approach to the development of such a complex and contradictory subject over a long period of time.

The objectification of the bodies of the tarantati, as well as the practice and processes of the ritual, has effectively silenced the voices and embodied presences of the savantati themselves. The doctors, scientists, and philosophers whose writings are discussed are all men, some of whom are writing based on personal observation of examples of the ritual, and others based on second-hand accounts or reading works of other writers. All of them are writing from the perspective of their own ideas, ideologies, and socio-cultural positionings, thus structuring the history and story of tarantism through their own interpretations and opinions, defining ways in which both the bodies of the tarantati and the existence of the ritual have been understood and presented.

As Alexandra Carter writes in relation to the study of dance history: "Historians make meaning; we need to be aware of who is making the meaning and from what perspective that meaning is made" (Carter, 2004: 14). This certainly leads to the question: "Whose history is it?", for clearly it is that of the histories and stories of the writers themselves, as well as the subjects they are writing about. The significance of the volume of writings and debates about tarantism through the centuries provides valuable insights into shifting views on the body, dance, music, healing, and medical practices, which offer a perspective on the defining of the performing body in relation to changes in ideologies and socio-cultural constructs.

In Chapter One, I proposed that the body, or rather the shifting process of embodiment within the dance, both inscribes and is inscribed by the socio-cultural surroundings, and that the space in which the ritual takes place is as much in a state of process as is the body of the tarantata and the performance itself, and that these are mutually generated by each other. The historical records likewise demonstrate a state of process, a shift in thoughts and practices, which both inscribe and are inscribed by the particular spatial-temporal location from which they emerge. The doctors, scientists, and philosophers are themselves engaged in the experiential process of writing based on their own bodymind state and their socio-cultural positionings, creating the emerging picture of tarantism as it was defined through the centuries. Additionally, historical records are part of the revivalist phenomenon of neo-tarantism in contemporary Salento, in a complex interplay of embodiment and identity based on the interpretation of the histories of a cultural performance form within the region, inscribing and being inscribed on the bodies and performance forms that have emerged more recently.

The problem with attempting to identify historical origins, whether of a ritual or performance form, was also discussed in Chapter One. The desire to find and identify the precise origin, and the linear evolution from this point of origin onwards, is a great temptation to academics. It can offer a sense of legitimacy to a historical study to state that "this is where it started, and this is how it developed." This is demonstrated in the histories of tarantism, with many writers throughout the centuries, as well as in contemporary Italy, suggesting that the origin of tarantism is found in the antiquity of Greek rituals and pagan practices. This is a speculation, though based on a reasonable assumption of the reality of the Greek influence in Apulia and on certain features of the ritual. However, this also denies the specific nature of tarantism as a particular and unique practice in its context, and the differences and individual characteristics that are a part of its own form.

The evolutionary question in relation to a performance form comes back to the unanswerable question: which came first, the chicken or the egg? The answer is: neither of them. It is not possible to say exactly where or when tarantism originated, nor precisely how it started and became established. What is available are the earliest records of its existence, which does not mean that it did not exist before or had emerged from a different type of ritual or performance. Although this chapter contains the "earliest recorded writings," this does not indicate that this is "where it all began." The questions of "how did tarantism begin," "when and why were pizzica music and dance first used as a means of cure rather than entertainment," or "how did the figure of the saranta become entwined with the ritual" will have to remain unanswered.

To refer back to Chapter One, it is perhaps more useful to see this as a process rather than a fixed object which has a clear beginning and end. When did a chicken evolve into something that we now call a chicken? It is simply not possible to say. These questions tend to demonstrate the "fallacy of emergence" based on "ideological assumptions"; to repeat David George (George, 1998: 12). Each "moment of history" was a present moment at the time it occurred and in its point of being written about, so in this chapter, what is offered is a series of these "moments" to create a picture of the changing approaches to the body and the performance of music and dance within tarantism. In order to provide a wider context which may be of help in understanding the shifting positions of music and dance in relation to the body, health, and society, there are two "moments" which are briefly discussed before the writings on tarantism: that of mousiké and ritual in ancient Greece, and the developments in music and dance in the early Christian Church. Music, words, and dance operate in a unified paradigm in ancient Greece, where music is a "delightful manifestation of the rhythms of words or physical movement" (Ley, 2007: 134). In this context, music and dance were used to achieve balance and harmony in the body and mind, often through rituals that invoked transformation and healing. The passage from Homer's Iliad demonstrates the importance of music in soothing the psyche and spirit of the Greek hero Achilles. This discussion highlights the relevance of music and dance in ancient Greece, which will be crucial in understanding the development of tarantism and its connections to Greek rituals and practices. This unification is seen through the term ‘mousiké, defined by Murray and Wilson to equate with the notion of ‘culture’: [Mousiké is the] union of song, dance, and word to which the Muses gave their name. Mousiké, the realm of the Muses, lies at the very heart of Greek culture, and is indeed a contender for the closest term in Greek to our (polymorphous) ‘culture’ {...} [It represented] a seamless complex of instrumental music, poetic word, and co-ordinated physical movement. [...] Mousiké was an endlessly variegated, rich set of cultural practices, with strongly marked regional traditions that made them a valuable item of local self-definition as well as a means for exchange and interaction. (Murray and Wilson, 2004: 1)

The Muses were the daughters of Zeus and Memory (Mnémosyné), and lived in the ‘shining dancing-places’ (Ley, 2007: 122) on Mount Olympus, with the Graces and Desire. The importance of memory is seen in the centrality of myths during the archaic period, where the need to unite a varied range of peoples into a single identity resulted in the use of myths to create the idea of a shared past, a collective memory, which defined not only who they were, but how they were: Mousiké shaped the way individuals and communities lived and sought to reproduce themselves. It was a medium through which ideals of behaviour were developed and enforced — the morality of individuals and collectives, notions of proper or ideal corporeal types, political principles and pragmatics. [...] Mousiké was also a vital medium through which societies created and related to their past. (Murray and Wilson, 2004: 2)

For Griffith, this resulted in a self-conscious panhellenic identity through shared myths and stories, which were ‘regarded by all Greeks as being about “their” collective past’ (Griffith, 2007: 15). Here is another example of a ‘moment’ where past and present were brought together to create a sense of shared identity through forms of cultural performances. Inherent within mousiké is the inseparability of music, dance and words. In this unity, these forms of performance had the ability to affect both the bodymind of the individual, and the socio-political structure of the state.

The potential for music to create a psychophysical transformation is manifested most clearly in the development of modes, or harmoniai, and the notion of harmony and sympathy. This leads to a correspondence between the balance of humours within the body, musical tones, and astrological and astronomical influences, connecting human and divine through a harmonious balance achieved by finding the appropriate musical scale to promote a particular state of being. Pythagoras (c. 570-490 BCE) made a correlation between music and numbers which resulted in the creation of a tonal system based in geometry and the harmony of the cosmos. This was bound up with the notion of ethos and character, which could be affected and determined by association with a mode that related to a planetary or divine influence. In this sense, the ‘Greek doctrine of ethos [...] was founded on the conviction that music affects character and that different kinds of music affect it in different ways’ (Grout, 1981: 9). For Pythagoras, ethos encompassed the moral qualities and effects ruled by mathematical ratios ‘that operate in the whole of the visible and invisible creation. Music, in this view, was not only a passive image of the orderly system of the universe; it was also a force that could affect the universe — hence the attribution of miracles to the legendary musicians of mythology’ (ibid.). 7). Therefore, there was a need to find the correct mode to establish the appropriate state of being within a person, and this also led to Pythagoras exploring the use of music in healing. There are several stories where he used music to calm or soothe 2 A musical ‘mode’ is a particular scale or pattern of notes, which can imply a specific key or tonal center for the music. 88 CHAPTER TWO someone who had been roused into a state of anger or agitation, such as when he supposedly calmed a young man who was drunk by changing the musical mode he was listening to, which was reported in the preface to Boethius’ De Musica, which will be mentioned in the section on music in the early Christian Church. Pythagoras’ ideas were developed by successive philosophers and doctors with a furthering of the notion of the way in which musical modes affect the bodymind, including the relation to the four bodily humours: blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile, with the associated characteristics of being sanguine, phlegmatic, melancholic and choleric, and their relationship to the four elements, and other associations such as the seasons of the year and times of the day. The first writings concerning the humours are usually attributed to Hippocrates (c. 460-377 BCE), with a fuller development of correspondences to other aspects by subsequent medical practitioners and philosophers, reaching a full exposition in the work of Galen (c. 129-216 CE) in the Roman period, whose treatises became the foundation of medical thought and practice for many centuries. One of the most significant philosophers relevant for this study is Plato (c. 429-347 BCE). In his Dialogue Timaeus, which was his most well-known text in medieval Europe, he stressed the importance of the balance, or harmony, of elements in the body to create a sense of well-being, and that it is the imbalance of the elements that leads to illness: The origin of diseases should be obvious. The body is composed of four elements — earth, fire, air and water; and disorders and diseases are caused by an unnatural excess or deficiency of any of them, by their shifting from their proper place to another, by any part of the body taking in an unsuitable variety either of fire or another element (for there are several varieties of them), and by similar disturbances. (Plato, 1977: 112) In relation to the idea of the connection between man and the divine, Plato believed that the qualities of the musical modes also had a correspondence with a particular deity or aspect of the divine, and through listening to and being involved with the music, a person can become filled and harmoniously ‘in tune’ with this divine energy. If the body is ‘in tune’ or in harmony with the mode relating to the deity, then this deity will be attracted into that body, leading to the Greek notion of ‘sympathy’, that Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 89 things which are similar will attract each other, just as those which are dissimilar will repel. This is seen in some of the religious rites which involve music and dance. The relationship between these is profoundly important in classical Greece, as Greek religion was ‘deeply musical and performative’ (Murray and Wilson, 2004: 4). These rites included being filled or possessed by a deity, leading to the state of entheos, of being engodded. An example of this type of possession ritual was the Pythia or Pythoness at Delphi, dedicated to Apollo. She became "entheos, plena deo": the god entered into her and used her vocal organs as if they were her own (Dodds, 1951: 70). Dodds points out that this is not a state of the soul leaving the body, but rather "that the body has a god within it" (ibid.: 87, n. 41). This state can lead to the feeling of being "outside of oneself" or "exd."

In Plato's Socratic Dialogue Jon, there is an examination of the nature of performance, with Socrates questioning Ion as to whether his performance of reciting Homer is based in acquired skill or if he has been inspired by divine possession. The dialogue continues with Socrates asking Ion about his experiences during his performances, and Ion responding that he is moved by the emotions of the stories he tells.

Plato connects the ideas of possession through "entheos" and "exd," the origin of the word "enthusiasm" and "ecstasy," respectively, in the experience of performance. The process of being filled by or being absorbed with a deity results in the moving away from the sense of "self." This two-way state is significant in understanding the connection between possession and performance.

Griffith (2007: 19, 23) emphasizes that both the performer of epic scenes and his audience are felt to be "beside, outside" themselves and "possessed by god" as a result of the vividness and emotionality of the narrative. The pleasurably "mind-bending" (psuchagégia) of allowing the god to enter "inside" oneself (enthousiasmos) and thus moving "outside" one's normal state of consciousness was recognized by audiences and critics alike as being brought about more powerfully by tragedy and comedy than by any other art-form.

Although Jon ends somewhat playfully, with Ion denying being in a state of divine frenzy and Socrates describing him as being a "proper Proteus," the combined state of entheos and exd is also found within the performance of religious rites involving music and dance, particularly those associated with Dionysus. It is sometimes described today as being where the soul leaves the body to journey somewhere else, leading to the idea of "soul loss." Gary Tomlinson makes such a distinction, describing tarantism as a ritual of possession rather than ekstatsis, which is a term he uses instead to describe the Benandanti, a cult whose practices consist of soul-journeying (see Tomlinson, 1993: 155 and Ginzburg, 1992). However, the experience of both possession and ekstasis in their use in Greek philosophy and practices did not have the same meaning. Dodds claims that "entheos" never meant that the soul had left the body, as Rohde seems to imply in some instances, but rather that the body had a god within it. In describing the experience of the Pythia, he states that she becomes "entheos" only in the sense of being in a state of grace resulting from the accomplishment of rites (Dodds, 1951: 87, n. 41). He makes a clear distinction between this type of experience and shamanism, which is "not the entry of an alien spirit into the shaman; it is the liberation of the shaman's spirit, which leaves his body and sets off on a mantic journey or 'psychic excursion' (ibid.: 88, n. 4.4). The experience of forgetfulness of self resulting from the belief in being possessed by or absorbed with a god is not the same as the 'self' or soul going somewhere else in the form of a shamanic journeying. See Tomlinson, 1993: 150-3, for a further discussion of some of the problems with categorizations and taxonomies of terms such as possession, ecstasy, and shamanism.

The rites of Dionysus were especially intertwined with theater performance. Those belonging to the guild of actors and musicians were known as the Artists of Dionysus. For the Athenian festival, the City Dionysia, a statue of the god was brought from his sanctuary on the south slope of the Acropolis to the festival, and they 'also built a theater near the temple, where the community could watch performances dedicated to Dionysus, who encouraged the complementary moods of ekstasis (standing outside oneself) and exthousiasmos (the god within) associated with wine' (Rehm, 2007: 185). He gave rise to the cult of Maenadism, women who were initiated into his rites, and were renowned for their wild, frenzied, ecstatic dancing, usually to music in the Phrygian mode, which was associated with Dionysus.

Dodds suggests that part of the social function of these rituals was cathartic, in the meaning of the word within classical Greek thought, in that: it purged the individual of those infectious irrational impulses which, when damned up, had given rise, as they have done in other cultures, to outbreaks of dancing mania and similar manifestations of collective hysteria; it relieved them by providing them with a ritual outlet. (Dodds, 1951: 76) Understood in this way, it is clear why direct connections have been made by later writers between the Dionysic rites of the Maenads and tarantism. The rituals of Dionysus can be seen as the use of dance and music to create a socially acceptable means to reach a state of release from the self, or ekstasis, in the action of the collective dance.

Similarly, the Corybantic rites, which Dodds suggests 'appealed to similar psychological types and produced similar psychological reactions' (ibid.: 78) were a ritualistic means to treat a state of 'madness; or as Plato defined it, 'phobies or anxiety-feel-ings [...] arising from some morbid mental condition' (ibid.: 78). It seems that the efficacy of the ritual would depend on the particular condition and proclivities of the participant, as 'the real test seems to have been the patient’s response to a particular ritual: if the rites of a god X stimulated him and produced a catharsis, that showed that his trouble was due to X; if he failed to react, the cause must lie elsewhere' (ibid. Just as the particular ritual relating to a specific god needed to be identified, the same was the case, as previously noted, for finding the appropriate musical mode to effect a process of healing. In Jon, Plato says that those in a state of illness ‘have a sharp ear for one tune only, the one which belongs to the god by whom they are possessed, and to that tune they respond freely and with gesture and speech, while they ignore all others’ (ibid.: 79). This reinforces the notion of the ability of music to create a transformation in the state of being, just as it did for the battle-worn Achilles, withdrawing for a moment from the actions of the war, and soothing his heart and spirit by playing the phorminx, and singing songs which recalled the famous deeds of men.

In this overview of aspects of the placing of music and dance within ancient and classical Greek thought, what can be seen is the interconnection of music and dance, and their part in the notion of ‘mousiké, defining a cultural and ethical identity for the panhellenic state. The development of the idea of modes, and how specific modes affect the state of being of a person in particular ways, when combined with medical practitioners as well as philosophers, led to a paradigm of musical healing consisting of the need to find the particular mode in order to achieve harmony within the being. The playing of a mode that was associated with a particular deity could also cause a sympathetic attraction to something that is similar, leading to a state of possession, or being filled by that deity and their quality, resulting in a loss of sense of self through being in exd, outside or beside oneself.

The particular feature of the need to find a correspondence of musical modes to promote a process of healing, will be discussed later in the records concerning tarantism. This brief exploration of music and dance in Greek medicine and ritual performance is in strong contrast with the following contextual ‘moment’ beginning several centuries later, examining how the early Christian Church appropriated and transformed the practice of music and dance.

Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism

Music and dance in the early Christian Church

During the period in which the Christian Church was trying to establish itself within Western Europe, music and dance came under close scrutiny and debate, with differing results that would affect the development of both in their practice and theory for many centuries to come. Some of these developments are significant for understanding the context of the early modern writings on tarantism, most particularly the division between sacred and secular performances; the separation of music and dance as disciplines; the continuing connection with music as a form of treatment for medical conditions; and the association of dance with ideas of immorality and erotic excess, especially in relation to women.

The connection of the use of forms of music and dance in pagan rites was one of the foremost reasons that the Church attempted to control their practice within its own liturgical framework in order to establish a firmer hold of Christianity throughout the west, so it was ‘therefore, a commonplace to regard the battle against dancing as a part of the war against paganism’ (Arcangeli, 1994: 127). From the time of the early Church Fathers, a clear division was being made between dancing within the building of the church itself as part of a service which reflected a divine union with the angels, and the lascivious excesses and sinful practices of popular dances outside the church, which were instead seen as reflections of demonic vices. In this sense, dance itself was not condemned outright as a practice, but rather it was the context in which it was performed that created the moral and religious divide in the minds of the Fathers. According to Backman, the ring dances or circle dances which were performed in the church, often around the altar, were an imitation and embodiment of angels dancing in a circle in paradise, with the altar as a representation of the divine at the centre (Backman, 1952: 21). However, the ring dances performed in a secular context outside the church were said to have the devil at the centre of the circle, and in the words of a French preacher, ‘omnes vergunt ad sinistrum’, they all turned to the left, or ‘perversely’ (Stevens, 1986: 161), in a diabolical mirroring of the sacred form enacted within the church.

St John Chrysostom (c. 345-407 CE), the Bishop of Constantinople, known as ‘Golden-Mouth’ wrote in no uncertain terms about this division in a lecture about how Christians within and outside the church building celebrated the festival of Whitsun:

"Yesterday was the festival of the Devil (a pagan festival), but you, on the contrary, celebrated the festival of the Holy Ghost as far as, with the utmost zeal of spirit, you have received all that we have proclaimed. You have passed the greater part of the day together in transports of moderation, in the performance of ring-dances in the spirit of St Paul. By this your merits have increased doubly, in the first place because you refrained from the indecent dances of the drunken, and in the second place because you danced those spiritual dances which are most pleasing and most modest ..., and while others performed dances for the Devil, you circled instead in this place and used musical instruments of the spirit, revealing your souls as do the musical instruments on which the Holy Ghost plays when he instils his grace into your hearts." (in Backman, 1952: 32)

This is interesting as another example of contested spaces of embodiment and performance, such as was discussed in the moment of the festival of St Paul in Galatina in Chapter One. In this instance, the event takes place on Whitsun, itself a holiday (holy-day) which Christianity appropriated from the Jewish festival of Shavuot, and also most probably, as St John Chrysostum suggests, a pagan festival (‘festival of the Devil’ in his terms) celebrating the summer. Within this conflicting spatial-temporal frame, two forms of dance occur: one, inside the church, described as ‘spiritual’ and ‘modest’ dedicated to St Paul, and the other outside the space of the church, both geographically and spiritually, labelled as ‘drunken’ and ‘indecent. Those dancers within the church are praised further for choosing a form of embodiment which is approved of within a Christian context, as opposed to the secular, even demonic, embodiment of the dancers outside the boundaries of the church building, which are instead considered to be shameful. St John Chrysostum offers one of the most renowned and often cited statements on secular dance leading to a state of shame, in his commentary on Salome's dance in St Matthew's Gospel:

"For where there is a dance, there also is the Devil. For God has not given us our feet to use in such a shameful way but in order that we may walk in decency, not that we should dance like camels (for even dancing camels make an unpleasant spectacle, much more than women), but in order to dance ring-dances with the angels." For if it is shameful for the body to behave thus, the more so is it for the spirit to do so. (in ibid.: 32) In this way, dance itself is not a forbidden activity, but it is the location and intention of the dancer that creates a defining of embodiment within the performance as to whether it is a sanctified or shameful act in the eyes of the Church. This connection of shame of both body and soul became intrinsically connected to those dance and music performances which were not within the strict ecclesiastical framework, and the control of performances relating to religious rites, whether festivals or particular occasions such as funerals where songs and dances were performed within the church building or churchyard, became tighter over the centuries. In 826 CE, the Council of Rome ‘complained that women, especially on holidays and anniversaries of saints, only came to the church in order to sing shameless songs and to perform choir dances, whereby they followed pagan example' (Backman, 1952: 155), and by the middle of the ninth century, Pope Leo IV banned women from dancing and singing in churches and their porches. This banning of performances in churches and churchyards continued through the thirteenth century and beyond, as dance became further associated with a moral debate that was articulated from the pulpit. According to Arcangeli, in the manuals for confessors and penitents that originated in the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215, a 'special entry for dance (chorea, in the predominant Latin form of these texts) was very common (while you would not find “music”, and rarely “theatre”)' (Arcangeli, 1994: 129). In this way, dance was separated from music, and singled out for special scrutiny.

Even in my current home city of Exeter, there was a Synod in 1287 which 'ordered that there shall be no wrestling, ring-dances or other forbidden games in churchyards, especially at night watches and the festivals of the saints, because by the performance of such play-acting and indecent games the dignity of the Church is dragged through the mire' (in Backman, 1952: 157).

CHAPTER TWO

In terms of the seven deadly sins, dance was seen as a manifestation of Lust, due to the social occasions where secular dance took place, when men and women would dance together, a particular feature of social dance of which the Church disapproved. Additionally, dance was related to the sin of Gluttony, being seen as a state of excess of both drunkenness and also enjoyment. This hearkens back to Gregory the Great, for whom dance 'was seen as a manifestation of inepta Laetitia [‘inane rejoicing’ ]' (ibid.: 129). Arcangeli points to the connection between dance and excessive joy, seen particularly in the types of embodied movements such as jumping and leaping (we still jump for joy'). He states that 'Plato [in the Laws] wrote that the word chords (dance) comes from chara (joy)' (ibid.: 139), even though this may be seen as a play on words rather than actual derivation. However, the equation between dance and excessive joy that came from secular pleasure, including eroticism and wine, may also have been seen by the Church as another link to pagan rites, especially those associated with Dionysus, so again needed to be controlled within a form of an ecclesiastical embodiment and expression. Dance as a pleasurable activity, an expression of the joy of moving to music, was perceived as a shameful act, when compared to the dance of angels around the altar in church, which was an initiation into the mystery rites of Christianity. This created a determination not only of the location and intention of the dance, but also of the type of embodied response to the act of dancing, leading to a distinction between sacred and secular manifestations. While the practice of dance was being divided into sacred and secular forms, the discipline of music experienced developments of its own, resulting in a separation in the study of the two performance forms.

One of the main features of medieval church music was the establishment of the modes, which were "clearly a compound of the Byzantine echoi and the Greek tono?" (Grout, 1981: 15), integrating western and eastern influences to form the basis of musical melodic structure. By the eleventh century, the system of modes had been formed. Although given the names of the ancient Greek modes (Phrygian, Dorian, Lydian, and Mixolydian), they were musically different from the Greek versions due to a difference in their transposition. There were eight modes altogether, grouped in four pairs, with each mode having two forms: authentic and plagal (which started a fourth lower than the authentic, and are prefixed with "Hypo-"). Each mode was structured in a specific way, reflecting different qualities.

As an example, the medieval Phrygian mode (though the Greek Phrygian mode became the medieval Dorian) was structured as follows: Semitone -- Tone -- Tone -- Tone -- Semitone -- Tone -- Tone. Starting on the note E, the ascending scale on a modern piano keyboard would consist of playing only the white notes to the E an octave above. The Phrygian is the closest mode to the minor scale as it is understood today, though with a flattened second. It is also, with the modification of a major third making it into the Phrygian Dominant, the mode that is often heard in forms of flamenco music, as well as in a range of Jewish and Arabic music, thus being considered the most "exotic" and "Eastern" sounding of the modes. Several of the songs used in the ritual of tarantism are recorded as being in the Phrygian mode, particularly with the inherent ambiguity between major and minor found in many of the pizzica songs, referred to in the Introduction.

As well as scales, there was a system of rhythmic modes established during the Middle Ages, originating in part from Greek rhythms based on patterns of speech. The most significant for this study is the first mode, the trochaic, consisting of an accented followed by an unaccented beat: -~. This rhythmic pattern, in duple and triple metre, is the one found most frequently in the pizzica music used in tarantism, and in the movements of the feet in the dance.

In addition to the developments in the practice of music, the philosophy and theory of musical knowledge were of extreme importance during the Middle Ages. One of the foremost writers in this respect was Boethius (c. 480-524), who in his Principles of Music made a connection to its Greek roots based in arithmetic exemplified by Pythagoras, and described music as a reflection of the order and harmony of the universe, and its related influence on character and ethos. The term "musica" was used to encompass the notion of knowledge and became one of the seven liberal arts (part of the quadrivium, alongside geometry, astronomy, and arithmetic, and the trivium of grammar, rhetoric, and dialectic). This separation of playing music from a theoretical and philosophical understanding of it made knowledge of "musica" a part of education. This was demonstrated by Isidore of Seville (c. 559-636) in his "Etymologies" HI ch. xvi: "Sine musica nulla disciplina potest esse perfecta" ("Without music no branch of learning can be complete") (in Stevens, 1986: 13).

Music was drawn into a paradigm of knowledge and learning, rather than for the aesthetic enjoyment and pleasure of the player and listener. St. Augustine articulated this in his "Confessions":

"Thus vacillate I between dangerous pleasure and tried soundness; being inclined rather (though I pronounce no irrevocable opinion upon the subject) to approve of the use of singing in church, that so by the delights of the ear the weaker minds may be stimulated to a devotional frame. Yet when it happens to me to be more moved by the singing than by what is sung, I confess myself to have sinned criminally, and then I would rather not have heard the singing." (Confessions, X, Ch. 33, trans. J. G. Pilkington in Whitney J. Oates, ed. Basic Writings of Saint Augustine, New York, 1948, in Grout, 1982: 27)

As with dance, the pleasurable enjoyment of music became associated with sin. The ideas from Pythagoras and Boethius as the authorities from the past became the established views on music and knowledge within education and the Church, which were connected as education occurred in monasteries and in the schools attached to cathedrals during the Middle Ages (ibid.: 56).

The distinction between music as pleasure and music as knowledge grew ever wider, developing from Boethius's differentiating between the cantor (singer) and "musica" (musician), in other words between someone who plays music, and someone who actually understands it but is not necessarily a performer, thereby separating practice from theory and knowledge. The singer or practitioner was debased to being likened to "a drunken man reeling home (he hopes) along a road he does not know" (Stevens, 1986: 376).

The development of music as a theoretical discipline within the world of knowledge that is also based in arithmetic and geometry, has influenced the way in which it has been understood and taught within western education. The separation of practice from theory, and of music from other performance disciplines such as dance and theatre, has been an important factor in how the arts have been placed and discussed within academia.

The separation of music from dance in the Middle Ages is also significant as a moving away from the united notion of "mousiké" in classical Greek thought. However, this understanding of the inherent interconnection between music and dance, particularly in relation to healing, was to be revived and renewed in the writings of the fifteenth-century Neoplatonists, particularly Marsilio Ficino, whose iatromusical approach in his writings on tarantism will be discussed shortly.

The "moments" on music and dance in ancient Greece and the early Christian Church contain aspects that will be of importance in the historical writings on the ritual of tarantism. These writings, in their appropriation of issues concerning the body, performance, and healing within the specific paradigms of philosophy, medicine, and history of each writer and period, demonstrate the reduction of the complex subject of tarantism into a site of debate by medical and ecclesiastical figures, many of whom had no direct contact with or knowledge of the people involved. The following investigation of the historical writings examines the shifting attitudes and paradigms of embodiment and performance from the fourteenth century onwards, noting how the body was defined and determined according to the socio-cultural contexts of the writers, and how this in turn leads to the embodiment of these ideas through the performance.

100 CHAPTER TWO 
Writings on tarantism from the fourteenth to the mid-twentieth centuries

Earliest recorded writings

Although there are extensive records concerning tarantism from the seventeenth century onwards, there are earlier writings, particularly within the de venenis literature, or the writings on poisons, of the use of music in treating the bite of a tarantula. The most probable source for the earliest documentation is that of the Sertum Papale de Venenis, written by the Paduan doctor Gulielmus de Marra in 1362. The section on the use of music to cure the bite of the tarantula is part of a collection of writings on the treatment of poisons, and is placed between a section on the hiss or sight of a basilisk,® and that concerning the treatment of hydrophobia, or the poison resulting from the bite of a mad dog. The section on tarantulas is summarised in Volume 3 of Lynn Thorndike’s extensive collection A History of Magic and Experimental Science:

Tarantula bite is relieved by music, because the poison produces melancholy whose best antidote is rejoicing. The vulgar and ignorant say that the insect sings when it bites and that when the patient hears similar cadences, it is a great relief to him. William is unwilling to admit this explanation but he thinks that the joy derived from the music may attract the spirits from within the body to the periphery and so prevent the poison from penetrating to the vitals. (Man. Barb. 306: 146-7, in Thorndike, 1966, Volume 3: 534.)

De Martino continues the citation from de Marra’s work which questions why it may be that hearing a specific melody will affect the patient in a particular way if, as he suggests, there is not a real connection between the spider and the music:

The basilisk was, at this time, considered to be a real creature, influenced by the description by Pliny the Elder of it being a snake that can kill both through its venom and glance. References to basilisks and Pliny in relation to tarantism continued through to the seventeenth century, e.g., in Ferdinando (1621) and Gritber (1679).

Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism

In fact, each individual of the human species, for a generic disposition, gains sensible pleasure from things which are agreeable to his own individuality. [...] [F]or hearing, some enjoy horns, others bagpipes, and still others songs. [...] In relation to this, those who are bitten by the tarantula receive the greatest pleasure from one music or another, for example the zither or especially the melody called pelandra; others enjoy the sound of the /epore and especially the aria called Dama di Provenza, and so on for other musical instruments, melodies and songs which are pleasing to them, their souls are joyous, and since cheerfulness is an excellent medicine for that disease, they recover and return to life, although the cause of the enjoyment they feel is another. (Ms. Lat. Barberini, p. 306, in De Martino, 2005: 214)

De Martino points out that this record does not contain a reference to the use of dance as part of the cure, discusses how the music is used, nor mentions Apulia specifically as the region where the events take place, but there are significant features in this document in relation to the understanding of tarantism as being caused by the poison resulting in the condition of melancholy, and the use of a specific type of music to cure the condition. Hecker, however, claims that the first reference to tarantism can be found in the work of the scholar Nicholas Perotti in his Cornucopiae Latinae Linguae in the following century. Perotti places the condition firmly within Apulia, and the description of the illness resembles later writings, in terms of falling into a state of melancholy which is cured by music that incites laughter and joy, as well as movements of leaping. Hecker actually suggests that a form of the condition existed much earlier, and makes reference to the physician Gariopontus, a contemporary of Constantine of Africa, both of whom were based in the famous medical school at Salerno in the eleventh century: The patients in their sudden attacks behaved like maniacs, sprang up, throwing their arms about with wild movements, and, if perchance a sword was at hand, they wounded themselves and others, so that it became necessary carefully to secure them. They imagined that they heard voices, and various kinds of sounds, and if, during this state of illusion, the tones of a favourite instrument happened to catch their ear, they commenced a spasmodic dance, or ran with the utmost energy which they could muster, until they were totally exhausted. These dangerous maniacs, who, it would seem, appeared in considerable numbers, were looked upon as a legion of devils, but on the causes of their malady this obscure writer adds nothing further than that he believes (oddly enough) that it may sometimes be excited by the bite of a mad dog.

102 CHAPTER TWO

He calls the disease Anteneasmus, by which is meant no doubt the Enthusiasmus of the Greek physicians. We cite this phenomenon as an important forerunner of tarantism, under the conviction that we have thus added to the evidence that the development of this latter must have been founded on circumstances which existed from the twelfth to the end of the fourteenth century. (Hecker, 1833: 69-70)

Hecker thus implies that tarantism grew out of illnesses connected to forms of mania, in part as a response of melancholy to sociological conditions such as the Black Death and other devastating plagues and illnesses of the Middle Ages, which were also the possible causes for the cult ‘dance manias such as St Vitus’ dance, which will be discussed shortly.

A further record from this period is provided by Alessandro di Alessandro (1461-1523), a lawyer from Naples, who offers an eye-witness account of a case of tarantism in Apulia in his Genialium dierum libri VI. He describes how those bitten by a ¢aranta are cured by music,’ through being ‘entranced and enticed’ (in De Martino, 2005: 92) by the musician playing a particular melody, to which they react to physically ‘in jumps and gestures which are not unseemly and disorderly, but rather in keeping with what the zither is playing’ (ibid.: 92).

Alessandro recounts going to Apulia and seeing a young man in a village who was a ¢arantato, and ‘danced with a certain elegance, with the movements of his body and mime in keeping with the rhythm of the tambourine’ (ibid.: 92). When the music stopped, the young man collapsed on the ground, but rose and danced again when the music restarted (Genialium dierum libri VI, Paris, Book IL, ch. 17, 1549, pp. 212-15, in De Martino, 2005: 92-3). This account offers a much more detailed description of the ritual, including explaining that it takes place 9 However, from the many descriptions and illustrations, it seems clear that a drum or tambourine were common, as well as a string instrument such as a violin (although earlier versions of this), a flute, and possibly a regional form of the bagpipe, which was the ‘the universal folk instrument’ (Grout, 1981: 74), and certainly an outdoor instrument, and therefore likely to have been played by travelling groups of musicians. Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 103 specifically in Apulia; the symptoms of the condition resulting from the bite are that of ‘stupor’ and ‘dulled senses’; the use of a particular form of music to instigate the cure, with the sufferer being ‘entranced’ and ‘fascinated’ by the music; the rhythms of the music causing a change in the movements of the ¢arantato; these movements are specifically that of a dance, rather than random spasmodic responses, and that the dancing demonstrated a ‘certain elegance’ in time with the rhythm, as opposed to Perotti’s account of the movements being an unstructured ‘leaping’ rather than dancing; and that once the tambourine stopped, he would fall to the ground in the original state of stupor, until the music began again. In its structure and detail, this is probably the first fullest description of the ritual in terms of the particular features that were observed in the following centuries.

These three historical documents and their commentaries demonstrate some significant features which are of importance in understanding the ways in which tarantism was first placed within written discourse: the medicalisation of the phenomenon within the context of writings on poisons; the diagnosis of the condition as being one of melancholy, which is cured by music; and the use of prolonged dancing in response to music, which was likened to some of the dance manias which were taking place in medieval Europe, particularly the St Vitus’ dance, which defined how tarantism was categorised by medical practitioners in successive writings.

In the three examples of the earliest documentations, what is not discussed is the personal responses of the tarantati to their condition; it is rather the observed opinions of each of the writers, framing the symptoms and cure within their own views. The body, as well as the performance of the music and dance forms, are appropriated within a discourse of a medical condition or disease which requires a cure that can be articulated within an understanding of biomedicine at that time.

What is also apparent from Alessandro’s account, is his seeing the phenomenon as a ‘curiosity, something to be observed and studied, a strange and even exotic practice, which motivated him to travel to a village in Apulia in order to witness the event for himself. The Sertum Papale, containing de Marra’s reference to the treatment of the poison from a tarantula, is part of the extensive de venenis literature dealing with poisons. This was a significant field of medical writings in 104 CHAPTER TWO the medieval and early modern periods, as poisoning was one of the most feared conditions. This covered the poisons from animal and insect bites; the effects of plague; and also poison as a murder weapon, which could be implemented at a distance both geographically and temporally. There was additionally an important connection between poisons and magic: ‘Poison was one of the great fears of the age. Its threat lay in the fact that bewitchment and poisoning were both methods by which one person might inflict harm on another’ (Gentilcore, 1998: 103), and it was often left up to doctors to make the distinction between a case of poisoning, and one of sorcery: Poisoning was for a long time closely associated with sorcery and magic. The fear of poison began with animal venom, particularly snake and insect stings. The fear of vipers' bites goes back to remote antiquity, becoming synonymous not only with poison but with disease itself. The Emperor Nero is reputed to have used viper's flesh as an antidote for snake-bites and other poisons, and it was also an ingredient of the original recipe for theriac. Gentilcore also mentions the phenomenon of snake charmers, found in Southern Italy in late medieval and early modern times, who were known generically as serpari or ciaralli (also cirauli). These snake-handling families were believed to have special powers, connecting them to the Marsians, who were reputed to be able to entrance snakes with incantations and cure the poison from their bites through their saliva.

The notion of "charm" implies a connection to magic, and the Marsians were reputed to be able to entrance snakes with incantations, and cure the poison from their bites through their saliva. The fear of poison began with animal venom, particularly snake and insect stings. The fear of vipers' bites goes back to remote antiquity, becoming synonymous not only with poison but with disease itself. The Emperor Nero is reputed to have used viper's flesh as an antidote for snake-bites and other poisons, and it was also an ingredient of the original recipe for theriac. Gentilcore also mentions the phenomenon of snake charmers, found in Southern Italy in late medieval and early modern times, who were known generically as serpari or ciaralli (also cirauli). These snake-handling families were believed to have special powers, connecting them to the Marsians, who were reputed to be able to entrance snakes with incantations and cure the poison from their bites through their saliva. As mentioned previously, the word "¢avanta" could mean snake or viper, as well as spider or scorpion, and the symbolic history of snakes, magic, and medicine is significant in the development of tarantism. It is not surprising that St. Paul, with his association of handling venomous snakes in Malta, became the patron saint of the tarantati. Gentilcore points out that the ciaralli, or snake-charmers, were similarly affiliated with St. Paul. He notes that when they came under the regulation of the Sicilian proto-medicato Giovanni Filippo Ingrassia in 1564, they were listed as "the psydli, who are called chirauli in the vernacular (because they operate without medicaments by the powers of St. Paul the Apostle, to whom they are given since birth)"

CHAPTER TWO

The involvement of St. Paul was part of the Christianization of their ancient ritual. The Acts of the Apostles (28: 3-5) recount how St. Paul, on the island of Malta, shook off a viper that had fastened on his hand without coming to any harm. Snake-handlers capitalized on this association, referring to themselves as members of the "house of St. Paul." They thus became known as pauliani or sanpaolari. (ibid.: 107)

Here is another instance of the Christianization of a pre-Christian healing tradition, through the enculturation of its practices within the confines of the Church through the inclusion of St. Paul as the patron saint to whom they are "given"; but also, as Gentilcore suggests, the snake-charmers themselves used the association with St. Paul as a means to give legitimacy to their tradition within the Christian world.

In the early writings on tarantism, there is one feature that continued through into the records from the early modern period, which is the diagnosis of the state resulting from the bite as being that of melancholy, which is cured by music. As was noted previously, in ancient Greece, melancholy was seen as a condition relating to the imbalance of the humor of black bile, and from antiquity, music was used as the means to help restore the equilibrium of the humors within the body through its ability to affect the psychophysical state.

Melancholy, originating in black bile, is related to the spleen and was also perceived to be connected to love and the erotic, and the symptoms could be either "robust or fragile, manic or withdrawn, frenzied or deluded, depending on time and place of observation. It has been both feared and desired, a sign of madness and of inspired furore, and a distinct indication of class or professional talent" (Austern, 2000: 116).

This distinction in symptoms could also be classified according to gender-based characteristics: From antiquity to the present day, melancholy has been perceived either as a privileged state of inspired genius and thus implicitly masculine, or as an unstable pathological state of fragility that borders on the feminine state of hysteria. At no point has this been more true than in the era during which the renaissance gave rise to modernity, when the intelligentsia and the fashionable elite regained interest in both melancholy and the ancient powers of music to move body and soul. (ibid.: 124)

Thus, melancholy could be either a state of deep sadness leading to artistic genius, fueled by unrequited love, which was personified by the image of a love-sick man, or by a fragile, emotional woman in a state of hysteria and frenzy. In Part 1, Section 1, Subsection IV, Robert Burton discusses the states of madness and frenzy, specifically Phrenitis ([frenzy]), which the Greeks derived from the word ([Greek: phraen]). He describes it as a disease of the mind with a continual madness or dotage, often accompanied by an acute fever or inflammation of the brain. It differs from melancholy and madness, as their dotage is without an ague, and it is typically more violent, with patients exhibiting anger and clamour. Madness is defined as a vehement dotage, or raving without a fever, and is often more violent than melancholy. It can be caused by the same factors as the other, such as choler adust and blood incensed, with a full age to distinguish it from children. Fracastorius adds that it should be confirmed Impotency, to separate it from those who accidentally come and go again, as by taking Henbane, Nightshade, Wine, etc.

There are various kinds of fury, such as Ecstasy, familiar with some persons, like Cardan's ability to enter it at will. This fury can also be found in Indian priests delivering their Oracles and the witches in Lapland, as Olaus Magnus wrote. The other species of this fury include Enthusiasms, Revelations, and Visions, often mentioned by Gregory and Bede in their works. Obsession or Possession of devils, Sibylline Prophets, and Poetical Furies are also mentioned. The most known are Lycanthropia, Hydrophobia, and Chorus Sancti Viti.

In Part 1, Section 2, Member 4, Subsect 7, Burton mentions that the state of melancholy can be due to the sting from a tarantula, which is an ordinary thing in Calabria and Apulia in Italy. Their symptoms are merrily described by Jovianus Pontanus Ant. dial., as they dance together and are cured by music. Treatment of melancholy with music was recorded in ancient Greece, and Burnett observes that this influenced Arabic doctors in their treatment of the condition through their reading and translation of Greek medical texts. The first-century Arabic doctor Ibn al-Jazzar writes, "In the case of sickness caused by excessive love, to prevent men from being submerged in excessive brooding, tempered and fragrant wine should be offered, and hearing various kinds of music, speaking with dear friends, etc." (The Guide for the Traveller, 1, in Burnett, 2000: 85). His contemporary Ibn Hindi talks of the relationship established in Greek medicine between specific conditions and their treatments with particular musical modes: “We know, for example, that there is a mode of melody and rhythm which arouses sadness, one which rouses joy, one relaxing and tranquilizing, one which keeps awake, and one which induces sleep. And whenever we order those who suffer from melancholy to be treated with the respective modes, it helps them” (in Ibid.: 86). This use of music to cure melancholy continued to influence the treatment of the condition through early modern Europe and was also used in connection with the biomedical diagnosis and defining of tarantism, seen particularly in the reference to the tarantata being in a state of feverish restlessness, longing for passion and erotic desire, and frenzied movement.

Austern offers the following description of the state of melancholic unrequited love:

"Like all other experiences with both physical and social aspects in Western thought, erotic illness was a set of conditions whose specifics varied by era and location. However, there were a few generalities that consistently defined the ailment. […] Its classic and easily recognizable symptoms included listlessness, sleep deprivation, lack of interest in food or drink, and the languorous wasting away of the entire body, except for the eyes, which, according to one tradition, revealed the infection of the sufferer's system through the optic nerve and into the three ventricles of the brain by the phantasmic image of the beloved. The disorder was accompanied by emotional instability, an irregular pulse, and an ambulatory mania born of restlessness; it was often associated with abnormal erotic phenomena and enhanced capacity for sexual performance. The most natural and effective cure, and the one most fervently desired by the sufferer, was union with the beloved.” (Austern, 2000: 118-119)

This bears a striking correspondence to the medical writings on tarantism, particularly during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, where the state of listlessness, an irregular pulse, mania, and enhanced sexual desire with a longing to be in divine union with the tarantula or St Paul who had caused the condition, became common features in the observation and diagnosis of the tarantate. The references to St Vitus' dance, and other forms of 'dance mania which arose during the Middle Ages, also became a feature of the writings on tarantism.

Instances of St Vitus' dance, or the Dancing Plague, are found from the eleventh to the seventeenth centuries throughout Europe. The symptoms of the condition, involving a state of apparent mania, leading to collective and frenzied dance or movement, often in relation to a particular ecclesiastical figure or building, explains why tarantism has often been included within the categorization of St Vitus' dance. However, the problems with categorizations and taxonomies are again revealed, as the particular cultural and performative manifestations of tarantism are subsumed under a general heading of dance mania, even though the characteristics are in many aspects quite different to the historical descriptions of St Vitus' dance, and to the medical condition that bears its name. In fact, St Vitus' dance is now accepted as being synonymous with Sydenham's Chorea, which is caused by rheumatic fever, resulting in involuntary spasmodic movements, and this is significant in understanding the essential differences between the phenomena. The reasons for the rise of the dancing plagues are often attributed to the extremely stressful circumstances of medieval Europe, such as the Black Death and other plagues; medical conditions including leprosy and syphilis; failure of harvests resulting in famine; war, and poverty (Donaldson et al.; Hecker; Sigerist; Backman; Bartholomew; Brabazon). It was also linked to conditions of melancholy, hysteria, and depression (Paracelsus; Bartholomew; Hughes). The exact date of the first occurrence specifically relating to St Vitus is unclear. Backman describes the famous incident that took place in Strasbourg in 1518. According to the records of Daniel Specklin written in 1587, a large number of old and young people began to dance in the market places, and continued to dance for a night and a day, until they fell to the ground. They were sent to the chapel of St Vitus near Zabern, where they were given 'small crosses and red shoes," and a mass was held for them. On the uppers and soles of the shoes, crosses were drawn in consecrated oil and in the name of St Vitus, they were sprinkled with holy water. This helped all of them' (Backman, 1952: 235-6).

Even though there are many recorded incidents of dance plagues prior to this (see Backman), St Vitus became associated with those smitten by the condition. De Martino states that the saint's name was used as a form of curse: 'Gott geh dir Sankt Veit (God send you St Vitus) or Dass dich Sankt Veit ankdme (may St Vitus come to you)' (De Martino, 2005: 221). Paracelsus (1493-1541) first developed the term choreomania to describe dancing plagues. He opposed the Galenic paradigm of the bodymind and instead posited that the cause of choreomania, or chorea lasciva as he suggested it should also be known, resides in either the laughing veins in the body or in the imagination.

In his unusual idea of the existence of laughing veins, he explains that when they are 'opened and bled, the person begins to laugh and cannot stop while he is bleeding' (ibid.: 158). This is caused by an imbalance of the spiritus vitae within the body, leading to an over-heating and inflammation of the laughing veins. The other cause of the condition is through an overactive imagination and lack of will and reason, resulting in an unhealthy indulgence in joy and worldly pleasure: 'This obviously is one of the reasons why whores and scoundrels who take pleasure in guitar and lute playing, who satisfy all voluptuousness, bodily pleasure, imagination and fancy, never escape but become ill in such a way that they jump and dance, thus applying what has been their occupation.' This dance which we find in whores does not come from nature nor have a natural cause, but it comes from recklessness and disgraceful living in which there is neither reason nor sense. (ibid.: 160) He suggests that the ‘voluptuous urge to dance’ (ibid.: 181) occurs more often in women than men, because of their tendency to relate to the imagination, and their lack of will and reason. He states that the cure for such an urge is abstinence which induces sadness, thus subsuming the state of excessive joy. If locking the patient in a dark room and depriving them of food and comforts does not work, then it ‘is better to take a good stick and give the patients a good beating and lock them in as described above’ (ibid.: 182).

If Paracelsus’ views on St Vitus’ dance appear idiosyncratic, they also demonstrate the potential essentialising of the culture-specific nature of conditions such as tarantism. The physician Hermann Griiber, writing in 1679, acknowledges some similarities between tarantism and St Vitus’ dance: ‘The kind of madness, or as it is called the St Vitus’ Dance [...] seems to have some affinity with the sting of the tarantula. Those affected with this malady are as delirious and restless as those bitten by the tarantula, and become so engrossed in dancing and running about that they ultimately become quite exhausted and fall to the ground’ (Griiber, 1886: 68). However, he also makes clear some of the distinctions between the two phenomena, stating that in St Vitus’ dance, there is no connection with the bite of an animal, and the sufferers are ‘seized with that peculiar madness, and, without any sounds of music, do tire themselves out by their movements’ (ibid.: 69).

De Martino also points to the differences in manifestation of the forms:

[T]he choreutic forms of Northern Europe are completely lacking in the musical symbolism of the ¢aranta that bites and poisons, inducing corresponding melodic aversions or inclinations in the poisoned victim. As we read here and there in the chronicles, even when the chromatic repulsions appeared in the crisis, especially to red, they remained mere impulses and did not have anything to do with the chro- matic symbolism of the taranta. (De Martino, 2005: 221)

The other significant difference is that in tarantism, the movements used are that of a specific form of dance in response to the particular music being played, whereas in St Vitus’ dance, the movements are usually described as paroxysms, without a direct response to the rhythm or melody of music, if there is some, or any organised form of dance. Even Backman, who includes a brief mention of tarantism, describes the movements of dance manias as being twitches, spasms and leaps which could be labelled as ‘dance’, as ‘people of those times did not mean by dancing what we mean today. For them any twitching of the muscles or the bending of the limbs was a dance’ (Backman, 1952: 327). Whether Backman is accurate in this assumption, it is clear that there is a distinction between this type of condition causing spasmodic muscular movements, and the use of the organised movements of pizzica dance in response to the appropriate music in tarantism. As well as the types of movements, there is the fact that tarantism was not always a mass public event, but rather was often performed in a private space, in a house or in the fields, with just the musicians and perhaps a few other people present. It was not necessarily a public or shared expression, but rather a personal experience of efficacy through the embodiment of the dance in response to the music in a particular time and space. Although the reoccurrence of the symptoms every year and the pilgrimage to the chapel of St Paul in Galatina became a public event in subsequent centuries, the tarantati did not necessarily perform the dance together, and the experience was still a personal one, even within a shared space. The tension between public and private was indicated in Chapter One, and this aspect of the individual experience of healing is often overlooked in writers who define tarantism as being analogous with St Vitus' dance.

Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 113, Backman concludes that in his opinion all forms of dance mania are caused by ergot poisoning," thus reducing the individual cultural contexts and forms of embodiment and experience of the particular place and time of each individual and event into one taxonomical category. Although perhaps a convenient means to diagnose tarantism as a medical condition, the categorisation and association with it as a form of St Vitus' dance, which continued in medical writings through to the twentieth century, often results in a distorted view of the particular magico-religious and performative characteristics of the ritual that are essential in understanding the nature of its efficacious potential.

The medicalisation of tarantism that is apparent from these earliest writings, dictates the way in which it continued to be written about and perceived, as will be demonstrated in this chapter. However, to add to the developing picture, Gentilcore cites a non-medical example of a pre-seventeenth-century writing on tarantism which offers another dimension. Giovanni Pontano (1426-1503) was a Neapolitan humanist and writer, working during the time of Aragonese court in Naples, eventually becoming leader of the famous academy there. In his satirical dialogue Antonius (1491), one of his characters explains why Apulians are considered to be exceedingly happy:

"Whereas only the Apulians have a good and ready excuse to justify their insanity, attributing its cause to the spider they call the tarantula, the bite of which causes men to go mad. And this constitutes their greatest happiness, since, if someone wanted to, he could obtain — quite licitly — the desired fruit of his madness. [...] Women are wont very often to be bitten by this spider; and then, since the poison cannot be extinguished in any other way, it is licit for them to unite with men, freely and with impunity. In this way what for others would be a shameful act [flagitium), for Apulian women is a remedy." (Pontano, Antonius, in I Dialoghi, ed. C. Previtera (Florence, 1943), p. 51, in Gentilcore, 2000: 260)

This extract demonstrates the beginnings of the feminisation of the ritual, in other words, the emphasis on women being bitten by the tarantula and needing the cure which Pontano states is through sexual liaison, becoming the defining feature of the phenomenon. ‘This satirical interpretation anticipates later views on tarantism as being a state of folly, and an excuse for immoral behaviour, most particularly by women. In fact, the earliest medical examples as shown do not suggest that women suffered from tarantism more than men, and certainly Alessandro's case study was of a young man. However, Paracelsus was not alone in suggesting a connection between a weakness in the rational mind, and women's fragility in this respect, with their tendency towards the imagination and fancy. The notion of lust and excessive joy in relation to dance has already been discussed, so a narrative began to develop, associating tarantism with sexual licence and women, particularly those from the lower class. This narrative was expanded during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, especially with the debate over whether the condition was caused by an actual spider bite or by hysterical fancy, or the desire to dance freely and behave in the manner of a tarantata, whilst not in fact being in a state of illness from poison.

The 'feminisation' of forms of cultural practices has been observed in many traditions. Christine Worobec describes such a process in her fascinating study of the k/ikushi in Russia, who were female 'shriekers, peasant women who were believed to be possessed by the devil. There are chronicled incidents of klikushi from the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries, with extensive study of the phenomenon by Russian medical and psychiatric practitioners at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth centuries. Worobec notes that the feminisation of the possession ritual led to the majority of sufferers being women by the mid-eighteenth century, and by the mid-nineteenth century, all of them were women. This was accompanied by a shift in the perception of the ritual as being an acceptable cultural expression, to instead seen as fraudulent, and the definition of the women as suffering from hysteria emphasised the 'feminine' nature of the condition.

The 'notion that the loss of control over the body constituted a feminine rather than a masculine trait' (Worobec, 2001: 52) reinforces the view of a lack of rational will in women and, as in tarantism several centuries earlier, the 'medicalization of possession and the hystericization of women's bodies by medical professionals was beginning to take effect' (ibid.: 53). Certainly by the end of the seventeenth century, doctors such as Baglivi were emphasising the role of women in tarantism, as will be seen later in this chapter, with his labelling the condition as being 'I' Carnevaletto delle Donne' (Baglivi, 1704: 368) ('the little carnival of women'), and stating that some women pretend to be bitten in order to enjoy dancing.

This can also be seen as being in part due to the medicalisation of tarantism, and Baglivi's need to justify the causes within a biomedical framework. If no 'real' biological foundation could be established by not finding evidence of an actual spider bite, then the only medical explanation could be that the ¢arantata was 'faking'. This creates an hegemony of medical taxonomy over culturally determined practices which may be acceptable within their specific context, yet not definable within certain biomedical explanations which attempted to harness such phenomena within their own rational, scientific world. The body becomes an object of medical definition, rather than a cultural expression of the experience of embodiment as a process during a ritualised dance response to a specific music, which is a psycho-physical means of alleviating symptoms resulting from a particular set of socio-cultural conditions.

Latromusical interpretations: De Ficino and Kircher

Despite the biomedical bias of writings on tarantism, there are also examples from the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries that offer a different understanding of the nature of the ritual, which are those based in an iatromusi-cal approach, or the innate healing power of music, within the framework of natural magic and philosophy. Two examples of this are discussed in this section: the brief mention of tarantism by the Neoplatonist Marsilio Ficino, and the extensive writings by the Jesuit priest and Renaissance polymath Athanasius Kircher, whose treatise Magnes, sive de arte magnetica was much quoted and often derided by the medical practitioners who followed him. As Gentilcore states in relation to the understanding in the early writings that the condition of tarantism was caused by the bite of an actual spider:

116

CHAPTER TWO

It was this symbiotic relationship between tarantism and the actual spider bites that formed the focus of debate, in the context of de venenis literature: writing on poisons, including the bites of venomous animals, and their antidotes. From this point on, cultural interest in tarantism moves in two essentially different directions, one after the other: musicological and medical. (Gentilcore, 2000: 260)

This section focuses on the first of these, the musicological, and the ability of music to effect a process of healing in the body through notions of sympathy and correspondence which hark back to those from ancient Greece previously discussed. Ficino and Kircher, both humanists, offer a different paradigm of interpretation of the body and embodiment within tarantism which is related to the natural world and natural magic, with an understanding of the efficacy of the ritual through the healing power of music and the relationship of the body to the cosmos, rather than a biomedical view offered by the subsequent medical practitioners. Though writing 150 years apart, and within different philosophical and cultural frameworks, it is their aligning of music and medicine within notions of natural magic, as well as the use of some of the same source material from antiquity, which places them together in this context.

Marsilio Ficino

Marsilio Ficino (1433-99) was one of the most significant figures in the development of Neoplatonism during the Renaissance, and responsible for the translation of Plato's work into Latin, as well as reviving interest in the importance of Plato, as opposed to Aristotle, whose writings and philosophy were more in favor at the time. Cosimo de Medici, powerful, rich and influential as well as greatly devoted to the furthering of learning and philosophy, invited Ficino to become the head of the Platonic Academy in Florence, later patronized by Cosimo’s son Piero and his grandson Lorenzo. The meetings of the Academy were attended by not only the Medici and invited philosophers, but also by some of the artists who were supported by the court, which included Michelangelo Buonarroti, Leonardo da Vinci, and Sandro Botticelli. Ficino, in the merging of past and present, drew on ideas from antiquity of not just Plato, but also the Neoplatonists from the third and fourth centuries CE, such as Iamblichus and Plotinus, as well as the ancient Egyptian Hermes Trismegistus, reinterpreting and developing these earlier ideas with his own interest in astrology and natural magic. In particular, he discussed the ability of music to create a psychophysical transformation through establishing a harmony in body and soul by means of correspondence and sympathy. Astrological influences, as they had developed by Ficino’s time, were also incorporated into the correspondences in relation to the musical modes, thus connecting ‘music theory and practical magic’ (Tomlinson, 1993: 97). Ficino created a synthesis of music, medicine, and astrology. He was the first Westerner to establish a therapeutic system based on music. In a letter to Antonio Canigiani, Ficino explained the connection between medicine and music: "You ask, Canigiani, why I so often combine the study of medicine with that of music. What, you say, has the trade of pharmacy to do with the lyre?" (Ficino, 1996: 61). He referred to Plato and Aristotle, who taught that music maintains and restores harmony in the soul, while medicine does the same for the body. Since the body and soul correspond with each other, Ficino argued that it is easy to care for the harmony of both body and soul in the same man. Chiron and the prophet David are mentioned as examples of practicing both arts. Democritus and Theophrastus maintained that this can be done in the case of other diseases, of both the body and the soul. Pythagoras, Empedocles, and the physician Asclepiades proved this in practice. (ibid.: 62)

Da Vinci, possibly influenced by Ficino, mentioned tarantism in one of his manuscripts: "Il morso della taranta mantiene 'uomo nel suo proponimento, cioé quel che pensava quando fu morso" (Cod. H 18 y, in Di Lecce, 1994: 9). Ficino stressed the importance of music because it is based in the medium of air, which has a stronger effect than anything transmitted through the other senses. This sympathetic correspondence allows particular music to gain the influence of a planet, connecting the mundane physical world with the cosmos. Music imitates emotions and moral attitudes, influencing the singer and listener. The planets have the moral character of the gods whose names they bear, which can be imitated in music. Performing such music can make oneself more Jovial, Solarian, Venereal, etc. This mimetic theory of music connects with the world-harmony one, as mimetic music is a living spirit, and the heavens also have musical spirit. (Walker, 1985: 16)

In Chapter 21 of the third book from Ficino's renowned collection De Vita (Book of Life), he explains further the connection between music, words, and the element of air in relation to magic. Some words, pronounced with a somewhat sharp effect, have great power over images, directing them to do their own thing more effectively. Origen asserts that there is a great power in certain words, and Alchindus and Synesius, discussing magic, agree. Zoroaster, who forbids the chanting of strange words, and Iamblichus also agree. The Pythagoreans used to do certain wonderful things in the manner of Phoebus and Orpheus with words, songs, and sounds. The ancient doctors of the Hebrews considered this most important, and all poets sing and make wonderful things with their songs. What is all this about? Well, it is so that you might know that certain things that are made of herbs and vapors are made first through the art of medicine, then through the art of astrology, resulting in a common form, just as a certain harmony is given by the gifts of the stars. Thus, tones are first selected for a kind of norm of the stars, then they are composed among themselves for the same kind of congruity, and become almost a common or shared form, in which a certain heavenly power arises.

Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 119
Now, of course, this material of harmony is purer, and more like heaven itself, than the material of medicine.

Harmony, therefore, is full of spirit and sense when it answers to a star according to its own signification, according to its limbs, and the form resulting from these limbs, and according to the affect of its imagination. It has no less a power than anything else that goes into one who is singing. From him this power goes into the nearest listener.

[M]any Orientals and Southern people, especially from India, people for the most part who use Solar things, are said to have an astonishing power with words.

Their singing is conceived with this power.

It is not, then, altogether amazing that certain diseases of the soul and body can sometimes be carried away by it, or even brought on by it, because this Musical spirit touches and works the spirit as a medium between body and soul, affecting either one with its outpouring of affection. You will agree that this force is marvelous, exciting and spirit-brightening, if you agree with the Pythagoreans and Platonists that this is a heavenly spirit, arranging everything with its movements and tones. (Ficino, 1996a: 158, 159-Go, 161, 162)

Ficino here explicates his connection between music and magic, and the power of words and music to affect the psychophysical state of being through harmonious congruence in relation to particular astrological influences, thus leading to an efficacy through the use of music and words. Music historian Gary Tomlinson notes that the Renaissance had a preoccupation ‘with efficacious utterance, musical miracles, and human manipulation of the world’ (Tomlinson, 1993: 97), and points to some of the linguistic origins which connect music and magic:

The lexicon of magic has loaned one of its specifically musical terms to our vocabulary of emotional delight: from incantare or incantatio, the musical technique taken by my dictionary to be exemplary of all magical operations, we borrow enchanting, enchanted, and related words. And from the most common Latin term for a song or tune, carmen, we derive a ubiquitous English word that still retains magical implications in some of its meanings, charm. (ibid.: 1)

The ability of music to charm or enchant a listener and be used as a form of medicine when understood through the harmonious correspondences which connect the mundane human world to the celestial one, leads to Ficino’s iatromusical framework in his brief mention of tarantism at the end of Chapter 21 of De Vita:

Just as people in Apulia, when they are touched by the poison spider there, become numb and lie down half-dead, that is what happens to people who hear Phoebus’ song. For they dance to its sound, they play, and get well. If, after ten years, they should hear a similar sound, they are suddenly stirred to dance again. (Ficino, 1996a: 164)

The reference to ‘Phoebus’ song’ is explained by Ficino in relation to healing: ‘the power of Phoebus as Lord of Music flourishes in all harmony. 

[...] Again, since your spirit has been affected inside, you will likewise affect the soul and body. [...] There is a Phoebean medicine in song, and a power in it’ (ibid.: 163, 164). The aforementioned use of a specific melody to instigate the cure of the poison in tarantism, certainly indicates why Ficino may have used tarantism as an example of musical and magical healing. The use of specific colours within the ritual, which will be discussed further in this chapter, is also a feature of the correspondences relating to celestial bodies, elements and humours, so the unique features of tarantism were appropriated within this paradigm as a way of explaining why these particular correspondences of melody and colour may be found. Ficino himself was much criticised by the Church, as his ideas were seen as based within pagan beliefs, and also by subsequent philosophers, scientists and doctors from the period of the Age of Enlightenment, for whom natural magic was a false and ignorant understanding of the world.

A similar fate was to await a man of the Jesuit order, Father Athanasius Kircher, as he developed his own iatromusical approach to defining tarantism towards the end of the Renaissance, finding himself at odds with those for whom the study of the rational world had overtaken that of the magical one.

Athanasius Kircher

On reading Kircher’s treatise Magnes, sive de arte magnetica (1641) which contains a chapter on tarantism in Part VIII, ‘De Magnetismo Musicae, René Descartes wrote to his friend Constanin Huygens saying of Kircher: “The Jesuit has a lot of tricks; he is more charlatan than scholar” (Findlen, 2004: 22). Even if, as Findlen suggests, this remark by Descartes may have been prompted by professional jealousy as he was also writing on magnets (ibid.: 22), it highlights the schism between Kircher’s late Renaissance framework of thought with that of the emerging Age of Enlightenment, which viewed Kircher’s branch of natural magic as not in keeping with the new world of science and reason.

Kircher (1602-80) was a German Jesuit, based in the Jesuit College in Rome from 1633, who studied, taught, and wrote on an extraordinary range of subjects, including Egyptology, the Classical world, comparative religion, music, mathematics, geology, and magnetism. The study on magnetism is not about ferro-magnetism, but rather connected to the notion of attraction in a broader sense, including that between people, and thus related back to notions of attraction from classical thought. This was central to his work, in that he ‘regarded magnetic attraction and repulsion as the lingua franca of all creation’ (Mayer-Deutsch, 2004: 111). As an example, in Magnes, sive de arte magnetica, he included illustrations of his invention of a Sunflower Clock, which operated on the principle that the sunflower would turn in response to the movements of the sun due to the attraction of the flower to the sun. It was also in this treatise that he wrote on tarantism within this understanding of the force of magnetism or attraction, and the natural world:

The attraction and repulsion of magnets is only the plainest evidence for the same forces that account for the surprising cures achieved by application of snakestone or the playing of tarantella music; the arrangement of the planets and the sun around the earth; and the lives and loves of plants, animals, and men. [...] The sole key to nature, says Kircher, is the unity among dispersed things, the ‘rerum omnium natu- ralium Magnesticus in hoc Universo nexus’ (the magnetic tie among all the natural things in this universe). (Saussy, 2004: 266) In addition to Magnes, sive, he also wrote on music in the Musurgia universalis (1650) which included diagrams of his inventions of music-making machines, and in the Phonurgia nova (1673). In his synthesis of the many disciplines which he studied, he spoke of the ability of music to affect and heal body and soul, and it is this iatromusical aspect in particular that made his writings on music and tarantism so important for De Martino in La terra del rimorso, attempting to move away from the medically reductionist definitions of tarantism.

Kircher’s interest in Apulian tarantism must be seen in the perspective of this attempt to gather in a single synthesis everything which had to do with universal magic, the occult magnetism of the universe, and in particular the prodigious healing effects of music. [...] Kircher embraced all of the ideological elements of tarantism in Apulian popular tradition [...] For him, these features were part of the same immediate reality as that lived by the Apulians who believed in tarantism, except that he wanted in a certain sense to be the philosopher of such connections, their vindicator in the framework of magnetism, iatromusic and humoral pathology. (De Martino, 2005: 225, 226)

In this way, De Martino felt that Kircher, unlike the later medical practitioners, was maintaining the culture-specific ‘nexus of crisis, cure and recovery — its integrity as a cultural phenomenon (ibid.: 226), rather than reducing it to a disease caused by poison or hysteria. Despite writing so fully on tarantism, Kircher himself did not actually observe any cases personally. Instead, he heard of accounts second-hand from two missionary Jesuits in Apulia, Father Nicolellus and Father Gallibertus, based at the colleges in Taranto and Lecce, who would send him details of cases they encountered. They also provided him with some musical notation and lyrics to a selection of the songs used in the rite, which were published by Kircher in a chapter in Magnes, sive, ‘On Tarantism or the Apulian Spider Tarantula, its magnetism and strange sympathy with Music, thus offering a unique example of actual music from this historical moment.

An example of one of Kircher’s tarantellas can be found in the top part of Illustration 5. What is notable from this example, and others included in Kircher’s collections, is the use of a 4/4 duple metre, as opposed to the 6/8 or 12/8 triple metre more commonly found in tarantella melodies. However, as stated in the Introduction, there is often an ambiguity in Apulian pizzica music between duple and triple time, and ethnomusicologist Diego Carpitella, who was part of De Martino’s research team, notes that some of the examples he collected in 1959 were also in 4/4. The only other example of notation of a therapeutic tarantella from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is in 12/8. It was collected by Stefano Storace in Torre Annunziata, which he discusses in his ‘genuine Letter from an Italian Gentleman’ published in the Gentleman’s Magazine in 1753.

Then, as Storace began to follow the aria that an elderly woman sang, ‘the man began to move to the rhythm of the music, lifting himself to his feet like a thunderbolt, giving the appearance of a man who had awoken from a terrible vision, his gaze fixed and wild, with every joint of his body in motion. When Storace stopped, the man fell to the floor in a convulsive fit; as soon as he resumed, the man was back on his feet and moving with vigour. (Melechi, 2006) This tarantella is also published in De Martino’s La terra del rimorso along with Kircher’s. Carpitella suggests that this shift from 4/4 to 12/8 in notation was ‘due to a process of stylization from folk to high or semi- high culture. [...] In effect, in folk music, rhythms in eighths and quarters are sometimes quite distinct, while in other cases it is difficult to decide if it is a triplet or a dotted note’ (Carpitella, 2005: 299). It is not possible to be completely sure from the notation whether the songs would have been performed in duple or triple time. It may also be that in the case of Storace, as he was attempting to pick up the song by ear from a woman who he felt was not a good singer, he may have interpreted the time as a clear 12/8, whereas in fact there was a greater ambiguity in metre, although as previously stated, the pizzica dances are different from the more familiar Neapolitan or Sicilian tarantellas that tend to be more clearly in triple time. Kircher’s interpretation of the reports of tarantism from the two Fathers in the field demonstrates his emphasis on the condition being caused by the bite of an actual spider, and the iatromusical approach to the healing of the bodymind through the use of a particular type of music relating to the spider instigating the cure of the dance. At the heart of this is a three-way process of ritualistic elements which together form the cure: music, dance and colour. The chromatic aspect is noted in many of the writings on tarantism through the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and for Kircher, this becomes associated with the notion of attraction and correspondence in relation to the humour of the spider which bit the victim, and of the type of music needed to cure them. One particular feature he notes is that the spider itself is of a specific colour, usually red or green, and will respond to one type of music rather than another. The person who was bitten by the taranta likewise assimilates this preference for both colour and music:

What provokes great amazement is the fact that for a certain resemblance of nature, [taranta poison] arouses the same reaction in man and in the ¢aranta ... As the poison stimulated by the music drives the men to dance through the continuous excitation of his muscles, it does likewise the taranta. (Kircher: 770, in De Martino, 2005: 95)

Kircher tells of an experiment which was ordered by the duchess in the palace in Andria, where a spider was placed hanging in a jar of water, and musicians were then instructed to play. According to the report from Father Nicolellus, when the musicians played a particular melody which corresponded to the humour of the spider, it began to move, leap and ‘dance’ in response to the rhythm of the music. When the musicians stopped playing, the spider also ceased to move. This same process was observed in the tarantati, in that they would need to hear a particular melody which corresponded to the spider that bit them, which would incite them to dance in response to the music, and when the musicians stopped playing, they would fall to the ground. This creates a direct correlation and correspondence between the behavior and process of embodiment connecting the taranta and tarantato. Kircher states that musicians would ask the sarantato about the specific color and location of the taranta which had bitten them, and they would then go to the place concerned to try out different songs to see which made the appropriately colored spider dance, and then would know that this was the particular mode, melody, and rhythm to play to the afflicted tarantato. However, De Martino suggests that the musicians traveling to the actual place probably did not occur, but rather, as Baglivi states, the musicians simply asked about the size and color of the taranta, and would then try different songs until the patient responded (De Martino, 2005: 96).

Whether or not this did occur, there is a direct correspondence established between the humor, color, and musical preference of the spider, and the state of being of the tarantato who was bitten, and the musicians have to try several songs to find the one which connects the two through sympathetic correspondence. Along with the colors, there were other ritual objects and events that occurred in the accounts, which became part of the symbolic landscape of tarantism.

Kircher notes that the ritual could be performed either outside or inside, and if outside, the zarantato would sometimes display a desire to be near or in water, and would create a type of swing by hanging from trees by ropes, as if imitating a spider hanging from a thread on its web. If the ritual took place indoors, then a rope could be hung from the ceiling to have the same effect. He also makes mention of the fact that sometimes the ¢arantati would use unsheathed swords or other weapons during the dance, being particularly drawn to the shining of the metal. As they danced, they would move the sword between their hands, throwing and catching it, and imitating being in a fight. Some would lie down on the sword, until inspired to jump up and start fighting and dancing again. The bottom image in Illustration 5 shows an outdoor example of the ritual, where the ¢arantato is dancing with two swords, with a musician playing for him nearby, and a spider dangling from a thread on a tree.

The element of fighting in the ritual represents both fighting the spirit of the spider and the effects of the poison. Within the pizzica pizzica, with its focus on courtship and the erotic, there is also an element of playful and flirtatious encounter between a man and woman, or sometimes a more serious battle between two men over a woman or as a matter of honour. The ritualistic relationship between fighting and healing, and sometimes additionally the erotic, is clearly embodied within the process and presence of the dance in this way. This will be explored further in the discussion of the pizzica scherma in Chapter Four.

The elements of the influence of nature and the swords or fighting aspect, were also reflected in the choice of colours and music. As mentioned, Kircher stated that the colours most often used were red and green, and that these colours needed different types of music to correspond to them. The colour green incited cheerful songs, with themes about nature, i.e. woodland and meadows, while red demanded more martial songs and rhythms (Kircher, 1641: 762). Kircher offers some insights into the types and socio-economic status of the cases of the ¢arantati that were observed. Although he states that “Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism” (127), many were peasants, shepherds, or others who worked on the land and were therefore not wealthy, there were, contrary to later discussions of tarantism, also noblemen and women who became tavantati, and even cases of Capuchin monks. In Taranto, musicians were paid a regular wage by public officials to be available to play for those afflicted, thus making the cure available to the poor who would not otherwise be able to afford the cost of hiring musicians for the time necessary to be healed (ibid.: 770).

In the case of the Capuchin monks, there was a report of one who performed the ritual daily, and when the Archbishop of Taranto went to see this for himself, the monk was irresistibly drawn to the red of the Archbishop's garments. There is also the story of the monk who was forbidden to perform the ritual, and in a frenzy ran out of the monastery and into the sea, drowning himself as a way of escaping the suffering from which he was not allowed the traditional means of cure.

In addition to providing music, Kircher offers some of the only examples at this time of lyrics for the songs used within the ritual. The range of these songs offers an interesting view on the ways in which the condition of tarantism was perceived. Some of the lyrics demonstrate a strong connection with love and the erotic, in some instances, being overtly sexual:

Deu ti mussicau la tarantella? Sotto la pudia della vanella. (ibid.: 871) [‘Where did the tarantula bite you? Under the fringe of my dress.’] (Gentilcore, 2000: 263)

This harks back to the ideas of sexual licence and the behaviour of women within the ritual, noted by Pontano, but also is related to the songs of love and courtship found more generally within the pizzica. The lyrics connect the spider directly with the bite and the condition, and after the enculturation of the figure of St Paul into the ritual, the savanta in the song is later sometimes replaced by St Paul himself biting the girls and boys in the genitals, thus transferring and transforming the metaphor of the bite and possession to that of and by St Paul instead of, or along with, the spider, which will be discussed later in this chapter.

Another lyric that Kircher includes which he says is in the Sicilian rhythm, or the Sicilian Octave, shows the nature of the correspondence with music itself, in this case by making a direct correlation between the body of a musical instrument, and that of a love-sick man in the process of playing and singing his suffering:

Stu pettu é fattu cimbalu d’amuri
Tasti li sensi mobili e accorti
Cordi li chianti, sospiri e duluri
Rosa é lu cori miu feritu
4 morti
Strali é lu ferru, chiai s6 li miei arduri
Marteddu é lu pensieri, ¢ la mia sorti
Mastra é la donna mia, ch’a tutti
Phuri Cantando canta leta la mia morti. (Kircher, 1641: 873)

[‘This breast has become a harpsichord of love
Keys, the senses, feeling and ready
Strings, the tears, sighs and pains
Sound hole is my heart, mortally wounded
Rod is a point, my ardours are wounds
Hammer is my thought and my fate
Conductor is my lady, who, singing without end
Joyfully sings my death.’] (Gentilcore, 2000: 263)

A common theme of pizzica songs is love and death, as this lyric exemplifies, along with the desire for the beloved in a melancholic longing. The song does not mention the figure of the ¢aranta, and in another example, instead of the zaranta being the cause of the condition, it was rather Apulian wine: Non ft taranta, né fu la tarantella
Ma ft lo vino della g______ Dove te mozicé dill'amata dove fu, Ohime si fusse gamma, ohime mamma, ohime. (Kircher, 1641: 758) [It wasn't the tarantula, or the tarantella, but it was wine from the flask. Where did it bite you, tell me my love, where it was? Oh, if it was your leg, oh, mother, oh.]

Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 129

In this way, the spider is metaphorically transformed into the wine, as it was previously into St Paul. A final example is reminiscent of the strong connection with the sea that was discussed in the Introduction, for here, rather than the spider, a musical instrument, or wine being associated with the beloved and the agent of healing, it is instead a love of the sea:

Allu mari mi portati, Se voleti che mi sanati. Allu mari, alla via, Cosi m'ama la donna mia. Allu mari, allu mari; Mentre campo, t'aggio amari. (ibid.: 874) [Take me to the sea If you want me to heal. To the sea, to the road. This is the way my woman loves me. To the sea, to the sea, I have to love you as long as I live.]

Kircher offers a phrase that aptly summarises the state of being found in many of these songs, that of "joyful misery" (Kircher: 768 in De Martino, 2005: 104). The merging of joy and pain is apparent in the lyrics, as it is in the major-minor shifts in the melodies, as well as in the movements and embodiment of the dance, alternating between immobility, deep sighing, and agitation, to release through the leaps, turns, and skipping, relieving the suffering of the condition through the culturally conditioned processes of embodiment within the ritual.

Even though the iatromusical framing of tarantism was soon subsumed beneath the weight of the medical debate and the age of rationality and science, De Martino reclaimed Kircher's writings in the middle of the twentieth century as he felt that they are far more culturally sensitive to the embodied processes within the ritual than those who followed him, and that Kircher 'ended up preserving for us much more on the cultural phenomenon of tarantism than doctors and naturalists have' (De Martino, 2005: 95).

The approach by Ficino and Kircher may be seen as having more affinity to contemporary attempts in Salento to understand the use of music and dance within their cultural context as a means of healing, and it is perhaps no surprise that some of the present-day practitioners refer to this type of understanding rather than a biomedical one which reduces tarantism to being a disease, or even a fabrication.

Pierpaolo De Giorgi, in his book on tarantism and healing (1999), describes the famous Salentine violinist Luigi Stifani who was born in Nard in 1914 and played for the tarantati, as being an 'iatromusico' (De Giorgi, 1999: 95). Through this, he recalls a past into the present, where an understanding of the innate healing power of music was utilised to establish a correspondence with the psychophysical state of being in order to effect a transformation that can lead to the re-establishment of health within the bodymind.

Perhaps this movement from a medical reductionist view to an iatromusical one is also seen in De Giorgi's choice of the word 'rinascita' for 'healing, which actually means 're-birth'. It is thus connected to the word 'i/ Rinascimento, the 'Renaissance', also a 're-birth, when Ficino at its height and Kircher at its end, wrote about a paradigm of the body which circled back to previous ideas, whilst incorporating their present ones, which were then often derided or ignored until the energetic re-birth of interest in tarantism itself in the twentieth century. The medical and scientific debate of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: The ‘moments’ of the history of tarantism reflect shifting views on and definitions of the nature of the bodymind, where the embodied experiences of those taking part in the ritual are appropriated and redefined within the philosophical, intellectual, and socio-cultural frameworks pursued by each writer situated within their spatial-temporal landscape, which often intersected and collided with other views and opinions of the same phenomenon.

What can be seen in the development of the writings on tarantism from the mid-seventeenth century onwards are the ways in which medical and scientific thinkers and practitioners changed how the body, self, and world were conceptualized and understood. Within the Age of Enlightenment, the acts of observation and classification became paramount, which led to the separation of the observer from the observed, thus making those whom they were observing into an object of study rather than a subject that experiences. For Descartes, the ‘sense of science was to be sight’ (Classen et al., 1994: 88), and the rationalizing of what was seen and understood led to its definition and classification, which needed certain forms of language and meaning in order to achieve a sense of legitimacy and authority, particularly during those ‘moments’ of a paradigm shift in ideas and views of the world.

David Harley points out that ‘in the building of Enlightenment natural history, the erection of complex systems of classification was central. Whenever a new style of enquiry is developed, a rhetorical campaign is required to legitimate it and differentiate it from earlier styles’ (Harley, 1999: 411). This could lead to public disputes between advocates of conflicting systems, as was noted by the eighteenth-century Neapolitan physician Francesco Serao, whose writings on tarantism will be discussed in this chapter. Serao describes the period as being one of heated arguments, sometimes very public, between philosophers, scientists, and students of various schools of thought, which led to Naples being seen as ‘the famous theatre for many battles of this sort’ (Serao: 136, in De Martino, 2005: 228).

The new paradigm of the body and world included the movement away from the humoural understanding of the bodymind, to one that is instead informed by dissection, the discovery of the nervous system, and the developing view of the relationship between anatomy and behavior, leading to a shift from a ‘holistic’ or integrated view of the bodymind found in the humoural approach, to an increasing separation of body from mind. This shift in the rhetoric of medicine and science resulted in an altering of the diagnosis and prognosis of tarantism, which moved it away from a culturally acceptable approach to relieving suffering through music and dance, to instead being a specific type of disease usually originating either in toxicology or psychosis. The main figure of the ‘taranta’ within the ritual may have played a large part in this redefinition, as it offered a way for physicians and naturalists to study and either propose or reject a biological cause based in an understanding of the natural world. For this to be the case, the spider had to be ‘real’, otherwise this kind of analysis would not be possible: Medical writers sought to reduce tarantism into some sort of simple ailment in order to fit it into the medical categories of the period. Their discussion of tarantism was based upon a clinical description of cases and a search for the actual taranta - the tarantula spider - which, for the peasant world, seemed to be more mythical than zoological. (Gentilcore, 2000: 264) In making the physical existence and study of the spider a central factor, the understanding of the efficacy of the ritual shifted from the ability of music and dance to effect the cure through the correspondences of natural magic, to instead psychophysiological disturbances caused by the poison from the spider, and the use of dance to 'sweat' the poison from the body. If no evidence of an actual spider bite could be found, then the condition would necessarily either be fabricated, or else caused by hysterical fancy or melancholy, and by the time of the late nineteenth century, a psychiatric disorder.

These views on tarantism will be seen in this discussion of a selection of medical and scientific writings from the seventeenth century onwards, each offering their own views and paradigms of the body and mind of the tarantata. This is made more complex through the additional intervention by the Catholic Church, which both absorbed tarantism, and was absorbed by it, transforming aspects of the ritual into a Christian framework. It is worth considering through the traces of these historical 'moments, that although the appropriations and categorisations by medicine, science, and the Church may have subsumed the voices of the tarantati themselves, it was possibly their enculturation that enabled the ritual to survive, if in changing forms, through times when cultural practices believed to be based in magic, superstition and paganism were being derided and often persecuted into non-existence by the medical and scientific communities, as well as the Church.

*Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 133
The Apulian physicians
The first evidence of this new type of approach came in 1621, with the publication of Centum historiae, seu observationes, et casus medici, omnes fere medicinae partes, cunctosque corporis humani morbos continents; quae non minus ob theoricam, et praxim ... nunc primum in lucem editae, written by the Apulian physician Epifanio Ferdinando. Ferdinando (1568-1638) was born in the town of Mesagne, and describes himself on the front page of the treatise as being a philosopher and doctor 'Messapiense e Salentinis' (Ferdinando, 1621: Front Page), thus stating his own regional and cultural identity, as was the convention at the time.

His discussion of cases of tarantism was based in his observations within Apulia, such as the case recorded under the date August 1612 of Petrus Simeon Maessapiensis, an adolescent of a 'calido' ['hot' or 'fiery'] temperament, who was bitten by a faranta whilst asleep in the fields (Ferdinando, 1621: 248). Ferdinando explains that the victims were mainly bitten in the summer, and that tarantulas were numerous in the region at that time. He states categorically that the condition is caused by the poison from the bite of the zaranta, and dismisses those who believe this to be otherwise. He also discusses the annual reoccurring of the condition, which could take place over a number of years (he mentions the case of a woman who continued to repeat the ritual for thirty years after the first bite), and tended to occur at the same time of year in which they had originally been bitten, usually the summer: 'Repetit quotannis multis tarantatis haec affection fere stato tempore in aestate' (ibid. 

259). 14 The renowned Irish scientist and founding member of the Royal Society, Robert Boyle, cites Ferdinando in his ‘Essay on the Great Effects of even languid and unheeded motion’ (1685), which contains a discussion of tarantism. He acknowledges that there may be some who do not believe the condition was really caused by the bite of a tarantula and cured by music, but points out that Ferdinando’s writings were based in his personal observations, and challenges those who doubt to go to see for themselves. His own belief was instilled by knowing some physicians and an acquaintance in Taranto, who ‘saw many bitten persons in their dances, some in public and some in private places, and amongst the rest a physician, on whom the tune that fitted his distemper had the same operation as on the other patients’ (Boyle, 1685: 75).

134 CHAPTER TWO

Although Ferdinando was working within a biomedical paradigm at odds with the iatromusical one discussed earlier, he nonetheless still emphasised the importance of the use of music and dance within the ritual. However in this case, he stated that the dance is used as a means of raising the temperature and pulse to sweat the poison out of the body, thus instigating the cure.

Dorothy Zinn points out in a footnote to her translation of La terra del rimorso, that in describing the manner of the dancing, the word ‘baccheggiva’ is used. She translates this as ‘exalted’, whilst stating that the original Italian term means ‘literally, to behave frenetically in the manner of the Bacchantes’ (Zinn, 2005: 97, fn. f), thus making the historical and cultural link back to the movements and processes of the Bacchic dancers in their state of ekstasis and enthousiasmos discussed earlier in this chapter. It is therefore not surprising that De Martino selected this passage to cite in his book, bearing in mind his own placing of the origins of tarantism within the Bacchic and Corybantic cults of ancient Greece, but also interesting that Ferdinando chose this particular term to describe the state of being of the dancer within the ritual.

Ferdinando makes some similar observations to Kircher about the elements of the ritual, for example that it could take place outside as well as inside; the use of a constructed swing; and the significance of the colours red and green. He extends this into naming the actual forms of music used, listing different types of the tarantella as being: Panno Verde (Green Cloth) and Panno Rosso (Red Cloth), as well as Cinque tempi, Spallata, and Moresca (a Moorish tune/dance) (Ferdinando, 1621: 259). The Panno Verde and Panno Rosso appear to correspond to Kircher’s description of the use of particular coloured cloths and ribbons relating to certain types of music, so in this case, Panno Verde (green) were gentler songs about the fields and groves of the countryside, whereas Panno Rosso (red) were more lively and excitable (Hecker, 184.4: 91, De Martino, 2005: 98).

Despite Ferdinando making a correlation between colour and music, this is not connected to the humours in the body as it was with Kircher. Although Ferdinando discusses the efficacious potential of the dance within the ritual, this is in order to effect a biomedical cure through sweating, and he proposes that perhaps the same result could be created by the means of other cures, such as theriac (Gentilcore, 2000: 264). The fullness of description of the ritual within Baglivi's 1695 essay, Dissertatio de Anatome, Morsu et Affectibus Tarantulae ('A Dissertation of the Anatomy, Bite and other Effects of the Tarantula'), as well as his own scientific and medical experiments and explanations, have led to Baglivi's work being one of the most often quoted and plagiarised writings on tarantism. Due to its influence and the rich detail of the ritual, this section contains a discussion of the treatise and his approach to tarantism, which led to his declaration of a rift between what he saw as the 'true' tarantism, which consisted of the disease relating to the poison, and if there is no evidence of a poisonous bite, he described this as the 'false' tarantism.

Baglivi was born in Ragusa in the province of Dalmatia (now Dubrovnik in Croatia), and at the age of fifteen was adopted by Petro Angelo, a physician in Lecce. He became a renowned physician himself, particularly in the areas of anatomy and pathology. He begins his treatise on the bite of the tarantula with a lengthy description of the history and landscape of Apulia, and emphasises the tendency of the climate towards excessive heat from the sun and dryness of the soil, so that 'the inhabitants breathe in an air that feels as if it came from a burning oven' (Baglivi, 1704: 350). He then likens the temperament of the climate to that of the people who live within it:

The temperament of the climate, is matched by that of the inhabitants; for, generally speaking, they are of a hot, scorched constitution, with black hair, and a brownish or paleish skin, meagre, impatient, peevish, watchful, very quick in their way of apprehension, nimble in reasoning, and extremely active. They are very subject to ardent fevers, frenzies, pleurisies, madness and other inflammatory diseases. Nay, the heat is so effective in that country, that I have seen several of the inhabitants urged by it to the last degree of impatience and madness. (ibid.: 350)

The point about excessive heat is significant in Baglivi's diagnosis of tarantism, and he suggests this is also connected to the nature and behaviour of the tarantula itself. It is 'a little animal impatient of cold, that keeps under ground in Winter' (ibid.: 351), however 'in Summer they straggle out and haunt the open fields, where they lie in wait for travellers' (ibid.: 352). This is the reason why so many of the attacks of tarantism occur in the summer, as the 'tarantula is not venomous in every country, nor in every season of the year, but only in Apulia, and that in Summer, especially about the Dog-Days. [...] ['T]heir poison is then exalted by the scorching beams of the sun, which makes them so mad and raging that they assault every one that comes near them' (ibid.: 359). He offers a description of the effects of the poison, which causes great unhappiness to the sufferer:

The poison of the tarantula affords us a deplorable influence of this unhappiness; for such is the peculiar and uncommon nature of this venom, that when once it seizes the body, it either kills the patient out of hand, if music and a reasonable use of remedies does not immediately take place; or, when these are employed, makes such a deep impression upon the fluids of the body, that it revives (as it were) every year; and particularly in the three months of the summer; and unless this anniversary return be mitigated for the time with dancing and the other antidotes, it keeps the patient all that year under an innumerable strain of grievous disorders. (ibid.: 362) In this, Baglivi confirms that music is a valid cure for the symptoms of the poison, as well as the reoccurrence of the condition on an annual basis, with the need to repeat the ritual of the cure. During the first stage of the illness, there are various psychophysical manifestations: A few hours after the bite, the patient is seized with a great difficulty of breathing, a heavy anguish of heart, and a prodigious sadness; his voice is sorrowful and querulous, and his eyes disturbed; and when he is asked by the bystanders where his pain lies, he either makes no answer at all, or points with his hand to the region of the heart, as if that were most affected. (ibid.: 363) Other symptoms include an attraction to particular colours, such as red, green or blue. Whilst stating that different tarantulas cause different types of symptoms, these are not related just to their colours, but rather to their biological categorisation, in that if they are spotted, they will cause pain, itching and headaches, whereas a bite from a black tarantula results in swelling, cramps, and vomiting. However, Baglivi does acknowledge that different types of tarantulas will correspond with particular types of music and instruments, and that these need to be found in order to instigate the cure: As the tarantulas are of different sizes, colours and virulency, so the persons stung by them are delighted and moved to dance by different kinds of sounds, according to the difference of the tarantula that infected them. Nay, every patient has not only his particular tune, but also his particular instrument: some a pastoral pipe, others a little drum, cittern, harp, timbrels, violins, and pipes of several sorts. Here it is remarkable that sometimes the musicians will tune three or four different sorts of sounds without having the least effect upon the patient. But when they fall into a tune that's accommodated to the poison they presently receive the benefit of it. However this must be taken for a truth, that how much so ever they vary in their particular tunes, yet they all agree in this. To have the notes run over the greatest quickness imaginable (which quickness of sound is commonly called Tarantella). (ibid.: 382) Baglivi also provides extensive description of the music and dance cure itself, which offers some interesting data concerning the processes of embodiment within the ritual. After the bite, the tarantato falls down, and is unable to move, and it is then that the musicians are called to play for him: Upon the first sounding of the music the fore-mentioned symptoms begin slowly to abate, the patient begins to move his fingers, hands, feet, and successively all the parts of the body; and as the music increases, their motion is accelerated, and if he was lying upon the ground, up he gets (as in a Fury) falls a dancing, sighing, and into a thousand mimick gestures. These first and violent motions continue for several hours, commonly for two or three; after a little breathing in a bed, where he is laid to carry off the sweat, and that he may pick up a little strength to work he goes again, with as much eagerness as he did before, and every day spends almost 12 hours by the clock in repeated dancing; and which, is truly wonderful, so far is he from being wearied or spent by this vehement exercise, that (as they say) it makes him more sprightly and strong, (ibid.: 378) This describes the process whereby the initial response to the music occurs in the extremities of the body, particularly the hands and feet, the impulse from which then spreads throughout the whole body. This was noted by other writers observing the ritual, in that it was often the hands and feet which began to move first by beating in time to the music, which was also a means whereby it was possible to diagnose someone as being a tarantata (as in the case observed by Cirillo, which will be discussed shortly). The increase in tempo and rhythm of the music was matched by their movements, which resulted in them rising up and dancing energetically, until falling down and resting for a period. The whole process was repeated as many times as necessary in order to complete the cure. This process of embodiment in the ritual continued to feature in the practice of tarantism, and was observed very much in this same form by De Martino in 1<!-- 1959, as is seen in his book and in the documentation within the related film, Terapia Coreutico-Musicale del Tarantismo (1959), discussed in Chapter Three. -->Baglivi notes that there are other ritualistic elements that can be introduced into the dance, some of which have been mentioned previously, including green vines; water; red, green or yellow cloths; swords and mirrors. The fact of someone asking for these things while dancing was sometimes used as a means for diagnosing the condition. Although Baglivi suggests that other treatments for poisons can be tried, such as Alexipharmacs, Bezoardics, or searing the area of the bite with a red-hot iron, he feels ultimately these remedies are not going to work unless music is also employed 'as is well known by the constant and infallible experience of those parts of the country' (ibid.: 376). During the annual reoccurrence of the condition, the musicians must also be called in again to play, otherwise the «tarantato» will not be cured.

Since Baglivi focuses his diagnosis of tarantism so firmly on the effects of the poison in the body, he encounters a problem when dealing with cases where there is no clear evidence of a bite occurring, thus removing the ritual from the realms of medical positivism and natural science. In order to accommodate this, Baglivi developed the notion of two types of tarantism, one real and one fake, with the fake form most often being attributed to women:

Here it must not be concealed, that though in our country there is really such a thing as the poison of the tarantula, and persons infected with it, yet women, that make up a great part of that number, very frequently counterfeit it under the masque of its usual symptoms; for, whether they be under the power of love, or have lost their fortunes, or meet with any of those evils that are peculiar to women, they never leave poring upon the mournful object, till they run into despair, or down-right melancholy, or at least are upon the borders of it; and they are also under a disadvantage or living a solitary sort of life, like that of nuns, denied the benefit of free converse with men, though never so fair and honest. Besides all this, the climate is sultry, their constitution is of the same nature, their food hot and very nourishing, and their life easy. Partly from the former, and partly from the latter of these causes, it is no rare thing with them to turn mopish and melancholy. No wonder then if they be mightily delighted with variety of music and dancing, whence they feign themselves to be stung by the tarantula, on purpose to enjoy the agreeable diversion of music, which is only allowed to such persons; and then the sham passes the better, for that the pretext is accompanied with a real paleness of face, sadness, difficulty of breathing, sorrow of heart, a depraved imagination, and the other symptoms of the pretended, rather than true poison of the tarantula. In fine, the musical entertainment of this country is so very agreeable to women that it is a proverb with us, ‘Il Carnevale delle Donne’ (‘the little carnival of women’). But though women counterfeit this distemper sometimes, we must not therefore imagine that all others do the same, for there are some persons otherwise both learned and religious, who, not being satisfied of this upon the credit of persons that were stung, have made the experiment upon themselves, that they have confessed, unless the music had been ready at hand, their lives would have gone for it. (ibid.: 368-9)

In this way, Baglivi establishes the discourse of some women who are suffering from melancholy, the effects of the heat, or a ‘depraved imagination’; faking the symptoms in order to be able to dance publicly in a context which is deemed acceptable due to being seen as an illness. He suggests that the experience of embodiment within the dance will be different depending on whether it is ‘real’ or not, and it is the musicians who can tell if the women are faking, ‘for if they find that they presently take any motions, and jog on indifferently, without any regard to the swiftness, slowness, or other difference of sounds, they give to understand the honest women is but in jest, and afterwards experience puts the matter out of doubt’ (ibid.: 382-3).

In other words, if the woman does not respond to the music through her movements, then she is considered to be not genuinely ill, as otherwise she would be moved by the music to dance in the recognised manner of the cure. This raises some interesting related questions that have been asked by anthropologists during their studies of ritual performances during the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, concerning how it may be possible to tell if a participant is ‘genuinely’ in a state of trance or possession, or whether they are ‘faking’ it. Not only is this dependent on the individual and cultural positioning of the person making the assessment, but it can also make essentialist assumptions about a state of being as deliberately or consciously experienced as ‘real’ or ‘fake’.

John Emigh suggests that ‘[ritual performers familiar with the process know whether or not they have been acting or in trance, just as accomplished actors have a clear sense as to whether or not they are pretending” (Emigh, 1996: 30). However, this establishes a dualistic approach to understanding a process of transformation and embodied experience which may not be possible to define within clear boundaries of being ‘genuine’ or otherwise. This question in relation to tarantism has been examined in the past few decades, when it has been re-established as a cultural phenomenon that can embrace notions such as trance, possession, or altered states, whereas clearly for Baglivi, this did not fit within his medical positivist framework, thus leading to his creation of such a gendered dichotomy in his diagnosis, and furthering the feminisation of the ritual.

By stating that ‘true’ tarantism is only what can be seen as being a disease, then the ‘false’ tarantism becomes all the other cultural manifestations. This also determines the embodied act of the women dancing. If they do not exhibit the particular medical features he describes, then they are perceived as not being genuinely ill or suffering from any type of condition which may be relieved through the presence of their action in the dance. In this way, their dancing is considered an act of immorality or weakness in temperament, as it does not conform to the medical paradigm of being caused by a disease, and therefore acceptable. The Neapolitan physicians Baglivi's work, as stated, was hugely influential in the dissemination of tarantism beyond Apulia through translations and citation. His views on the medicalization of the ritual still acknowledged the existence of the condition resulting from the bite of a spider, and the potential for music and dance to act as a cure within the particular site of Apulia. It was this view, as well as that of Kircher's iatromusical ideas, that was challenged by physicians from the Neapolitan medical school, who had a very different perspective on the cause and symptoms of the ritual.

One day in August 1693, two men entered the bookshop of the renowned printer Antoine Bulifon in Naples. What happened next was related by Bulifon in a letter that was cited by the Neapolitan physician Francesco Serao (1702-85), in one of his lectures (Lezioni) given at the Academy of Sciences and Letters. The two men in the bookshop were both doctors, and held conflicting views on the nature of tarantism. One was Don Domenico Sangenito, who had written an article claiming the existence of tarantism as being a genuine phenomenon resulting from the bite of a spider. The other was Bernardino Clarizio, a student of Cirillo at the school of medicine in the University of Naples, where the teachings of Hobbes, Bacon, Descartes, and Gassendi were prevalent. These views, along with those of the Counter-Reformation, had led to prominent medical figures such as Tommaso Cornelio ridiculing the work of Kircher and his writings on natural magic and philosophy.

A heated argument on the real nature of tarantism ensued between Clarizio and Sangenito, leading to a public challenge. Clarizio stated that he would allow himself to be bitten by a tarantula, to see if he would suffer from any of the symptoms of tarantism as a result. If he did so, then it would prove Sangenito correct in his views on the condition, and Clarizio would have to live with the consequences. However, if he had no ill effects, then Sangenito would have to buy a number of books for Clarizio to enjoy "in spite of all the tarantulas of Apulia and all the fanatics of the universe" (Serao, 1.c., in De Martino, 2005: 229). The outcome of the experiment was that Clarizio got his books.

Serao recounted this story as part of his own redefining of tarantism within the ideas of the Neapolitan medical school, which created an opposition to the views of the doctors in Apulia such as Ferdinando, Baglivi, and Nicola Caputo. At the beginning of the eighteenth century, Naples was a city renowned for its learning and culture, and particularly as a place of medical and scientific discovery and debate. The great natural feature that dominates Naples, the volcano of Vesuvius, drew scientists to its surroundings to investigate the particular features of nature in the area. Both Serao and Bulifon wrote about the eruptions of Vesuvius that they witnessed, and Serao in particular became renowned for his description of the eruption in 1737. The volcano additionally attracted naturalists and scientists from around Europe, and particularly after the excavation of Herculaneum in 1738 and Pompeii ten years later, also drew those on the Grand Tour or otherwise interested in viewing the remains of the classical past, including poets, writers, and painters, to Naples and the surrounding areas. When Serao published his Della Tarantola, 0 sia Falangio di Puglia in 1742, based on his Lezioni, he was writing within the framework of thought prevalent in the medical school which, as already mentioned, supported the philosophical and scientific views of those such as Descartes and Hobbes, and particularly opposed those held by Kircher. As such, it is perhaps not surprising that tarantism became a site of debate by those within the school attempting to place the ritual within a paradigm which was in direct contradiction to one based in natural magic. However, Serao goes further than this to suggest that the condition, which he describes as ‘bizarre’ and ‘surprising’ (‘un bizzarro e sorprendente fenomeno’ (Serao, 1742: 105)) has nothing to do with a spider at all, but is instead a means of dealing with a psychic disorder caused by melancholy which is particular to the people from Apulia. In addition to citing the story of Clarizio and Sangenito, he also quoted his teacher Niccolò Cirillo’s account of his witnessing a woman he saw in a hospital in 1721. She would not eat or speak, and appeared to be unable to move, until he noted that ‘her hands and head were shaking in a certain rhythm so that the agitation appeared to correspond to a musical tempo’ (Serao: 194 in De Martino, 2005: 94). On asking where she came from, and discovering that she was a native of Apulia, he decided this must be a case of tarantism. He called in musicians to play for her, and when the music started, she began to move her hands and head. With some assistance, she got up and, holding a red ribbon, began moving on her own to the rhythms of the music. Cirillo notes his astonishment that she could have so much strength to be able to dance in this way, considering she had not eaten for several days and had appeared so incapacitated before the music started. After dancing, she went back to bed to rest before the music restarted, but she was too weak to get up again, and died three days later. In this case, there is no mention of evidence of an actual spider’s bite, but instead it is stated that Cirillo suspected the woman was a farantata because she originated in Apulia. This feature in particular became part of Serao's assessment of the condition in Della Tarantola. He does not dispute that such a thing can happen, but questions the reality of whether its cause is actually the poison resulting from the bite of a tarantula. He goes into great detail about the biology of the different spiders and scorpions in Apulia, where they are found, and their particular characteristics. In analyzing this, alongside information provided to him by his correspondents in the region, he concludes that it is not possible to reduce the illness to being caused by the poison from a tarantula, but instead that it was due to the inherent state of melancholy found in the nature of people from Apulia, and their desire to play music and dance as a means of coping with what he states is a psychic disorder of melancholy, or ‘delirio malinconico’ (Serao, 174.2: 217). In this way, he places the condition as being a cultural phenomenon, even though still an illness, and labels it as ‘un istituto’ (an ‘institution’), a term of which De Martino approves, as it suggests a more rounded research approach to the condition than a purely medical one. However, De Martino also acknowledges that Serao is not clear about the distinction or relationship between an ‘institution’ and a ‘disease’ and it is ultimately his views on the condition as being a psychic disorder rather than anything to do with spiders which became the established view on the ritual (De Martino, 2005: 239). Perhaps De Martino’s approval of the term ‘istituto’ has more to do with his own reading of tarantism as a cultural phenomenon, than Serao’s original intention. The medical debate during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries demonstrates a continual appropriation of the ¢arantati and manifestations of the ritual into the discourse and rhetoric of each particular physician in 144 CHAPTER TWO the battle ensuing over the paradigm shift into the Age of Enlightenment. This debate was not only about the derision of natural magic and the pro- motion of science, but also concerned the means and practices of medical hypothesis. The division was between the physicians from Apulia, observ- ing cases of tarantism, and writing about their views on the validity of the condition as caused by the bite of a spider and the cure through music and dance, and those physicians in Naples, offering their opinions based on second-hand reports.

Thus, as Gentilcore suggests in his review of Di Mitri’s contemporary re-appraisal of the historical records, the ‘real debate was within medicine itself: cosmopolitan center versus empirical practice’ (Gentilcore, 2008: 450). As Apulian physician Baglivi points out at the start of his treatise on tarantism:

All the Authors that writ of the Tarantula have either gone upon Hearsay, or coined several Things at pleasure. None of them ever was in Apulia where the creature chiefly displays its venom, abating for Epiphanius Ferdinando an Apulian, that added to his practical observations from histories of persons bit with the tarantula. This province [is] therefore untouched, or only made known by some general and confused hints. (Baglivi, 1704: 345-6)

This establishes tarantism as a contested space between two sites: the local, at the periphery, which encompasses direct observation in its methods; and the centre, which is perceived as the cosmopolitan height of learning, but whose methods are based in analysis of second-hand accounts, rather than through observation in the field.

Throughout this debate, what remains unheard is the voices of the tarantati themselves, or their own understanding of the meaning of the ritual from their embodied experience. Although many of the physicians offer a brief contextualisation of the social status of some of the ¢arantati, there is nothing about how they themselves feel about undertaking the ritual. The many writings are always about the ¢arantati, interpreting their actions within a particular medical or philosophical theory, rather than from the perspective of their own belief and experience, which defines how the ritual has been seen and understood in relation to its efficacious potential.

As Csordas discusses in relation to early accounts of healing rituals: ‘there is attention to what is done to participants without much attention to what it means for them. Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 145 Their lack of experiential specificity has had important consequences for our understanding of therapeutic efficacy’ (Csordas, 1996: 94). The historical records speak more of the views and beliefs of the physicians, rather than those undergoing the ritual. However, it was these medical views which defined the way in which tarantism was discussed and disseminated, which in turn affected the future practice of the ritual. Serao’s views, as reductionist as they were, had a strong influence on how tarantism was seen by physicians and scientists in his time and afterwards, and was possibly one of the factors which led to the decline in the practice of the ritual through the late eighteenth and into the nineteenth centuries. Dominico Cirillo, a Professor of Natural History at the University of Naples, noted Serao's contribution to the process in a letter to the English doctor William Watson in 1770: "Every year this surprising disorder loses ground, and I am persuaded, that in a very little while it will entirely lose its credit. The Neapolitan physicians all look upon the tarantula in the same light, particularly after the ingenious book published on this subject, by the learned Dr. Serao, who, by various experiments, has proved, that the bite of the tarantula never produced any bad effects, and that music never had any thing to do with it." (Cirillo, 1770: 237-8)

Thus, the center of learning in the school in Naples had a voice that was ultimately stronger than that of the periphery of those working with empirical practice in the region of Apulia. Tarantism, with its complex encompassing of nature and efficacy, offered fertile ground for attempts at legitimising ideas and practices by a range of writers whose legacy has been both a blessing and a curse for the development and study of the ritual.

146 CHAPTER TWO

The influence of the Church, and the enculturation of St Paul

There was another significant influence on the history of tarantism which was in part responsible for its decline, and also had a connection to the medical debates: the Catholic Church. Clearly, the Church has been an influence throughout the historical times which have been discussed, but it was during the eighteenth century that tarantism was explicitly drawn into the Church's domain through the figure of St Paul and the chapel of Galatina, which was first discussed in the work of Apulian physician Nicola Caputo, whose views on tarantism were also in disagreement with those from the medical school in Naples as part of the medical debate in the eighteenth century.

During the period after the Counter-Reformation, the Church waged a war on what were seen as practices of magic and pagan rites, partly as a means of establishing a firmer control over the lives and beliefs of the people. In particular, this led to a close relationship between the Church and systems of healing practices, as the ecclesiastical hegemony sought to eradicate the belief in the efficacious power of magical practices and rituals by labelling them as demonic, and needing instead the divine intervention and intercession of the one Christian God in order to be healed successfully.

The Episcopal court was opened as part of an ongoing campaign against 'magic and superstition': a category of rituals believed to gain their efficacy — and their very efficacy was rarely questioned — through the intervention of the devil. If a spell caused illness, it was the devil which gave it its power and God who allowed it to happen as a way of testing the sinner. And only the Church's remedies, the ecclesiastical authorities argued, could safely combat it. (Gentilcore, 1998: 14)

Gentilcore proposes a model for what he defines as the 'medical pluralism' present in the Kingdom of Naples during the early modern period, which consists of 'three concentric and permeable rings, labelled "medical", "ecclesiastical", and "popular" (ibid.: 3). The choice of which form of treatment would be undertaken is based in factors such as availability, cost and suitability, but could well consist of a combination of the three. 

Disease was equated with sin, and thus the body that was ill was also a body that was possessed by some form of evil which needed to be purged in order to be cured. This understanding of illness as a form of possession which is healed by exorcism was a common perception of the process of disease within the body: The popular healing rituals of the period made use of exorcising formulas to conjure disease out of the body. But the possession-illness link is clearly evident in the miracle narratives, too. Disease is represented as an active force, which enters and advances through the body. It ‘assails, ‘oppresses, ‘comes upon, ‘strikes, ‘crushes, ‘burdens’ the body. A war between sickness and health ensues, the body becoming the field of battle. [...] During this corporeal encounter the sick person is dispossessed. [...] The disease ‘withdraws, the body is ‘liberated’, ‘cleansed’. The sick person has been singled out, the body reunited with the self and its functionality restored. (ibid.: 182)

This description makes it clear why tarantism was classed as an illness of possession, which needed some form of exorcism as a means of cure. The previous discussion concerning poisons also made reference to this as being seen as a form of possession, which needs the purging cure of exorcism, sometimes in the form of a miraculous and divine intervention.

One of the means of performing the miracle of the cure was through the intercession of the healing power of saints, by praying to them, going on pilgrimages, and making offerings. Different saints became associated with different conditions, and it was St Paul who became the patron saint of the ¢arantati. Although this process of the christianisation of tarantism is often seen as an enculturation by the Church or, because of the subsequent decline in the ritual, the ‘deculturation’ or ‘cultural disintegration’ as Gentilcore suggests (Gentilcore, 1992: 4), it is perhaps also possible to view this as a two-way process. By incorporating elements of Catholicism 16 See Gentilcore, 1992 and 1998, for an in-depth exploration of the notion of ‘medical pluralism’ and the various forms of treatment available. 148 CHAPTER TWO into the practice of tarantism, it was able to survive through a time of the Inquisitions where many so-called ‘folk’ or ‘pagan’ practices were being wiped out as examples of witchcraft and sorcery (see Carlo Ginzburg’s The Night Battles (1992) for his well-known discussion of the persecution of the benandanti during the Inquisitions as an example).

Some of the ways in which St Paul became part of the ritualised landscape of tarantism are perhaps not ones of which the Church might have approved, but with the protection of the saint, and the resultant control the Church had over the tarantati, as well as receiving the monetary offerings made to St Paul in thanks for the cure, the transformation of St Paul into an erotic symbol became an established part of the ritual. The figure of St Paul has already been mentioned in relation to the serpari ox ciaralli, the snake charmers and healers who claimed affiliation with the saint, citing the Biblical reference of his handling venomous snakes in Malta (Acts of the Apostles, Ch. 28, vs. 3-5). It is the physician Nicola Caputo who first mentions the similar enculturation of St Paul into the ritual of tarantism, in his treatise De Tarantulae Anatome et Morsu, pub- lished in Lecce in 1741. Caputo had trained in the medical school in Naples under Cirillo, and thus was familiar with the discourses of medicine and science,______ However, as a doctor of Apulia, his treatise offers a very different conclusion, claiming that the condition is actually caused by the poison from the bite of a taranta, and is cured through music and dance: "We are sure of this: the Apulian tarantula and, with a few exceptions, all the species of spiders cause the illness named tarantism with their bite, for which there is no other more practicable remedy than musical therapy, as experience has shown." (Caputo, 2001: 171)

As well as describing the various spiders and scorpions found in the region, he also writes about twenty-two case studies of tarantism, one of which was that of his own wife, Beatrice Di Cesare (Case Number 19, ibid.: 147-8). In April 1721, she was bitten by a scorpion and began to suffer from the symptoms of tarantism, which went on for many days. Eventually, the musicians were called to play for her, and after finding the correct melody, she danced her cure. This particular case is interesting not just because of Di Cesare being Caputo's wife, but also that this meant she was considered a noblewoman, thus reinforcing that during this period, it was not only the lower-class 'peasants' who became tarantate, as was the perception that was reinforced particularly during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

As part of his extensive analysis and hypotheses of the case studies, Caputo discusses the affiliation of St Paul with the ritual in one section of De Tarantulae, which examines notions of miracles within an ecclesiastical framework, with the idea of the 'morbo sacro' (ibid.: 214) [sacred disease]. He tells of the local legend in Galatina that St Paul came to the town in disguise and stayed at the home of a supporter of his in a house that came to be known as the 'casa di S. Paolo' (ibid.: 219) [ 'the house of St Paul' ]. As a reward, St Paul granted his supporter and his descendants the power to heal the bite of venomous snakes, spiders, and scorpions, and additionally that the water from their well would assist in the cure, if the afflicted person drank it and prayed for protection to St Paul (ibid.: 210). This establishes that during the first half of the eighteenth century, tarantati were seeing Galatina as a place of pilgrimage particularly associated with St Paul, and the curing of their condition.

There was a subsequent dispute over the building of the chapel to St Paul at the house between the Vignola family who owned the casa, and the Church, particularly over which of them would collect the offerings that were made at the well by the avantati, but eventually the chapel was built and consecrated in 1793. It has acted as a focus for the practice of tarantism since, and particularly for the pilgrimage of the tarantati on the festival of St Peter and St Paul on 29 June, where they would come from all over Apulia to re-enact the ritual, and give thanks to St Paul. The water from the well was also drunk in order to receive the blessing of the saint, until the local authorities sealed the well in 1959, claiming that the water was polluted. 

150 CHAPTER TWO St Paul became a complex figure within the ritual, with multiple meanings and processes ascribed to him. As mentioned previously, he became transposed with the symbol of the ¢aranta, and was thus seen as both the agent and cure of the condition, in that he could cause the illness as a means of punishment, but also heal the victim in a miraculous act of intercession. In addition, the inherent erotic element already noted also became associated with him, and as with Dionysus in the Greek rituals discussed earlier, the farantata would become ‘engodded or possessed by St Paul himself in a mystical or divine union with him. There was sometimes a strong sexual element within the lyrics of the songs, which has been referred to earlier in relation to the figure of the taranta. 

The women who performed the ritual would dress in white, as if wearing a wedding dress, and called themselves the ‘spose di San Paolo (brides of St Paul)’ (ibid.: 25). Thus the figure of St Paul became entwined with the prior elements of the ritual, in a merging of the religious and the erotic, the Christian and the pagan, as De Giorgio suggests:

‘La commistione di elementi fortemente sacri e di elementi fortemente erotici svela una sor- prendente religiosita pagana e cristiana insieme. Le donne vengono santifi- cate dal morso erotico. Vestono, come gli antichi iniziati, abiti bianchi che evocano mistiche nozze. Sussite persino una identificazione tra San Paolo ela “taranta” (De Giorgi, 1999: 90) [“The mixture of strongly sacred and erotic elements reveals a surprising coming together of pagan and Christian religiosity. The women become sanctified through the erotic bite. They wear white clothes, like those of ancient initiations, which is evocative of the mystical marriage. There exists an identifying of St Paul with the “taranta”]. This explanation of the idea of the mystical marriage (sistiche nozze) and the women being sanctified through the erotic bite (z#orso erotico) certainly instils in tarantism a coming together of a past and present in its manifestation, as well that of the pagan and Christian, and the sacred and the erotic. This is, obviously, too simple an analysis of a complex development of a form of cultural performance over many centuries, yet the point to make is that St Paul, and the Church, became as encultured into the ritual as the other way round. For St Paul to become such an object of sexual desire, and substituted for the bite of the spider, is a subversion of the hegemonic control of Christianity. This led to an altered symbolic embodiment of the image of St Paul, who the ¢arantati fought with, were healed by, and loved. However, the Church also certainly drew the ritual into its own domain through the figure of St Paul, propagating the removal of elements that were considered as ‘pagan’ or non-Christian from what might otherwise be seen as a manifestation of the cult of St Paul. Despite being able to view both these influences on the other simultaneously, the gradual Christianisation of tarantism is also a reason for its decline during the nineteenth century, as the notion of shame (vergogna) which has already been mentioned in relation to music and dance in the early Christian Church, helped to drive its practice underground, in an attempt to relegate it to a form of ‘folk practice’ based in superstition that was of the past. This will be seen in the discussion of the field work conducted by De Martino in the next chapter, however what will also be revealed is that in 1959 and beyond, the figure of St Paul was still maintaining the ambivalent position as agent, healer, and lover for the tarantate. This connection is still manifest in the festival of St Paul at his chapel in Galatina today, as discussed in Chapter One, with all of its complex and multiple forms of performance and embodiment.

In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the volume and range of writings on tarantism during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, with the debates and appropriations of medicine and the Church, offer much in the analysis of historical ‘moments’ of the ritual. This section on the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, up to the work of De Martino in 1959, will summarise some of the key interpretations of the ways in which tarantism was approached in the furthering of these views, as well as the influence of the earlier writings through their dissemination throughout Europe.

One point to mention first is that during the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, views on tarantism were generally a continuation of those that had been debated in the early to mid-eighteenth century, in that it was either caused by a spider bite; a form of psychosis or hysteria; or that the condition was being faked, either for pleasure or financial gain. One feature of these writings is the debate moving from being based in Italy, to having a wider field of dissemination and discussion through translations of texts such as that by Baglivi in particular, as well as visitors to the region from other parts of Europe as part of the Grand Tour or for scientific study, contributing their own writing and opinion on the ritual.

Henry Swinburne has already been mentioned in the Introduction in relation to his description of witnessing a Neapolitan tarantella, however he also went to Apulia, where he wanted to be shown an example of the mysterious ritual relating to the bite of a spider:

As I was now in the country of the tarantula, I was desirous of investigating minutely every particular relative to that insect; but the season was not far enough advanced, and no tarantati had begun to stir. I prevailed upon a woman, who had formerly been bitten, to act the part, and dance the tarantata before me. A great many musicians were summoned, and she performed the dance, as all present assured me, to perfection. (Swinburne, 1790: 304-5)

What is interesting in this extract is that Swinburne had set up a staged performance of the ritual, because no genuine manifestation was available. He did not expect her to actually enter into a state of trance, or to be in any sense healed by the process, but merely wanted to see the external elements of the dance:

At first she lolled stupidly on a chair, while the instruments were playing some dull music. They touched, at length, the chord supposed to vibrate to her heart, and up she sprang with a most hideous yell, staggered about the room like a drunken person, holding a handkerchief in both hands, raising them alternately, and moving in very true time. As the music grew brisker, her motions quickened, and she skipped about with great vigour and variety of steps, every now and then shrieking very loud. The scene was far from pleasant; and, at my desire, an end was put to it before the woman was tired. (ibid.: 305) Based on his description, this does appear to be a somewhat crude re-enactment of the stages of the ritual, performed for him in almost the way of the tourist performances of the tarantella. He does not say whether he paid the woman and musicians, but it is not surprising that what he saw did not represent a ‘real’ experience of tarantism. However, he appears to base his own judgements on the validity of the ritual on this observation.

Having mentioned some of the features of tarantism found in the writings of Baglivi and Serao, he then offers his own opinion: They are exact copies of the ancient priestesses of Bacchus. The orgies of that God, whose worship under various symbols, was more widely spread over the globe than that of any other divinity, were, no doubt, performed with energy and enthusiasm by the lively inhabitants of this warm climate. The introduction of Christianity abolished all public exhibitions of these heathenish rites, and the women durst no longer act a frantic part in the character of Bacchantes. Unwilling to give up so darling an amusement, they devised other pretences; and possession by evil spirits may have furnished them with one. Accident may also have led them to a discovery of the tarantula; and, upon the strength of its poison, the Puglian dames still enjoy their old dance, though time has effaced the memory of its ancient name and institution: and this I take to be the origin of so strange a practice. If at any time these dancers are really and involuntarily affected, I can suppose it to be nothing more than an attack upon their nerves, a species of St. Vitus’s dance. (ibid.: 306-7)

Swinburne is suggesting a direct lineage back to ancient Greece and the practices of the Bacchae, fulfilling his desire to see ‘antiquity in the flesh’ or a residue manifestation of the classical past in the present, even though this represents a pagan rite that for the Catholic Swinburne was abhorrent. Such stories about the strange cure from the bite of the tarantula began spreading throughout Europe through travel writings and the translations of medical treatises, adding to the sense of curiosity and mystique surrounding the practice from the ‘dark South. However, tarantism extended further than this as was demonstrated in the case of a young girl, Nancy Hazard, in Rhode Island in America in 1801, related by Carlson and Simpson (1971). Nancy was out in a field when a black spider ran over her hand, and she felt a slight pricking on her hand as it did so. By the third day after this, she had developed fits which Dr Joshua Perry of South Kingston described as being hysterical, and ‘suggestive of St Vitus dance’ (Carlson and Simpson, 1971: 293). He called in his partner Dr Joseph Comstock, who wrote an account of the case. He noticed that she liked the colours green and red, and would drum her chest with her fingers as if beating out a rhythm. Music was played for her, and she appeared to respond well to this, being particularly keen on the sound of a violin. Later, she began to beat the rhythm with her feet, and rose from her bed to dance: Her dance steps kept accurate time with the music, and sometimes she would dance wildly with high leaps off the floor. Her dances could last up to an hour and a half and terminate when she would suddenly drop to the floor ‘like a log’, often to begin dancing again until at last she would stop. Placed on her bed, she would fall back into a stupor. (ibid.: 295) Dr Comstock recommended that as a result, music should be ‘the principal remedy’ (ibid.: 295). In writing up the case five months later, Comstock discusses what he saw in Rhode Island, questioning whether it had been due to hysteria or tarantism. Knowledge of tarantism had spread across the Atlantic through the English translations of Baglivi’s treatise (1704 and 1723). Various references to the ritual had been made in publications in America from 1767, and ‘[b]y 1800, anyone widely read in the medical literature might have run across some reference to the condition’ (ibid.: 299). Comstock’s debate over whether Nancy’s case had been caused by tarantism or hysteria shows how closely these were associated in medical thinking at the time:

In the late eighteenth century, tarantism and hysteria were considered related conditions. Hysteria was still thought by many to be caused by a disturbance of the uterus [...]. [and] emphasized] the purely nervous character of hysteria, whether the source of the initial disturbance was the uterus or not. By 1801, the opinion that hysteria was a nervous disorder originating in the brain was accepted by most advanced and respected physicians. (ibid.: 297)

This aligning of hysteria and tarantism was a continuation of the forms of diagnosis of the condition from earlier centuries, but with the changing views on the nervous system, this came to be particularly associated with women, and indeed the writings on tarantism through the nineteenth century demonstrate this increasing feminization and hystericization of the ritual, as it became more closely defined as a condition relating to women suffering from hysteria and psychosis.

Comstock decided that Nancy’s case was one of both tarantism and hysteria, and that ‘he regards her dancing from the point of view of nervous disturbance and not from that of motivation of psychological factors’ (ibid.: 299). This view resulting from the transplantation of the ritual into another country, defining it through yet another particular medical framework, removes it even further from its spatial-temporal location of Apulia, stripping it of all the culture-specific manifestations, and instead categorizes it under a general condition that was to so define and confine the bodies and minds of women.

The medical and scientific reductions of tarantism continued through into the early twentieth century. Francesco De Raho, in an attempt to investigate the phenomenon, conducted experiments on guinea pigs which he had bitten by tarantulas, as well as observing cases of the ritual. Publishing his findings in I/carantolismo nella superstizione e nella scienza (1908), he concluded that tarantism was a ‘malattia nervosa’, or a nervous condition peculiar to the people of Apulia.

Dr Henry Sigerist, who moved from Germany to America in 1931, becoming a lecturer at Johns Hopkins, wrote an influential chapter on the subject in the collection Music and Medicine (1948), edited by Dorothy Schullian and Max Schoen. This was, as Gouk points out, the ‘first multi-author work in English devoted to the subject’ (Gouk, 2000a: 3) of music and healing, and therefore important in the field, not least because of the few such collections on the subject that were published until 2000, with the exception of Werner Friedrich Kimmel’s 156 Sigerist's chapter examines historical documentation of the ritual, concluding it was a "melancholiae seu amentiae quaedam species," a kind of melancholy or insanity. Tarantism was a nervous disorder, not caused by the tarantula's sting. Sigerist based his assumptions on the high incidence of mental diseases in Apulia's inbred population. He believed tarantism was a neurosis peculiar to that region.

Katner's 1956 study, Das Ratsel des Tarentismus, discussed the ritual's history and offered a detailed scientific analysis of the spiders found in the region. Katner was interested in the connection between music and medicine, and had previously written on tarantism during the Baroque period. De Martino stated that Katner had attempted to see cases of tarantism in Apulia but was unable to do so, conducting his work exclusively on philological bases. De Martino invited Katner to join his ethnographic field research in Galatina in 1959, which Katner did, though this was after Das Ratsel had been written.

Katner concluded that tarantism was caused by sunstroke and heatstroke, as well as other conditions such as the inability to sweat and a lack of salt, possibly an excess of drinking alcohol. He referred to Baglivi's treatise concerning the climate of Apulia and the nature of the people within the region.

Marius Schneider, the director of the Institute of Musical Ethnography in Berlin, wrote extensively about forms of musical healing from around the world, focusing on symbolic perspectives. His book La Danza Delle Spade e La Tarantella discussed sword dances and the tarantella, interweaving notions of healing, astrology, myths, and symbolism relating to music. He suggested that the "fighting" aspect of the dance in tarantism was necessary to awaken the body for the cure. The symbolism of the spider was also important to him: La tarantella ¢ una danza di ragni, cioé un tipo di quei balli di animali nei quali i partecipanti desiderano identificarsi con certi animali considerati come incarnazioni degli spiriti dei morti, che quando sono scontenti portano la morte o la malattia agli uomini. The tarantella is a dance of the spiders, a type of animal dance where participants identify with certain animals considered as an incarnation of the spirits of the dead. When these animals are disaffected, they carry death or illness to humans. Through this symbolic interpretation, Schneider also reduces aspects of the ritual in his work, falling into the same pitfalls as Jung and Eliade through a form of cultural relativism that does not acknowledge fully the particular features of the ritual in its cultural and spatial-temporal frameworks.

Despite Schneider’s non-medical view on the ritual, it was ultimately the doctors and scientists who had the strongest voices on tarantism in the twentieth century up to the publication of De Martino’s study in 1961. The development of psychiatric medicine had a profound effect on those who experienced tarantism, establishing a definition of the body and mind of the tarantata as suffering from a psychiatric illness, needing psychiatric treatment to be cured. One result of this was the increased feeling of shame (vergogna) felt by both the sufferers and their families, due to the stigma such a label carries with it, and this is also a possible reason for the decline in the number of savantati during the twentieth century.

The reducing of phenomena such as tarantism to being a psychiatric illness has been re-addressed in the past few decades, particularly with the influence of anthropology on psychiatry, acknowledging a need to understand these types of conditions as being ‘culture-bound’ rather than imposing a specific western definition of ‘sickness’ or ‘madness’ on a form of cultural performance which may not fit into such taxonomies.

Charles Hughes laid out the territory for attempting to see such processes as being ‘culture-bound’:

The puzzlement about the syndromes has its source in the bizarre characteristics of the behaviour displayed. If (as is usually the case) the frame of comparison is the Western-derived system of psychiatric diagnostic categories, these syndromes are, at least phenomenologically, unfamiliar ways of being ‘crazy’. [...] The controversy exists over whether such episodes or patterns of behaviour are simply culturally-based and different, yet ‘normal’ ways of acting, or examples of ‘authentic’ disease and disorder. (Hughes, 1985: 3)

Anthropologist Robert Bartholomew acknowledged similar problems with classification in his discussion of tarantism as a manifestation of mass psychogenic illness (MPI) (including such practices as St Vitus’ dance and collective demonic possession), particularly with the difficulties of ascribing such categorizations to traditions from another culture, or from a historical perspective:

Western psychiatrists typically categorize tarantism as a form of MPI due to its psychogenic character. [...] In basing judgment primarily on descriptions of the behaviour per se, it is unsurprising that contemporary psychiatry typifies tarantism as a form of group psychopathology. [...] By focusing on ‘bizarre’, descriptive aspects of tarantism per se, and blinded by Western culture-biased definitions of normality, researchers have overlooked its symbolic significance, and the influence of existing social and cultural norms. [...] The examination of behaviours that have been classified as strange and bizarre by contemporary Western cultural standards Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 159 of normality, such as dancing manias, tarantism and demonopathy, offers a valuable lesson in evaluating the future actions of social groups, cultures and historical eras, particularly when the customs and beliefs differ significantly from that of the investigator. Bartholomew, 1994: 286, 287, 299) Bartholomew points out that one of the Western culturally biased factors associated with MPIs relates to women, establishing an association of women's nature and behavior as being particularly susceptible to this type of phenomenon: "The belief of innate female susceptibility has become accepted as a social fact by most contemporary researchers who continue to use it as a self-fulfilling criteria for determining the presence of psychosomatic illness." (David Miller, 1985, p. 103)

"Where all or the majority of the victims were women, this fact alone is considered part of the proof that hysteria caused the affliction." (ibid.: 294)

The history of tarantism has shown just such a defining of female susceptibility, with a process of a feminisation and related hystericisation of the ritual, as women were categorized as being weak and prone to such illnesses and behaviors. This was also seen in the case of the klikushi referred to previously, the women shriekers in Russia who believed themselves to be possessed by a demon.

Worobec notes that in 1899, the Medical Department of the Ministry of the Interior sent the psychiatrist Nikolia Vailevich Krainskii to observe several cases of klikushi in the village of Ashschepkovo. His views on the phenomenon were that "klikushi were women whose feminine characteristics of backwardness, atavism, and unbridled passions could be tamed only by masculine scientific rationalism" (Worobec, 2001: 9).

Worobec also emphasizes that Krainskii stated that the klikushi were evidence of the backwardness of the countryside, and the peasants who lived within it, in contrast to the "advances of industrialization, urbanization, and increasing literacy" (ibid.: 9) that were being seen in Russian cities at the time.

In this way, by studying demon possession in the distant and recent past, he joined the debate among a growing Russian educated public about Russia's relative backwardness in comparison to Western Europe, about the peasantry's, especially the peasant women's, role in that backwardness. The study pointed to Russian psychiatrists' desire to wrest authority away from spiritual and lay healers to whom the possessed turned for aid. In this battle, a majority of these trained specialists classified klikushestvo as deviant and therefore unacceptable female behavior. Placing it under the rubric of hysteria, they engaged in larger discussions of women's character that preoccupied the attention of Western European medical specialists. (ibid.: 9)

A similar situation occurred in Apulia in relation to tarantism, where, particularly after the Risorgimento and with the industrialization of Italy, the South was still perceived as a place of backwardness, which was inhibiting the modernization of the country. The practice of tarantism, and the women who undertook the ritual (even though men were also taking part) become representations of this backwardness by continuing to be involved with a ritual that was considered to be based in superstition or pretence, and in their being categorized as suffering from a mental illness, therefore needing psychiatric treatment in order to be cured, thereby reinforcing the sense of shame. In this new paradigm of medicine, women were again objectified and appropriated as a source of definition by a hegemonic paradigm of the female body. Their own experience and sense of embodiment was once more silenced, as the need to dance was seen as a form of backward and deviant behavior. It was into this world of a Southern Italy in change, with the decline in the overt practice of tarantism leaving just traces of a former cultural performance form, that De Martino enters in 1959, redefining and repositioning tarantism, and the tarantati, in a way which would have far-reaching effects on the ritual and the region.

Throughout the many historical 'moments' discussed in this chapter, with the appropriations and redefinitions, leading to the medicalization, christianization and feminization of tarantism, what is interesting is that the actual processes and elements of the ritual remained largely unchanged during this time. Even the incorporation of the figure of St. Paul, although placing tarantism within the confines of the Church, became an absorbing of the saint into the existing features of the taranzta.

In terms of the embodied experience and processes of performance, such as the state of being resulting from the original condition leading to lethargy and an inability to move, and being awoken from this state by the musicians finding the appropriate rhythm and melody which suited the tavantata, allowing them to create a psychophysical transformation through the embodied experience of the dance itself, these elements stayed essentially the same from the fourteenth through to the late twentieth centuries.

With all the attempts to subdue the voices and bodies of the tavantati, with debates and public fights over how to define the 'illness' and 'cure' within different theoretical and philosophical viewpoints, the actual practice of the ritual managed to continue, even if in diminishing form. However, contained within the very essence of tarantism is the sense of suffering which needs to be alleviated and transformed through the music and dance, and it is this suffering, often attributed to socio-economic factors and the difficulties of life in rural Southern Italy, that particularly interested De Martino in his own redefinition of the process of tarantism as being one of a crisis of presence, which is discussed in the next chapter.

CHAPTER THREE
Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited

The work undertaken by Ernesto De Martino on tarantism acts as a bridge between the past and present, between the history of the ritual during its dying days, and the contemporary revival of interest in tarantism and the music and dance of Salento. It is also, in its scope and writing, a combination of history and ethnography, with an interdisciplinary framing that can be seen as ahead of its time in many respects.

This chapter is divided into two sections, which are connected through the work of De Martino and his writings on tarantism published in his influential book La terra del rimorso. De Martino has been such a significant factor in the history and revival of the ritual, as well as a source of identification for many Salentines today, that it is essential to address his work as part of this study. Therefore the first part of the chapter offers a discussion of some of his key ideas, as well as his field work and writings on tarantism contained within his book. Some of the subsequent influences and criticisms of his work are also presented. The second section is an attempt to analyze the processes of the ritual as embodied experience within the dance through aspects of performance studies. There are potential problems with this undertaking, not least the danger of falling into the very traps for which I have criticized others. However, I have endeavored to offer a view on the ritual through performance studies that may expand and enhance those presented by anthropologists, sociologists, and historians, so adding a piece of the picture, rather than in any way suggesting that this is "the answer" or wanting to define or reduce the wealth and complexity of individual and collective experiences over many centuries. This can only be another voice in the crowd, but hopefully one that can speak of embodied experience in a way which is of benefit to the furthering of the field.

164 CHAPTER THREE Ernesto De Martino and La terra del rimorso

Despite the criticisms of aspects of the book that may be made, there can be no doubting the significance of La terra del rimorso in the change of approach to how tarantism was seen and understood, and the impact that its publication had on both researchers and the local people of Salento in creating and defining an identity of a cultural heritage that became represented through the practice of succeeding generations of Salentines. As Liidtke says, it "is impossible to consider tarantism today without taking note of this important study" (Liidtke, 2009: 64), and so this chapter will focus on De Martino's views on tarantism, and the influence that these had on a selection of subsequent writers on the ritual. In addition, as his book offers some of the most detailed descriptions of the ritual, along with the documentary film made by Carpitella during their field research, this chapter will also discuss some of the features and processes of the music and dance in the ritual through these observations from the perspective of aspects of performance studies, exploring the embodied experience of transformation enabled through the specific psychophysical aspects found within the ritual.

De Martino (1908-65) was born in Naples, and so was a "man of the South." Although he had such a strong influence on the development of anthropology and the study of cultural practices within Italy, he himself was not an anthropologist, but rather a historian of religions, and one of the founders of the Italian School of the History of Religions. He became a follower of Benedetto Croce, one of the most important figures in the fields of history and philosophy in Italy at the time. Over the course of his work, De Martino showed a level of ambivalence towards Croce's idealist view of the practices of "primitive" peoples, and moved both towards and away from Croce's ideas of history at various points in his writings. He became involved with politics, joining the Communist Party, and taking a strong anti-Fascist stance. A committed Marxist, one of the strongest influences on his work was that of Antonio Gramsci (1891-1937) who was imprisoned by the Fascist Party for his involvement with the Italian Communist Party. Gramsci's Prison Notebooks are a major exposition on his ideas of the cultural hegemony which leads to the suppression of the subaltern peasant class of the South by the capitalist power which determines to keep them in their powerless and passive state. De Martino took these views, and combined them with his interest in existentialism, most particularly the work of Heidegger, as well as Sartre and Hegel. In drawing together the Marxist and Gramscian notions of the need to give a voice and a historical presence to the subalterns in order to provide them with an active agency, and Heidegger's notion of Dasein, or "being-in-the-world," he developed two ideas which were central in his interpretation of tarantism: the crisis of presence, and critical ethnocentrism. De Martino investigated the ritualistic practices of Southern Italy, particularly those he saw as being based in magic, such as the evil eye (malocchio) and the mourning and funeral rites, as well as tarantism. In these practices, he describes a contradiction between the ‘misery psychology’ (‘miseria psichologica’ (De Martino, 2006: 95)) of the peasants using magical rites which prevents them from taking their place in the modern world as he sees it, but also that it is through these ritual processes that the subalterns can reclaim their sense of history, place, and ‘being’ in the world, which was threatened by a ‘crisis of presence’ resolved through the ritual into a re-integration of the self.

The ‘crisis of presence’ (‘la crisi della presenza’) was De Martino's term for the existential dilemma, the risk of ‘not-being-here’ or ‘not-being-in-oneself’ (‘il rischio de non esserci’ (G. Saunders, 1995: 331)). In this way, he politicizes the notion of ‘presence’ into one which he defines as the subject's ‘ability to be an active agent in history’ (Di Nola, 1998: 160). The crisis of presence is the experience of the loss of self within a historical moment, leading to the inability to act as an agent in the world, but instead remaining in a passive position, as someone who is acted upon. The subaltern in particular has been denied their place in history, leading to the sense of crisis of ‘not-being-here’ or ‘in-oneself’, or the lack of agency:

To be ‘without history’ or ‘out of history’ is to lack the consciousness essential to agency, and thus to be unable to make appropriate choices, to be unable to ‘act’ in the moment in order to ‘make history, and to be, instead, a passive recipient of his-tory as made by others. (G. Saunders, 1998: 186)

166 CHAPTER THREE
For De Martino, the practices of magic and ritual have the ability to restore the sense of presence, of ‘being-here’, through their cultural processes, thereby giving a voice, history, and active agency to the previously powerless. Thus, magic is both provoked by, and is a reaction to the sense of crisis, and is a culturally conditioned and acceptable means of resolving the crisis through re-establishing the experience of presence in the world (Di Nola, 1998: 161). Subalterns are particularly susceptible to the crisis of presence due to their socio-economic position and suppression by the hegemonic power, and so magic and ritual are culture-specific means by which they are able to recover their sense of presence and agency:

Magic is thus a way of coping in the face of overwhelming social and economic marginalization. [...] In the absence of effective strategies to counter the overwhelmingly negative aspects of this environment, popular religion helps people to live with their situation. (G. Saunders, 1998: 191)

This process effectively historicizes and empowers the subalterns. De Martino's idea of 'critical ethnocentrism' also has an historical dimension, and was developed after 1948 in part as a response to the Southern Question, and his study of subaltern folklore and culture in the South. Critical ethnocentrism, or 'ethnographic humanism, is a rejection of relativism, and has a 'deep awareness of this historical determination and the culturally conditioned use of values and categories of judgement' (Di Nola, 1998: 158). He wanted to challenge the cultural assumptions inherent within the categorizations used by the researcher and writer which were based in their own cultural bias. Whilst acknowledging that the researcher will be operating within their own system of understanding, as this is what they know, by opening up their awareness to the fact of the limitations and dangers of these categories, they may have a greater ability of approaching other cultures and histories which use different categories. Di Nola cites De Martino in La fine del mondo, explaining his notion of ‘critical ethnocentrism’:

In the perspective of a ‘critical ethnocentrism,’ the western (or westernized) ethnologist assumes the history of his own culture as a unit by which to measure alien cultural histories, but [...]. In the act of measuring, gains consciousness of the historic prison and of the limits of his own system, and opens himself up to the task of reforming the categories of observation he has available at the start of his research. (De Martino, La fine del mondo, Turin: Einaudi, 1977: 396-7, in ibid.: 163)

Although on one hand seeming to be somewhat ahead of his time in challenging researchers to move from an ethnocentric attitude to one which takes account of the particular contexts, histories and experiences of the cultures which are being studied, there were limits as to how far he was able to actually achieve this in practice, provoking Di Nola’s chapter title: ‘How Critical was De Martino’s “Critical Ethnocentrism” in Southern Italy?’ (ibid.: 157).

Although there is an exploration of the process of tarantism through his case studies within La terra del rimorso, the actual voices of the ¢arantati themselves are not really heard: it is about them, rather than from them, and the predominant voice is that of De Martino in his analysis and definition of the ritual. Crapanzo points out that the potential problem with critical ethnocentrism is that it can ‘become an imperial gesture in which the primitive simply serve our purpose’ (Crapanzo, 2005: ix), and in citing some of the criticisms of his work, Liidtke indicates that ‘by dismissing the psychopathological approach as inherently reductive, De Martino failed to recognise that psychiatry was increasingly broadening its parameters to include sociocultural variables’ (Liidtke, 2009: 66).

De Martino conducted his field research in Salento over a period of three weeks, from 20 June to 10 July 1959, in order to focus the work on and around the festival of St Paul in Galatina. He took the unusual step of gathering together an interdisciplinary team which consisted of Dr Gionvanni Jervis, a specialist in neuropsychiatry; a psychologist, Dr Letizia Jervis-Comba; the ethnomusicologist Dr Diego Carpitella, who had collaborated with De Martino previously; Professor Amalia Signorelli-D'Ayala, a cultural anthropologist, who was to look at the social and economic issues; and Vittoria De Palma, who acted as social assistant and liaison between the team and the ¢arantati. All of these contributed Appendices to La terra del rimorso. The team examined twenty-one case studies in Salento, sixteen women and five men, ranging in age from thirteen to seventy-six. With the exception of Michele of Nardo, they were all experiencing 'rebites, rather than undertaking the ritual for the first time. The descriptions of the events surrounding the first bite included being bitten or stung by a snake, scorpion or ant as well as a tarantula. One of the tarantati could not remember the actual bite; for another it had occurred after she had dreamed about scorzoni; another after seeing a snake being killed; and one had a spell cast on her by a snake while she was going towards the sea. For some, the bite occurred whilst they were outdoors, either awake or asleep, and for Rita of Alezio, the bite occurred ‘following an offense to St Paul’ (De Martino, 2005: 83). The most detailed description given of a arantata they observed was that of Maria of Nardo, and Carpitella also filmed her through the proc- ess of the ritual. Photographs of her are found in La terra del rimorso, and footage in Carpitella’s ethnographic film La terapia coreutico-musicale del tarantismo (1960).

Maria, aged twenty-nine when the team met her, had received the first bite when she was twenty. According to De Martino, Maria had endured a difficult childhood, and at eighteen had fallen in love with a young man. However, the union had been opposed by her family, and the man left her. She experienced much suffering as a result, and then at midday on a Sunday, she said that a ¢aranta bit her, and she was made to dance, thus becoming tavantata.

A local woman had already decided that her son should marry Maria, and asked Maria if she would be willing to become his wife. Since Maria was still in love with the original young man, she delayed responding to the mother, and then had a vision of St Paul during which he told her that she should not marry the man, but instead enter into a ‘mystical marriage’ with himself. However, the mother persisted in proposing her son, and eventually Maria agreed to the initial stages of the marriage. She then became unwell, and later said she was summoned by St Paul and left the house. On returning to her home having been wandering through the fields for three days, she explained that ‘St Paul had stung her once again, forcing her to dance’ (ibid.: 45). She agreed to marry her fiancé, but remained a tarantata, performing the ritual each year, particularly during the summer and on the feast day of St Paul in Galatina (ibid.: 44-5).

This was the background to Maria’s story, which De Martino and the research team discovered after seeing her perform the ritual. The team observed her at her home in Nardo on 24 and 25 June. De Martino describes the experience of entering the house whilst the ritual was taking place as being ‘brutally hurled onto another planet’ (ibid.: 38). In the small one-room building, the furniture had been cleared to the edge of the space and covered with cloths, and the bed was laid down on the floor. There were sacred objects placed around the room, such as brightly coloured pictures of St Peter and St Paul, and a bottle of water taken from the well in Galatina. A white cloth had been laid on the ground, and it was on this that Maria was dancing when they arrived, dressed in white, and with ‘eyes like a sleepwalker’s’ (ibid.: 39). Four musicians were playing for her on the guitar, the accordion, the violin and the tamburello.

There were three distinct phases to her dance, noted in De Martino’s description, and observable from Carpitella’s film, which can be divided into the movements which take place on the floor, those performed when upright, and the falling down after dancing. The cycle of the sequence begins and ends in a resting position on the ground. At the beginning, when Maria is lying on the cloth, the musicians were in close proximity to her head, with the violinist at points kneeling down very near towards her. When they began to play, her first movements were an energetic shaking of her head from side to side in time to the fast beat of the music. This was succeeded by a range of movements on the floor, including rolling backwards and forwards along the cloth with the body and arms outstretched; lying on her back with her knees bent and feet flat on the floor, pushing herself around the cloth with her feet stamping alternately in time to the music, and her head shaking from side to side; in the same position, with just her feet stamping in time to the music and her head shaking without travelling along the ground; lying on her front with her hands on the floor beside her head, pushing up her head and shoulders, her head shaking from side to side, with the movement continuing through her whole body; on her front, doing the same pushing movement to propel herself around the cloth as she did on her back, this time using the toes of alternate feet to create the movement, in time to the music. She then stood up, to begin the next phase.

She moved with a jogging movement in time to the beat of the music, sometimes with her head shaking from side to side, always on her toes (she was wearing stockings, with no shoes). At times she stayed in one place performing these movements with her feet whilst facing the 170 CHAPTER THREE musicians, other times she was moving around the floor. She would also run quickly in circles around the space marked by the white cloth, and sometimes spin on one spot. She held a coloured cloth with one end in each hand, with her arms sometimes lifted above her head, or with one raised and one lowered behind her back, or moving the cloth in front of her.

At a particular point as she became more unstable on her feet (in Carpitella's film, this came during the middle of a spinning movement) some women would form a circle around her to protect her, and she fell to the ground, where a pillow was placed under her head, and she rested until the musicians began to play again, and the sequence was repeated. Maria had not recovered by the end of the day, so the musicians came back the next day, and she danced again. During the day, there were signs that she was getting better, as she took some food when resting, and in the afternoon, gave a few cries like a dog barking. Her dance movements also "appeared freer and more varied in its figures" (De Martino, 2005: 43) until at 2.55pm, she stopped in the middle of running, indicated to the musicians to stop, and lay down on her bed.

The musicians began to play another song which was "of thanks to the Saint, with the subsidiary aim of making sure that the tarantata was truly indifferent to the stimulus of the music" (ibid: 43). Maria stayed where she was, watching them play. After those present had given thanks, and she had rested a little, Maria wanted to go to Galatina to thank St Paul herself, and De Martino and his team offered to take her. When inside the chapel, she went through the same cycle of dance sequence again, this time without the musicians, running round the altar. After drinking some water from the well, she left the monetary offerings which had been given during the ritual. She returned a few days later on 29 June, to re-enact the process with the other sarantate during the festival of St Peter and St Paul (ibid.: 38-44). De Martino's analysis of seeing Maria undertaking the ritual was part of his re-framing of tarantism within the notion of the "crisis of presence" taking a symbolic approach to the elements of the event, and ultimately presenting a "psychoanalytically tinged interpretation" (Liidtke, 2009: 65) of the process and experience of the tarantate. He rejected biomedical explanations of tarantism as being connected to the poison from the bite of a taranta, partly because there was minimal evidence of an actual bite, and the majority of the case studies were of repeats of the ritual, rather than of the first bite. Instead, he saw the figure of the spider, and other aspects of the ritual, as part of a symbolic or mythical-ritual ‘horizon’, which served as the culturally conditioned means to frame and establish the healing features of the ritual process.

Taranta, bite and poison thus have a symbolic meaning in tarantism: they give a horizon to the unconscious drives and reactions they provoke in an individual consciousness. [...] The symbol of the taranta lends a figure' to the formless, rhythm and melody to menacing silence, and color to the colorless in an assiduous quest of articulated and distinct passions, where a horizonless excitation alternates with a depression that isolates and closes off. (De Martino, 2005: 35, 36)

It is through this idea of the symbolic or mythical horizon of the elements of the ritual that De Martino suggests his more psychoanalytical interpretation of tarantism as being a means of dealing with personal, emotional and psychological problems:

This is, in essence, the symbol of the ¢aranta as a mythical-ritual horizon of evocation, configuration, release and resolution of the unresolved psychic conflicts which ‘re-bite’ in the obscurity of the unconscious. As a cultural model, this symbol offers a mythical-ritual order for settling these conflicts and reintegrating individuals into the group. (ibid.: 36)

In discussing the case of Maria of Nardo, he suggests that through the repeated practice of the ritual during the occasions of the rimorso or re-bite, she is finding the means to cope with and release her pent-up frustrations and difficulties through the identification with the symbols of the saranta and St Paul. These conflicts were in part related to the erotic, as the first bite occurred directly after her being left by her first love, and the re-bite during the time of her feeling pressured into marrying her husband, thus

“Maria periodically released her conflicts and converted her frustrations into symbol, lightening the period between ceremonies — that is, daily life - of 1 Dorothy Zinn inserts a footnote at this point to indicate that De Martino is doing a double-play on the word figura which means ‘form, but can also be a ‘figure’ in music and dance. 172 CHAPTER THREE the burden of unconscious stimulations which would have been extremely dangerous had she not found a socialized and traditional project of calen- drical, festive treatment in tarantism’ (ibid.: 45).

Thus for De Martino, the exorcism of the ritual becomes a culturally acceptable form of catharsis for unfulfilled passions and coping with the pressures of everyday life. It certainly may be questioned whether De Martino was himself offer- ing a reductionist view of the complexities of tarantism in this way, and indeed whether this approach offers any real sense of historical and political empowerment to the ‘subaltern’. However, the book offers a more contex- tualised and in-depth picture of the “religion of remorse” (ibid.: 129) than many of the previous writings about it, and the use of an interdisciplinary research team provides a multilayered picture, making La terra del rimorso a work of anthropology and history that was unusual at the time, and has been of great influence since. As Karanika states, De Martino's 'unique contribution was to have attempted to see tarantism through different angles of a prism' (Karanika, 2005: 27), and this makes the book a significant study in this respect. It is also ironic that De Martino was writing about the "minor" religion (De Martino, 2005: 129) of tarantism in its dying days, and yet it was his act of writing and publishing La terra del rimorso that in part led to the revival of interest in the ritual and the practice of pizzica music and dance. De Martino's work on tarantism had a far-reaching effect on the study of the ritual, and on the development of approaches to anthropology and culture by scholars within Italy.

Karen Liidtke offers an excellent overview of some of these developments (Liidtke, 2009: 67-74). She suggests that this research can be 'subdivided into three general themes, socio-economic, medical and anthropological, depending on the key focus taken' (ibid.: 67). Some of these studies aim to expand on or critique the work undertaken by De Martino, but his views on tarantism and La terra del rimorso are still central factors in academic approaches to both the ritual and questions of examining cultural practices in Southern Italy. However, there has been comparatively little written about De Martino outside Italy. Considering his influential ideas in the development of ethnology, this may be seen as somewhat surprising. It is scholars such as George Saunders, Mariella Pandolf, Vincent Crapanzo and Annalisa Di Nola who have been writing about his work in English. More recently, with a widening of interest in tarantism, he has also been discussed in publications in Britain and America in relation to his work on the ritual (e.g., Tomlinson (1993), Horden (2000), Del Giudice and van Deusen (2003), Liidtke (2000, 2005, 2009)), but this is still fairly limited. La terra del rimorso was only translated into English for the first time in 2005 due to the efforts and dedication of Dorothy Zinn, but other than a translation of I/ mondo magico under the title Primitive Magic in 1972, there has been no access to De Martino's writings in English.

There are, however, two further works by non-Italian authors that contain a discussion of De Martino and his writings on tarantism, which are both books that are commonly used in the research and debate concerning possession rituals using music and dance, and so are important in the field: Gilbert Rouget's work Music and Trance (first published in French in 1980), and Ioan Lewis's Ecstatic Religion (1971). Rouget's book on the use of music within trance and ritual has become an influential text within the study of ritual performance. Ultimately, his discussion of tarantism summarises his opinion on the ritual by stating that '[e]xamined closely, tarantism turns out to be nothing more than a particular form of possession' (Rouget, 1985: 159). He states his disagreement with De Martino's views on tarantism, feeling that they are 'deeply impregnated with psychoanalysis' (ibid.: 161), and that the fundamental problem is that De Martino does not accept the importance of the spider itself. Rouget cites examples from the historical records of the dance where the ¢arantata appears to imitate the movements of the spider, pointing out that De Martino interpreted some of these actions through psychoanalysis, for example saying that the hanging from ropes which was mentioned in Chapter Two, is a symbolic representation of the Greek myth of the hanged virgins as well as Phaedra, and the feeling of being rocked and embraced by their mother. For Rouget: The problem with such an amalgam is that it not only proves nothing (in fact, it makes one think that anything can be symbolic of anything), but it also obscures the essen- tial core of the matter, which is that here we have people in trance busy identifying themselves, through dance, with a creature thought to have made them ill; in other words, we are dealing with a characteristic case of possession. (ibid.: 161)

This certainly addresses some of the problematic issues concerning De Martino’s symbolic and psychoanalytic interpretation, but perhaps over-relies on a comparative approach between ritual performances across cultures which dominates Rouget’s book, not always taking the particu- lar culturally determined nature of the experience into account. He does point out that ultimately the bite is actually ‘extraordinarily ambigu- ous’ (ibid.: 165), explaining that there is a need to exorcise the venom of the spider, however this process is through identification and imitation. In this way, there is a coming together of the bite and the spider as being the agent of both the illness and the cure, as well as the real and the imaginary: In short, tarantism is the very model of the ideal scenario, since within it the symbol and the real, the signifier and the signified, the manifest and the latent, the anecdote and the hidden meaning, the pretext and the profound motivation or, to refer to De Martino’s thesis [...] szorso (and re-morso) and rimorso (bite, rebite, remorse), coincide perfectly. (ibid.: 165)

Lewis's views on tarantism offer a very different picture, and one in which women in particular appear in a fairly negative light, furthering the feminisation and hystericisation of the ritual seen in Chapter Two. He suggests that tarantism offers women the ability to strike out against gender constraints of behaviour, and states that the bite of the spider does not cause the condition, but rather that it is a practice by a cult of ‘mainly peasant women’ (Lewis, 1971: 90) who are ultimately, as he discusses in the case of Maria of Nardé using De Martino’s description, ‘imposing severe economic stress on the family which she did not love, and flagrantly calling public attention to her problems. If she could not radically remedy her situ- ation, at least she could continue to protest at it in a religious idiom which men could condone as a divinely sanctioned therapy’ (ibid.: 92).

Lewis's strong views on the women in this and other rituals again essentialises the particular characteristics of tarantism. In Chapter Two, I discussed the problems of making a correlation of tarantism with the general category of ‘St Vitus’ dance’ and Lewis offers a recent example of such a comparison. In relation to the dance manias which spread throughout Europe in the fifteenth century and tarantism, he states: ‘Whether it was known as St Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited 175 Vitus’s Dance, or tarantism, its symptoms and the circumstances in which it occurred, were generally the same’ (ibid.: 41). He likewise reduces the experience of women in the healing rituals he discusses: It will now be clear, I think, that we are dealing with a widespread strategy employed by women to achieve ends which they cannot readily obtain more directly. Women are, in effect, making a special virtue of adversity and affliction, and, often quite liter- ally, capitalizing on their distress. This cult of feminine frailty which, in its aetiolated form, is familiar enough to us from the swooning attacks experienced by Victorian women in similar circumstances, is admirably well adapted to the life situation of those who employ it. By being overcome involuntarily by an arbitrary affliction for which they cannot be held accountable, these possessed women gain attention and consideration, and within variously defined limits, successfully manipulate their husbands and menfolk. (ibid.: 85-6) While this seems a clear example of an imposition of a set of values and assumptions onto a cultural practice, it is important to note that Lewis's book is often used as a source of ‘authority’ on the subject of ecstatic ritual practices within academia in the UK, including his views on tarantism, partly because there has been so little else published, certainly at the time he was writing, on the subject. Historian Gary Tomlinson, for example, describes Lewis's work as a ‘no-nonsense study’ (Tomlinson, 1993: 151), and supports Lewis’s describing of tarantism as being a cult, even though it does not actually conform to the definition of this in terms of being a self-consciously collective group with an initiation rite, as Rouget points out in saying that tarantism is not ‘properly speaking’ a cult (Rouget, 1985: 27). However, this does highlight the issues that De Martino was seeking to address in his development of critical ethnocentrism, in that if a researcher is not self-questioning about their choice of categories they use based in their own cultural assumptions and positionings, then this can lead to a misinterpretation of the particular circumstances of a practice from another culture. These types of problems can occur when one book becomes an ‘authority’ on a subject, particularly when it is one of the only sources available. There are many concerns with Eliade’s much-utilised book on shamanism; yet as Rouget indicates, he uses Eliade’s writing because it was the only such study available to him despite being aware of the problems with it (ibid.: 18). This is also a similar potential concern with La terra del rimorso, in that it has now become ‘the’ authority on tarantism, even though it has been critiqued more recently, as mentioned previously. This is an issue not only for academics, but also for many Salentines in their own identifying of De Martino’s work as the main source which describes and defines not just the ritual, but is also a part of their own heritage and identity. Liidtke observes that often the first question she was asked by Salentines when she said that she was researching tarantism, was ‘Have you read De Martino?’ (Liidtke, 2009: 64). My own experience was of noting that La terra del rimorso was on prominent display for sale in many of the bookshops in Lecce and Galatina, as well as on stalls during pizzica festivals. On several occasions, a Salentine held up the book for me to see, saying that this was their history, culture and identity. When I asked if they had actually read the book, the most common answer was that they had not. In this way, the book has become a means of identification as an object in itself, rather than necessarily the argument that De Martino was making within it. This has also led to the possibility of a lack of a critical view of the narratives that are offered in the book, as well as De Martino’s own analysis which is conditioned through his particular intellectual viewpoint. When I spoke with some Salentines about the criticisms of his work made by contemporary Italian scholars, the response tended to be that these scholars had ‘misunderstood’ what De Martino was saying. There can be a tendency for a somewhat romanticised repositioning of the book-as-object, and De Martino-as-authority, particularly within the revival of tarantism as a cultural symbol and heritage in Salento. It is perhaps ironic that De Martino has become a part of the symbolic horizon of the past and present of tarantism, which he was attempting to articulate through his book. Remorse, Transformation, and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited

It is important to acknowledge some of the potential problems with La terra del rimorso noted above. Although I have used the book throughout this study, it is always with this caution in mind. The following section, which attempts to offer a re-framing of the experience of the embodiment within tarantism through aspects of performance studies, can only be a speculation and suggestion, as I have not seen or spoken directly with any of the few remaining tarantate. Therefore, this is not based on their personal experience, but rather on second-hand written accounts, documentary film evidence, and speaking with Salentines on their own reflections and knowledge of the tarantate, and their experience of performing the music and dance. Even though this is a limitation, an analysis of embodied experience in this way can provide an alternate view on the ritual that may be of benefit in the attempt to understand the process of efficacy involved. It is not offered as another redefinition or categorization, but rather as a further piece in the mosaic. Additionally, this type of approach to the study of tarantism may help expand the debate of these forms of cultural performances within the field of performance studies, as well as anthropology and sociology.

A key feature discussed in Chapter One is the notion of connecting past and present through the embodied presence of the dance in a particular spatial-temporal location. The movements described in De Martino's book and seen in the documentary film made by Diego Carpitella are themselves a bringing together of the past into the present, as they bear close resemblance to those written in the historical records over many centuries, discussed in Chapter Two. The body, and the space in which it is moving, are both inscribing and being inscribed by the cultural forms from a memory of generations past, which through the liveness of the action of the dance in that moment create the sense of a 'presence' that contains that past within it.

To repeat Buckland:

It can be argued that dance has a particular propensity to foreground cultural memory as embodied practice by virtue of its predominantly somatic modes of transmission. Indeed in traditional forms of danced display, it could be argued that longevity of human memory is publicly enacted, demonstrating the ethereality of human existence and the continuity of human experience, as successive generations re-present the dancing. (Buckland, 2001: 1)

The three-part sequence within the ritual of the movements on the floor, starting with immobility, then the extremities of the body being gradually stirred by the music to move, with this impulse going through the body leading to a sequence of the movements on the floor, before standing and moving energetically round the space, until falling down immobile again, have been observed in the records from Alessandro di Alessandro onwards. Thus, the history of the ritual is re-enacted, re-played, and re-embodied with each tarantata's 'moment' of the dance, not just of her own 'ri/re-morso' repeating of the experience of the first bite, but also of all those other 'moments of prior tarantate which are made present in the space/time of the performance. The experience in the ritual is one of both the suffering which causes the condition, and of the release through the dance which 'cures' it, in part due to the belief in the efficacy created through the long history of this particular form of healing within the specific cultural context. For Mariella Pandolfi, talking of her informant Maria: Her suffering [...] is inscribed within her body and recounted through her body. [...] The lived experience of Maria is inscribed in a context — like that of peasant Italy — that is made up of 'stratified centuries' [...] History is absorbed in Maria's story so that its traces survive like the traces of the past in the ruins of the town, a past that people still speak of, age-old events that are described as if they occurred only yesterday. (Pandolfi, 1990: 260)

Pandolfi also notes that the potential danger of an historical perspective is that it can essentialize particular practices of healing and belief, and suggests instead the need for a phenomenological approach in order to offer a fuller understanding of an experience (ibid.: 260). In Chapter One, I suggested that a combination of seeing both the inner and outer, the lived experience and the socio-cultural-historical context, is a helpful means to understand the embodied experience of transformation within the Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited 179 'presence' of a performance event. The sense of a collective and historical suffering may be part of that experience which leads to the embodiment within the ritual; but it is also the personal story and bodymind of the tarantata that creates the particular presence of the 'moment through the dance, and embodies both past and present within it. For Pandolfi, it is ultimately that the women in the village with whom she spoke are 'narrating [themselves] "through the body" [which] is an attempt to manage emotionally the relationship between catastrophic external events and the catastrophic internal event in corporeal terms. A new sense of reality is taken on when this is enclosed in the body' (ibid.: 267). In this way, the inner and outer are united in the process of the ritual which has the potential to create a transformational experience that establishes a different perception of body and 'self' in the world.

Ada Metafune uses similar terms when speaking of women from previous generations who were not allowed a strong visibility within the community. They would dance pizzica on family occasions, at weddings, or during the harvesting in the tobacco fields, and in the act of dancing were able to express themselves physically, or as Ada states: 'in quel momento si poteva parlare con il corpo' (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [ 'at that point it was possible to speak with the body' ], thus creating a sense of embodied presence in the space of their lives and the community. This is not necessarily De Martino's notion of the 'crisis of presence' leading to a re-establishment of order and an historical and active agency, but rather a more personal efficacy of transformation through embodying past and present in the 'moment' of the action of the dance, both being and being-seen in the particular time and place of the event. This experience can also be viewed through the processes and movements of the dance itself. De Martino mentions the Salentine dialect verb 'scazzicare, which he describes as follows: it indicates an action of lifting or removing a material weight or compact mass (for example, moving a straw mattress), and in the psychic and psychosomatic framework, it denotes an abnormal and irresistible stimulation of sentiments and bodily needs, their indomitable pricking and unleashing. Thus, for example, [...] of someone compellingly taken by emotion, it is said i scazzicano li passioni. Among the passions which can scazzicarsi, the venereal appetite takes on particular emphasis, and one of 180 CHAPTER THREE the verb's most common meanings concerns the erotic impulse's uncontrolled bursting out against every discipline of civility and custom. (De Martino, 2005: 37) He also states that scazzicare can refer to the impulse and stimulation of the music and colours within the symbolic landscape of the ritual, as they ‘[evoke] latent urging in the state of total inertia; rather than release these urges in an incoherent psychomotor excitation, this stimulation releases them in a ceremonial order dominated by dance figures and the other symbolic themes of tarantism in action’ (ibid.: 37). Salentine scholar Antonella Rizzo explained to me that the notion of scazzicare in relation to pizzica is that the music and dance ‘stimulates (scazzica) or sparks off’ the impulse to move the emotions and passions, as well as the body (Rizzo, 2009). This notion of being ‘carried away’ or taken over and moved by passion, of a stimulation or urge which leads to an irresistible bursting out, is clearly of significance within tarantism. The definition of ‘scazzicare’ as removing a weight is itself interesting, as the embodied processes within the dance can be seen as the experiential transformation through the ritual from the state of being as a result of the ‘bite’, that of the lethargic immobility or uncontrolled spasms, into the movements of the dance which result in an upright vigorous running in the space. In metaphorical terms, this is a psychophysical process of ‘throwing off a weight." The weight results in the original condition of suffering, and the action of removing or throwing off the weight leads to the lightness of both the movements and the inner condition of release. The weight is one of both body and mind, as is the moving or release of that weight through the process of the ritual. Although this is a metaphor, it is one that can be seen to have a psychophysical relationship to an action and process, particularly if understood through the notion of the physical basis to metaphor found in the work of George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. In their book Philosophy in the Flesh, they offer a view of the way in which human reason is grounded in embodied experience: 2 Liidtke mentions that one informant spoke to her about her grandmother who became a tarantata, saying the she held a lot of tension in her body, ‘bearing a weight on her shoulders’ (Liidtke, 2009: 142). Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited 181 Reason is not disembodied [...] but arises from the nature of our brains, bodies and bodily experience. [...] It is the striking claim that the very structure of reason itself comes from the details of our embodiment. The same neural and cognitive mechanisms that allow us to perceive and move around also create our conceptual systems and modes of reason. Reason is not, in any way, a transcendent feature of the universe or disembodied mind. (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999: 4) Based on this view, they have explored the way in which people conceptualise, perceive and understand the world, and how this is shaped by bodymind experiences, ‘[b]ecause our conceptual systems grow out of our bodies, [therefore] meaning is grounded in and through our bodies’ (ibid.: 6). The embodied mind, in attempting to make sense of the world, creates metaphors that are inherently linked to the experience of the sensorimotor system. Lakoff and Johnson offer the example of the metaphor ‘More is Up, as in “Prices rose” and “Stocks Plummeted”. In the More is Up, a subjective judgment of quantity is conceptualized in terms of the sensorimotor experience of verticality' (ibid.: 47). Similarly, a physical experience, such as the difficulty in lifting a heavy object, is related cognitively in the mind to the experience of the difficulty of coping with responsibilities and problems. This cognitive connection is repeated until it becomes established as a pattern, and the conceptual metaphor arises: Difficulties are Burdens

If seen in this way, then the psychophysical experience of feeling weighed down, both physically and mentally, by the difficulties and oppressions experienced in life, is transformed through the scazzicare process of throwing off or removing the weight, releasing the feeling of immobility and discomfort, through the embodied action of the dance. The 'illness' and suffering are a state of being that is 'stuck' or trapped by the weight of the circumstances, thereby being unable to move, and the process of healing involves a means of 'getting out of' the feeling of being stuck, into 182 CHAPTER THREE

the dynamic movements of dancing, in other words, from immobility to mobility, from stasis to change. The late Buddhist teacher John Garrie Roshi defines healing as being the restoration of the natural process of change (Garrie, 1998: 105). If 'health' can be seen as change and flow within the bodymind, then when it becomes stuck or blocked in some way, this leads to the feeling of illness or suffering, which is relieved by removing the blockage, thus re-establishing the psychophysical condition of change and movement in body and mind.

To experience 'li scazzicano li passioni, being carried away by the passions (De Martino, 2003: 37), throws off the burden and blockage of the weight of difficulties and suffering which has resulted in immobility, freeing the bodymind to experience release and relief in motion and a sense of well-being through the action of the dance in the specific cultural and spatial-temporal location. De Martino mentioned that the stimulation created through the music and colour within tarantism has the effect of waking up the tavantata from the state of inertia, in relation to the notion of scazzicare.

This idea of inertia, as well as the need for change and the ability of dance to effect this change, is also explored by dance practitioner Anna Halprin. As noted in Chapter One, Halprin was a significant figure in the development of new approaches to performance during the 1960s, and she has continued to explore different ways of using dance and movement as personal and collective transformation, as well as choreography and performance-making.* She was diagnosed with cancer in 1972, and during her period of recovery, explored her own experience of the condition through movement and images. She developed this process into what she calls the Five Stages of Healing, which she has used with both individuals and large groups within communities: The first was simply to look and see and identify the issue, the polarity between the dark side and the light side. The second point in my journey was the actual confron- tation, which was followed by a release. After the release, the third task was finding some way to integrate the new changes in my body. The last step in my journey was an assimilation, a coming back to my community and my family and my life. (Halprin, 1995: 67) This describes what may be seen as a familiar ritual process, from the point of identifying and facing the state of crisis, to using a particular means to experience release, followed by an integration and assimilation of both the self and the community. This process can also be traced in the practice of tarantism.

Throughout her work, Halprin speaks of the ability of dance to create a transformation of the bodymind, particularly when focusing on a particular issue, and the importance of the process of change through this:

One of the things about working with real-life issues is that it can be transformative. […] It’s not about the dancers and it’s not about an interpretation of a theme, it is real. And by doing it you get to a different place with that issue, and in your life. The dance changes the dancer. The purpose is to create change. That’s when we start using the word ‘ritual.’ To distinguish that from dance as entertainment, dance as spectacle. Not that it couldn't be a spectacle or it couldn’t be entertaining, but that is not the purpose. (ibid.: 14)

Halprin here offers a view of dance in this context which presents a way of understanding the use of dance within tarantism, even though this still needs to be seen within the particular cultural manifestations of the ritual. Her point about the place when dance performance becomes ‘ritual’ as being connected to purpose is significant, and in Chapter One I used the word ‘intention’ rather than ‘purpose’ to express a similar idea. Inertia is the energy or force of a resistance to change a state of motion. As she explains: ‘Changing direction in movement is overcoming inertia. Have you noticed that when you are lying down at rest, it is often difficult to get up? You need to apply a great deal of will and often have to force yourself up — not just because you are tired but because you are overcoming and resisting inertia and gravity’ (ibid.: 34). The force of gravity acts as a pull on the body, and combined with inertia, can result in the feeling of being stuck or blocked and unable to move, if there is no opposing force strong enough to break this. It is the third factor, momentum, which gives the impulse to move- ment. She suggests that for the dancer, an awareness of these three together can be explored to create engaging and pleasurable movements, and it is at these points that the forces are ‘moving you. I often say to myself, “Let the movement take over and move you” (ibid.: 34).

The notion of the use and effect of these physical forces that Halprin discusses can be extended into a psychophysical view which encompasses both inner feeling and outer movement in approaching the shifting state of being in the ritual. Within tarantism, the state of the illness after the bite is one of gravity and inertia, of the feeling of being stuck in immobil- ity or locked into convulsive movement. This is transformed through the embodied responses to the impulse of the music, which is the scazzicare process of the urge exciting the bodymind, leading to the momentum of the dance movements both on the floor and upright, gaining in speed and intensity. This leads to a different experience of the relationship to grav- ity and inertia, until the stimulation of the music is stopped, resulting in another shift of falling to the ground so the process can begin again. This constant movement between gravity, inertia and momentum continues until the feeling of efficacy has been established by the tavantata, and they are able to be released from the cycle.

The impulse of the music to provoke and urge the change in the body- mind, or the process of scazzicare, is in part due to the nature of the music itself, as well as the particular types of movements which are performed in response. The music used in the ritual both stimulates and guides the tarantata through her process of the dance. One of the key features of the music is that of the ostinato rhythm created by the tamburello, which was discussed in the Introduction. This repetitive rhythm of triplets, in a tro- chaic pattern of an accented followed by an unaccented beat (~~ —~ | -” -”) is also the rhythmic pattern of the heartbeat, and the repetition and inten- sity of the playing can affect the heartbeat of the dancer in response, raising the pulse through the repeated rhythm of the musical beat. Kay Gardner points out that this rhythmic pattern is used in many types of ‘healing music for duplicating the heartbeat’ (Gardner, 1997: 80), citing the example of the drumbeat in Native American traditions, which is likewise in a similar pattern, though in 4/4 time rather than 6/8. The ambiguity of the rhythm in the pizzica music created by the melody on the violin being played in 4/4 with the tamburello ostinato in 6/8 was noted in the Introduction. Diego Carpitella, in his Appendix to De Martino's book discussing the 'jatromusical' nature of what the musicians are playing, states that: The result is that this type of music has a dual aspect which merits thorough analysis from a psychological point of view, in that it reflects two typical moments of religious techniques: dilation and exasperation of the crisis, musically resolved in particular expressive techniques (accentuated rhythm, syncopation, instrumental effects, various ways of striking the tambourine, cries, rhythmic laments); and control of the crisis, reflected above all in the ostinato of the isometric rhythm. (Carpitella, 2005: 299) There is an ambivalence in key between major and minor, which De Giorgi mentions in relation to the playing of violinist Luigi Stifani and his brother Pantaleo, for whom ‘lamivalenza maggiore-minore é impor-tante nella scelta del brano in grado di attivare il ciclo coreutico ed é in relazione con il temperamento dell’inferma’ (De Giorgi, 1999: 96) ‘the major-minor ambiguity is important in the choice of the piece able to activate the choreutic cycle and is in relation to the temperament of the ill woman’. For the musicians, the variations in the ambiguous nature of the music are important for discovering which particular melodic and harmonic structure and aesthetic is most pleasing for the particular tarantata, thus allowing the music to stimulate or excite (scazzicare) the ill person to move in response. This finding of a particular type of music which relates to the temperament of the farantata was observed as a key feature in the historical records in Chapter Two.

The use of an ostinato bass in the pizzica tarantata music is significant in the dance, leading to a sympathetic correspondence of movements and music. The ostinato, or basso ostinato (sustained ground bass) in musical melodic terms is ‘a base that is repeated intact while the melody above it changes’ (Grout, 1981: 294), which is a particular feature of classical Baroque music. Interestingly, this creates an ambiguity within the music that Grout claims is reflected in the contradiction and tension of ideas within the Baroque itself: Baroque music shows conflict and tension between centrifugal forces of freedom of expression and the centripetal forces of discipline and order in a musical composition. (ibid.: 299) The ostinato or repeated bass line acts as an anchor, or foundation, for the melodies that are played above it. In pizzica music, this leads to the tension referred to in the Introduction between the melody which is often freer in tempo, and the regularity or constraint of the repeated rhythmic bass.

When translated into the movements of the dance, this may be seen as allowing the freedom of expression and release of the tarantata within the dance, which is also ‘grounded’ or supported by the rhythmic bass which helps to both regulate the dancer’s heart-beat, encourage her to sustain the movements, and provide a solid bass to prevent her from ‘bursting out’ in a completely uncontrolled manner. So it gives a form and structure to the freedom of the ritual, or lends ‘a figure to the formless, to repeat De Martino (De Martino, 2005: 36), and as noted above by Carpitella.

Even though there is a release and expressivity through the movements, the feet in particular move in the regular rhythm given by the tamburello as well as guitar, if one is used, thus helping to give a sense of containment to the tarantata in her movements through the rhythmic contact with the ground. In this way, rather than an ambiguity, I would suggest this is a ‘complementarity’: a unity of opposites within the structure of the music and dance, allowing for freedom within the confines of the rhythm, as much as the movements are also contained by the space of the ronda in order to protect and focus the tarantata during the ritual. As Bruce Kapferer notes in relation to the use of music in rituals: The music envelops the patient and, through the organized rhythm of its sound, can enter into a direct, and internally experienced, relation with the body. It is in the body that music is heard, and it is with the body that the dynamic movement of the music may be expressed. (Kapferer, 1991: 259) Furthermore, the repeated rhythm of the ostinato bass can enable the tarantata to continue and sustain the actions of the dance over a long period of time. The shift from the irregular pulse noted in the illness stage, which involves palpitations and difficulty in breathing, to adjusting the pulse to the regular and fast beat of the zamburello rhythm, likewise operates as a means of the ‘throwing off’ the state of inertia which is the illness, leading to the efficacious state of movements in the dance. The descriptions and filmic evidence of the ritual demonstrate the continuous movements carried out by the ¢arantata, whether in skipping or running either on the spot or in circles, which continues over a long period of time. There can be a variation in the figures and movements, but the rhythm of the feet is always in relation to the beat of the tamburello. It is this act of endurance which is a particular feature of tarantism, with the extended periods of physical exertion through the dance. The regular beat assists in the ability of the tavantata to continue the movements over a long time, as is also seen in many kinds of ritualistic and popular musical forms, which similarly allow for a regular, fast, rhythmic pulse to encourage sustained dancing. The regular beat leads to a change and regularising of the systems and processes in the body, such as a rapid pulse and breathing pattern, the raising of endorphins through the action of the movements, and an increased body temperature often leading to sweating. The process of sweating was suggested by some of the physicians noted in Chapter Two as being a possible reason for the dance acting as a cure, in that it sweats the poison out of the body, and the use of sweating as a means of purging toxins from the body is one that is used in a range of cultural practices.

Extended periods of running or fast movement have been used in some approaches to performer training for a variety of reasons, which are useful to examine in relation to tarantism and the idea of scazzicare. One of the most well-known examples of this is the practice of night running used in the training of the theatre company Gardzienice, based in rural Poland, and founded and directed by Wiordzimierz Staniewski. One of the key features of Gardzienice’s work is that of ‘musicality’: Staniewski defines the term musicality as a specific feeling for music which corresponds with the Pythagorean concept of the harmonia mundi: ‘I am utterly convinced that the earth is musical, that it has musicality and that every part of nature can be musical’ (Staniewski 1993: 11). He regards musicality as the vital source for his theatre.

The actors are not attempting to imitate the sounds of nature but finding their own organic rhythmic sounds and gestures which are rehearsed repetitively with the precise momentum of a musical phrase. (Hodge, 2000: 231-2) The use of repetition in various forms during training is a key feature of Gardzienice’s work, which includes the learning and performance of songs from different traditions, and music and singing are often a mainstay of their performances. The notion of musicality is related to that of mutuality, which is the deep connection and interaction between the performers, a sense of ‘being in tune’ with each other. Musicality and mutuality are both at the heart of the night running exercise. The group of performers is led by one person who establishes a clear rhythm. The others sense this rhythm and run closely packed around the leader, often through complete darkness. See Zarrilli (1998) on kalaripayattu as an example. Remorse, Transformation, and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited 189 in the forest. The sound of their breathing becomes more important, and both the rhythms of the breath and the stamping of the feet play a counterpoint to the regular ostinato running rhythm created by the leader, the process of which can continue for an hour (ibid.: 236).

Staniewski speaks of the importance of the mutual rhythm found during the process, as well as mentioning the idea of ostinato in relation to the regular and repetitive running rhythms: "When you run through the night, when you run together with other people, you search for rhythms, for a common rhythm, for rhythm as dialogue, rhythms in which you look for the relationship with the person who is next to you, on your right side, on your left side, ahead or behind you. When you run, you search for certain dynamics which occur through repetition, through the continuity of the breath, through continuous rhythms, as in ostinato in music, and you feel your inner self is growing, extending somehow." (Staniewski 1993: 24, in ibid.: 236)

The notion of both musicality and mutuality may be applied to the relationship between the musicians and tarantata within tarantism, as it is the close interrelationship between the music and dance which allows for the process of healing in the ritual. The musicians need to align themselves to the needs of the dancer, and then she in turn will feel for and respond to the rhythms and mood established by the musicians to allow for a psychophysical transformation within the embodied action of the dancing.

Alison Hodge, who has worked closely with Gardzienice, describes night running as an "existential" activity (ibid.: 237), which develops the perception and heightened awareness of the processes of the bodymind through the action of the running, as described by Staniewski: "The gate of your perception is open, and in this way you can deal with many things around you. [...] Physiologically you could explain this by saying that your senses are reacting more sharply, that your blood is circulating more strongly." (Staniewski 1993: 25, in ibid.: 237)

The psychophysical shifts happen through the embodiment and experience of the action of the running, which are both provoked and sustained by the rhythm of the stamping of the feet and the breath. Within the ritual of tarantism, the sense of transformation and efficacy is produced by the 190 CHAPTER THREE provocation or urging of the music to wake up the body to the action of the movements of the dance; likewise, the arantata is aided in sustaining the dance over a long period of time by the regular rhythms of the music. The scazzicare process of the music and sometimes colour acts as a stimulus to activate both body and inner feeling, and it is through the resultant experience of continuous movements within the dance that the sense of well-being is reached. It is the action of the movements, supported by the music, that creates the shift in the bodymind, as well as the inner feelings that are stirred by the music, which assists in the urging of the body to begin and continue the dance. This can be seen as a two-way process or continuum between inner and outer, or between feeling and body, where these are in constant relationship or mutuality with each other. Theatre practitioner and academic Dorinda Hulton discusses a similar process in working with actors, exploring whether an emotion will lead to stimulating a physical response of a gesture or movement, or if the movement will provoke an emotional response, or in fact whether it is a continuum between the two. Hulton, who also uses repetition and running as part of her work (Hulton, 1998: 27), has found the writing of William James to be important in this respect. James' article "What is an Emotion?" (1884) examines the way in which emotions are produced by embodied action:

Our natural way of thinking about these standard emotions [e.g., anger, fear, rapture, lust] is that the mental perception of some fact excites the mental affection called the emotion, and that this latter state of mind gives rise to the bodily expression. My thesis on the contrary is that the bodily changes follow directly the PERCEPTION of the exciting fact, and that our feeling of the same changes as they occur is the emotion. Common sense says, we lose our fortune, we are sorry and weep; we meet a bear, are frightened and run; we are insulted by a rival, are angry and strike. The hypothesis here to be defended says that this order of sequence is incorrect, that the one mental state is not immediately induced by the other, that the bodily manifestations must first be interposed between, and that the more rational statement is that we feel sorry because we cry, angry because we strike, afraid because we are sorry, angry, or fearful, as the case may be. Without the bodily states following on the perception, the latter would be purely cognitive in form, pale, colourless, destitute of emotional warmth. (James, 1884: 7)

In this way, the initial reaction to an event results in a physical response, and it is the changes in the body which occur that lead to the resultant emotional state. These are usually experienced together, so there is no sense of separation between the physical and psychological reactions and states. Even though James' work may now be seen as somewhat dated, the significance of what he is suggesting has been of influence within actor training® in terms of approaching the relationship between inner and outer, or physical and emotional arousal and response. In tarantism, the transformation and efficacy, the feeling of well-being, occurs through the physical actions of the dance, which are in turn provoked by (scazzicare) the responses to the music, which is being played as a result of the need of the tarantata to be healed as a response of the psychophysical state of illness and inertia that has been established through the 'bite'.

Dorinda Hulton has also been influenced by the work of the late theatre practitioner Joseph Chaikin, who likewise explored the connection between inner and outer in his exercises with actors, and much of his work is about the processes of change and transformation within the psychophysical being. As an example, within his sound and movement exercise, he points out that sometimes it is not always clear for the actor whether the impulse is coming from internal or external sources, however, as Hulton points out, 'within the process of change and transformation, there is essentially a flow or dialogue between the two. "Don't let anyone tell you to go from the inside out — or the outside in. It's a circle" ([Chaikin in] Blumentahl 1981: 56)' (Hulton, 2000: 160-1). This is also connected to the two-way 6 Peter Hulton, the editor of Theatre Papers, explains why this article had an influence on actor training, particularly in New York as part of the avant-garde movement in theatre: “The article would have been current in New York theatre training circles in the 1960s and 1970s. Emotion arising from a physical source was clearly of interest to all the physical work coming out of Europe and moving across to the States. It would have been current to the Open Theatre [run by Joseph Chaikin] and others. One of the problems the then avant-garde in the States had to contend with was how to respond to the arrival of surrealist texts from France and elsewhere which did not rely on a psychological interpretation of behaviour. Impulses for action would come, they thought, more from the body than the mind — hence the interest in this article’ (P. Hulton, 2009: email correspondence). 192

CHAPTER THREE process and connection between body and mind, and it is through this that there is a constant sense of ‘emergence’: It is equally clear, however, when the actor allows a particular kind of shifting balance, or dialogue, between body and mind, in listening to and watching for the emerging form, the emerging image, and is able, moment to moment, to come into alignment with it. In such a case, there is a perceptible quality of ‘presence, moment to moment within the process of change and transformation. (ibid.: 161) The idea of ‘presence’ is connected to the present moment emergence of a psychophysical being engaged in the particular action and image that have arisen through the outer and inner impulses and associations. As Hulton explains, presence is ‘the quality of engagement between subject and object’ (Hulton, 1998: 27).

The notion of the emergence of both bodymind and ‘self, as well as performance, in each moment, was discussed in Chapter One in relation to the ideas of presence and embodiment. If this is applied to the process of transformation within tarantism, this may be seen as an emergence in the moment of the lived body of the savantata, engaged with both the external stimulus of the music and colours, as well as the figure and image of the taranta and St Paul which become internalised and provoke (scazzicare) the movements of the dance and the inner images and associations with the embodied history of the ritual. This can lead to the sense of transformation and efficacy through the engagement of and identification with both the movements of the dance and the image of the spider and the saint. Thus the sarantata embodies and makes present the spider through her movements, in this sense being ‘possessed’ by the saranta, ‘becoming’ it and making the symbol real through the actions of the dance and her engagement with the image, belief and embodied history.

The types of movements themselves can also lead to a transformation in the state of being, and to certain experiences caused by shifts in the bodymind. Movements such as the rapid shaking of the head from side to side, and fast spinning on the spot, can lead to feelings of giddiness, faintness, nausea, and also euphoria. The movements of spinning or turning are used in ritualistic dance practices such as the well-known example of those performed by the dervishes to establish a sense of connection with the divine, but often in these practices, as also in the execution of fast pirouettes by ballet dancers, the process of ‘spotting’ is used to prevent the dancer from becoming dizzy. However, in tarantism, it appears that the purpose of the spinning and shaking of the head is to establish a euphoric sense of giddiness, which results in falling to the ground as a stage within the ritual process. In this sense, it is part of a known structure, and the movements are thus within a framework that creates a form for the tarantata, a sense of order or control within the release and freedom of the movements. This was noted earlier in relation to both the music and dance embodying the tension between control and freedom, and Chaikin also uses this idea in his description of the actor's process in responding to inner and outer impulses: "The 'act' is one of balancing between control and surrender" (Chaikin, 1991: 10).

The tarantata may be giving herself up in surrender through the movements, however this is still contained within the culturally determined form of the ritual, through the playing of the musicians, the support of those around her, and the framing of the contained space of the ronda. This also recalls the play between order and chaos which was referred to in the Introduction as being perceived as a feature of the Greek cultural influence in Salento, and in the sound and structure of the tamburello itself. This notion of control has to be understood as a way to support and encourage the freedom, not as a means to exert a dominant power over and manipulation of the tarantata.

When I showed Carpitella's film of Maria of Nardo's ritual to a British dancer, her response was to comment on the way in which she saw the male musicians 'controlling' Maria, as she perceived this in her observation, in a negative sense. This was also emphasised by the way in which Maria was the focal point for a crowd of observers watching her dance. This may be an understandable response to seeing the film without a knowledge of the actual cultural process of what was happening. However, rather than 'controlling' in a puppet-like sense, the musicians can perhaps be seen to be guiding and framing the movements and experience.

Although the dervish dancers do not use the same process of spotting that ballet dancers do, they do attempt to establish a firm focal base as they turn in order to not become dizzy.

In Chapter One, I suggested that the complete engagement and absorption with the action of a performance or any activity in the spatial-temporal moment can lead to an experience of 'forgetting of the self' where the action seems to happen without 'me' doing it, or that the music is playing without a conscious sense of the musician playing it, and the dance is dancing without a dancer 'performing' it. This sense of forgetting the self occurs in the act of 'being with' an activity, being fully engaged and absorbed at a psychophysical level in the experience of the action in the moment. I proposed that this can be a way of explaining what might be called a 'trance' state, particularly by performers who sometimes express this kind of dissolution between subject and object, where the 'living through, or perezhivanie to repeat Stanislavsky's term for 'experiencing, means that the sense of a separate 'I' is forgotten in the present moment absorption with the action. Although clearly different in intention and process, Maria of Nardo expressed a similar type of experience after she had declared her recovery from the ritual process, when the doctor from De Martino's research team asked her some questions about her experience. From the replies he obtained, he was able to deduce that her notion of time had remained suspended from the previous day, when the exorcism had begun (she thought it was Thursday, when it was actually Friday). She knew that she had danced, but did not remember anything of what had taken place during the dance. Among other things, she did not recall that the team members were present for her choreutic performances, and indeed, she believed that they had entered the hovel for the first time that very moment. (De Martino, 2005: 43)

This indicates the experience of the 'forgetting of the self and losing awareness of the environmental surroundings, through surrendering and' Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited 195 being completely absorbed in the ritual process.' This was in part conditioned through a religious belief, and Maria explained that at the point of the cure, she heard the voice of St Paul telling her in dialect that he was giving her grace. De Giorgi mentions that there have been examples noted in other cases where during the periods of rest or being immobile, some of the '¢avantate' would have an intimate conversation with St Paul (De Giorgi, 1999: 93).

There can be comparisons made between this and the experiences of mystics in a state of divine union, however this has been written about extensively elsewhere, and is not the purpose of this study. Whilst not denying the religious factor has an important impact on the overall experience, it is the question of how the inner bodymind state in correlation with the outer socio-cultural circumstances creates the sense of presence within the embodiment of the action in the particular moment. The written, oral and visual records indicate a transformation of the self which happens through the action of the dance in response to the music, in a specific spatial-temporal location. It is this process of liveness in the dancing, of the being and being-seen, that leads to the self-declared efficacy of the ritual experience.

De Martino was aware that he was writing about a ritual that was in decline, as fewer people were openly becoming tarantati. Reasons for this included the increasing emphasis on psychiatric medicine, referred to in Chapter Two, heightening the feeling of shame connected to tarantism. Likewise, in post-war Italy the emphasis was on the modernisation and industrialisation of the country, so again tarantism was seen as being of the 'primitive past' and no longer relevant to modern Italy, and this led to a greater sense of disapproval of those who undertook the ritual. Some Salentines also said that the use of pesticides had resulted in the disappearance of tarantulas, 8 One of Liidtke's informants described a similar experience from his illness in 1967, where he climbed onto the statue of St Paul in Galatina, but had no recollection of how he managed this, or any awareness of the people surrounding him (Litdtke, 2009: 83). 196 CHAPTER THREE so this meant that the tavanta was no longer part of the landscape to bite those who suffered from tarantism (Liidtke, 2009: 1). Furthermore, conditions began to change in Italy, seen most particularly in relation to the position of women, as was discussed in Chapter One. With a greater sense of freedom and personal expression emerging over the past thirty years, along with some improvements in the socio-economic conditions, there is maybe less need to undertake the process of a ritual which was seen to be of a ‘pagan’ past. There are also now other avenues available for relieving the pressures of everyday life. In Salento today, there are countless festivals and performances of pizzica music and dance where people certainly appear to experience a process of release, though this time in the name of pleasure rather than suffering. It is this development, along with a reinforcing of local identity not only through the culture but also the long and complex history of tarantism, of which De Martino plays such an important part, which will be the focus of the next chapter.

CHAPTER FOUR
Revivals, Roots and Raves: the Performance of Pigzica in Contemporary Salento
10 August 2001

I arrived at the place in Parabita where we were to begin the workshops in pizzica music and dance. It was my second full day in Salento, and the sun was scorching. I was looking forward to learning to dance the pizzica pizzica with Ada Metafune. As we came to the entrance of the building, I saw a young man with blond hair pull up on a motorcycle. I wondered what he was doing here, and what connection he had with the workshop. We went into the space where we were to work, and as the musicians got ready to play, I saw the young man go to pick up a tamburello, and then as the music started, began to play the instrument with such passion and engagement that he seemed to express his whole life through it. I was astonished at the transformation in him, and at the skill and energy in his playing.

I had tended to associate the tambourine as being a ‘girl's instrument', so seeing a man play it so passionately made me both more intrigued about the place in which I had found myself, and also more aware of my own ignorance. As we began working with Ada, she taught us some of the basic steps of the dance. We then stood in a circle, and she invited us in to the centre one at a time to dance with her. As we entered the circle, she gave each of us a ribbon of a colour which she had chosen for us. We tied the ribbon round our wrist, forehead or neck, and danced with her for a time, before stepping back to the edge of the circle with the others. As Ada invited me to enter the space of the ronda with her, the pulsing music of the pizzica and Ada's encouraging quality led me almost instantly to drop the inhibitions and nervousness I was feeling, and move towards her in the centre of the circle. She gave me a pink ribbon, which I tied on my wrist, and we danced together, turning in circles, lifting and moving our skirts in flowing shapes, skipping to the rhythm, until I sensed the urge to move back from the centre to the edge, and joined in the clapping to the music with the others. I felt like some form of initiation had taken place, but was not really sure what this meant. A few days later, I went with some of those on the workshop to a festival of pizzica music. Alla Bua, the same music group that played when we danced with Ada, were performing a set in a hot evening. We walked amongst stalls full of food and drink, as well as those selling ‘ethnic’ jewelry and knick-knacks from Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. I caught the occasional smell of cannabis in the air, reminding me of a Southern Italian version of Glastonbury, but from the late 1980s to early 1990s, before it became as large and commercial as it is now.

When Alla Bua started playing on stage, a crowd gathered in front of the platform, some dancing pizzica pizzica. At one point, a young girl dressed in a skirt and with long hair got up on to the stage. She began to dance slowly, turning from side to side, with her arms flowing around her, and a glazed look in her eyes. I didn’t know who she was, or if she was part of the group and performance. It seemed at times that some of the musicians were turning towards her to play for her. After the concert, Giuseppe Memmi, the leader of Alla Bua at the time, explained that they felt she was ill, so they were playing for her.

Throughout these days and those that followed in the workshop and at the festivals, I was struck by the wealth of the history and culture of Salento, the enjoyment I experienced in the Revivals, Roots and Raves, in the music and dance of the pizzica, and my own naivety in the kinds of initial assumptions I had made. These were a few of my first moments of encounter with Salento and the pizzica, having only previously researched the history and practice of tarantism.

I found myself wondering how this contemporary use of the music and dance was related to the centuries of the culture-specific healing ritual, and in what ways the festivals and commercialization of the music and symbols of tarantism that I saw around me related to the identity of being Salentine for the younger generation.

The experience of working with Ada and Alla Bua, as well as the others who were leading the workshop and giving an insight into the history and culture of Salento, had made a deep impression on me, and I had a hint of the therapeutic potential of the music and dance. But what is the place for pizzica in a spatial-temporal location where tourism is becoming a mainstay of the economy, and tarantism is used as a means for local identity and global marketing, bringing a combination of curious visitors and numerous researchers to find a history in the present revival of a lost world?

How has the re-energizing of the cultural forms and practices led to heated debates on issues of authenticity, ownership, and the ‘contaminazione of pizzica? What new forms of music and events have emerged from this re-working of ‘traditional’ forms into those which have relevance in the third millennium? Is there still a connection to the religious context and therapeutic potential inherent within tarantism? If Chapter Two posed the question, ‘Whose history is it?, this chapter may well ask: “Whose present is it?) as similar issues of multiple voices and viewpoints, appropriations and definitions are found in examining aspects of the ‘revival’ and the ways in which past and present combine to form the lived experience in the people and culture of the serra of Salento. 

200 CHAPTER FOUR Revival/reinvention/restoration

The work of Eric Hobsbawm has been fundamental in approaching the idea of ‘neo-traditions,’ examining the debate between authenticity and invention in traditions that lay claim to a historical lineage. He discusses the use of ancient materials to construct invented traditions of a novel type for quite novel purposes. A large store of such material is accumulated in the past of any society, and an elaborate language of symbolic practice and communication is always available. Sometimes new traditions could be readily grafted on old ones, sometimes they could be devised by borrowing from well-supplied warehouses of official ritual, symbolism and moral exhortation. (Hobsbawm, 2000: 6)

Hobsbawm suggests that symbols from the past, as well as music and dance, can be used as a means to create cohesion within a community, and to strengthen the sense of regional or ethnic identity. The direct association with a heritage and history can offer a way to authenticate the neo-tradition, and to establish the feeling of ‘belonging’ within a particular group:

For all invented traditions, so far as possible, use history as a legitimator of action and cement of group cohesion. Frequently it becomes the actual symbol of study. [...] [Modern nations and all their impedimenta generally claim to be the opposite of novel, namely rooted in the remotest antiquity, and the opposite of constructed. (ibid.: 12, 14)

Chapter Two noted the use of myths to create a sense of panhellenic identity in the ancient Greek world, with both symbols and the integrated culture of mousiké acting as ‘a vital medium through which societies created and related to their past’ (Murray and Wilson, 2004: 2). Music and dance in particular can be used in this way due to their ‘predominantly somatic modes of transmission’ so that the performance of these forms becomes the manifestation of memory which is, to repeat Buckland, ‘publicly enacted, demonstrating the ethereality of human existence and the continuity of human experience, as successive generations re-present dancing’ (Buckland, 2001: 1). This also highlights the conflicts between continuity and fixity in the idea of tradition.

Felicia Hughes-Freeland points out that tradition is a process, not a thing. [...] Indeed, tradition should not necessarily be understood as referring to customs that are authentic, indigenous, and long established, although there may be particular instances, but rather as an ideology that attributes precedents to practices that may have recently been revived, recast, or reinvented, even if the label or contexts refer back to a previous practice. (Hughes-Freeland, 2006: 55)

In their work on the ethnomusicology of ‘popular’ and ‘traditional’ music in relation to place and identity, Connell and Gibson similarly suggest that tradition should not be considered as something that is fixed, but rather as a process that is in change, and also that the commodification of the idea of ‘traditional’ attempts to fix it as an object, rather than acknowledging its fluid nature: The moment of commodification — as music is transformed from cultural expression to product, as traditions are usurped by change — is crucial. Binary relations established in considering such commodification constantly appear — between ‘tradition’ and ‘contemporary’ in folk revival, in ‘regional’ traditions and in various expressions of ‘roots’ in music. Unpacking fixity implies that we begin by examining more closely notions of ‘traditional’ music and commodification, as they establish the character of a particular form of authenticity. (Connell and Gibson, 2003: 19) I have suggested throughout this study that the body, performance, and site/place can be reconsidered as being a process rather than an object. In a similar sense, the notion of ‘tradition’ is not fixed, but in constant change in relation to shifts in the socio-cultural surroundings and developments with multiplicities of manifestations and approaches. However, within the neo-traditions, there can be a tendency to attempt to fix the tradition into an object for the sake of commercialization, giving it a marketable legitimacy with a clearly defined lineage and associations of culture, history, and place. Music and dance can become not just the objectified representation, but also the perceived embodiment of a culture and history, which relates to the local and regional emic and etic sense of identity:

It was once assumed that communities and individuals were recognizable through relatively stable identities — traditions, cultural traits, opinions, and practices that could be collected, mapped, and objectified. [...] More commonly, these ‘fixed’ identities were imposed as clichéd images of place and culture in tourist promotions, political rhetoric, and sensationalist media, essentialisms that had little resemblance to everyday, lived experience. (ibid.: 117)

Connell and Gibson, however, do point out that this view has since been challenged, and that more complex ways of understanding the construction of a fluid sense of identity in relation to cultural productions such as music are being examined:

The ways individuals, communities, regions, or nations see themselves involves engagement with a potential myriad options: ethnicity, religion, gender, occupational status, political beliefs, and so on. Music remains an important cultural sphere in which identities are affirmed, challenged, taken apart, and reconstructed. (ibid.: 117)

The revival of pizzica music and dance in Salento, with its reference to a historical past that includes the ritual of tarantism, exhibits this type of complexity in the shifts of both culture and identity. If the histories of tarantism presented in Chapter Two demonstrated the appropriations by medical practitioners, the Church, and philosophers, the revival shows appropriations of not only the history of tarantism and the music and dance of pizzica, but also the land and the people of Salento by the tourist industry, politicians, academia, and the ‘World’ music and dance stage, leading to conflicts within the very society that was seeking a unification through its indigenous culture.

Roots of revival

The last section of Chapter Three noted the gradual demise of the ritual of tarantism for a variety of reasons. The music and dance of pizzica were heard less and less in the terra of Salento, as during the 1950s and 1960s, other forms of music from outside the region became popular with young people, and new types of social events and practices began to take the place of those associated with the older generations. Violinist Roberto Raheli suggests that the elders also began to play less of the traditional forms of music due to its associations with the pre-industrial past, a time of poverty, and the sense of shame and suffering: In the sixties and seventies, the older Salentines abandoned our traditional music. Our traditional culture fled from itself. Those songs and its music had been completely associated with suffering and poverty; therefore, when — fortunately — there was less poverty, the songs associated with the past were rejected too. There was less poverty, but also less poetry, less suffering but also fewer songs, less music. (Raheli, 2005: 125)

The publication of De Martino's La terra del rimorso had raised interest in the ritual of tarantism, resulting in an increase of academics and tourists to the region. But it was not really until the 1970s, and then a more influential move in the late 1980s and 1990s, that pizzica was performed and used as a source of identity and pride in Salento in a new way.

Tracing the beginnings or roots of how this revival of pizzica occurred raises the same sorts of problems with ‘origins’ that were noted in Chapter Two in relation to history. It is not always possible to place a finger on the precise moment that something began, nor then to trace a clear pathway from that moment to the present. Instead, what becomes apparent are a series of ‘moments,’ many of which operate within conflicting ideologies across contested spaces, that together may create a picture of the ways in which the so-called zeo-tarantismo movement gathered momentum.

The picture offered here is inevitably conditioned and limited by my research and choice of aspects to include, so, to refer back to Lynn Maners in Chapter One, this is offered as an interpretation based on my reading and field work, which itself is a reflection of what I did, where I went, and with whom I spoke.

Ada Metafune said to me, with an ironic smile, that in Salento, everyone is an expert in pizzica: “Noi salentini siamo tutti esperti, diciamo “si, io so” (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [‘we Salentines are all experts, we say “Yes, I know”’]. I certainly found many strong and often conflicting opinions and determinations of ‘what actually happened; and who was responsible for instigating the revival. As is often the case, it was most likely a combination of factors and people, but with the problematic concerns of ownership, authenticity, and legitimacy as part of the equation, there is no single answer, but rather a multiplicity of ‘moments’ in a complex picture.

The first wave in the re-emergence or re-animation of pizzica occurred in the 1970s, particularly with the formation of the music group the Canzoniere Grecanico Salentino in 1975, which included Luigi Chiriatti and Daniele Durante. They ‘became Salento’ first folk revival group’ (De Giudice, 2005: 241), performing a range of local music and, according to their website, ‘producendo numerosi fascicoli di studi sul folklore pugliese ed organizzando la prima rassegna delle minoranze linguistiche pugliesi’ (<http://www.Canzonieregrecanico salentino.net/> accessed 22 March 2009) [‘producing numerous collections of studies on Apulian folklore and organising the first festival of Apulia’s linguistic minorities’].

Additionally, efforts were made to collect and record some of the traditional music and songs from the elders of Salento, however Liidtke points out that ‘[o]ften these endeavours met with resistance, as they evoked memories of a past tinged with suffering and anguish, often looked back on with embarrassment’ (Liidtke, 2009: 104-5). It was the next attempt at a revival during the 1980s and particularly in the 1990s that changed the playing of pizzica from one of shame (vergogna) to one of pride (orgoglio), identification, and enjoyment. It is at this point in the story that different strands and ‘moments’ begin to appear in a weaving together of phenomena, each with their own motivation and outcome, that led to the diversity of traditions and contested spaces that emerged through the revival process. In part, this occurred through the influence of both academics and practitioners, each examining and promoting the new view of pizzica from their particular lens of enquiry and practice.

One strand occurred around the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli where, in 1982, musicians, dancers, and academics took part in ‘il ritorno a San Rocco’, to promote the music and playing of the tamburello in particular (ibid.: 107-8). It was in part from this that Ada Metafune and Guiseppe Memmi with Alla Bua began their journey down the path to reviving and performing pizzica. Additionally, the group I Tamburellisti di Torrepaduli was founded in 1989 by performer and ethnomusicologist Pierpoalo De Giorgi and Amedeo De Rosa in order to research and perform the music. With the help of Paolo Pellegrino and Revivals, Roots and Raves 205 Antonio Anchora, they attempted to revive the songs in the Griko dialect of the Grecia Salentina region.

"The interest in groups playing the pizzica encountered a second, and more significant, wave in the early 1990s, which resulted in many more groups of musicians and dancers being created, and performing in concerts as well as recording CDs of the music. According to Del Giudice: It appears that part of the motivation behind this second phase revival was the increasing multiethnicity of Italian (and Salentine) society. Many began to examine their own ethnic identity vis-a-vis foreign ethnicities in their midst. They asked themselves, for instance, why Moroccans and Albanians did not readily relinquish their cultural identities, while Salentines did so easily? Reflection on their own traditions and the search for what identified them as Salentines helped bring the pizzica to the fore, and spawned some of this folk music revival's reconfiguration. (Del Giudice, 2005: 241)

Today, there is an increasingly large number of pizzica groups who play in concerts within and outside Apulia, and record CDs and DVDs. Pigzica entered the 'World Music" stage and record markets, moving the music from the local to the global, allowing for a visibility of the musicians beyond Salento leading to a sense of celebrity and economic benefit for those groups which have become successful. Some of the bands have toured internationally, gaining greater recognition around the world. Officina Zoé, one of the most renowned groups in Salento, and whose website states that they 'triggered off the revival of pizzica' (<www.officinazoe.com/eng/main_eng.html> accessed 3 May 2009), have toured not only throughout Europe but also America, and in the last few years, in Asia.

In this sense, "World music" is a relativist term depending on what part of the world you are situated. 206 CHAPTER FOUR (Korea and Japan)

They have also provided the music for two films made by Salentine film director Edoardo Winspeare, Sangue Vivo (2000) and Il Miracolo (2003). As well as the revival of ‘traditional’ forms of pizzica music, another manifestation which contributed to the resurgence of performance was through the re-working of pizzica into new types of music, whether through the rise in techno music, or fusion with other genres from different parts of the world through the New Age and World Music movements. Some of these new forms were created through embracing new technologies and types of performance event, for example when DJs at raves and in discos would mix pizzica with techno music, inventing ‘techno-pizziche (Del Giudice, 2005: 240).

The rave culture, with its emphasis on ‘letting go’ through prolonged dancing to music with a repetitive and heavy rhythmic beat, in many ways leant itself to the younger generation seeking a two-way, Janus-like movement both back to their roots, and forward into the new world that was happening around them. ‘The identification with tarantism as being an occasion for prolonged dancing and entering into a state of trance to a sustained rhythmic pattern, merged with the party and drug culture of the techno scene, and raves and parties on beaches began to take place along the Salentine coastland. Edoardo Winspeare told me of his being involved with organising two hundred such beach parties in the early 1990s (Winspeare, 2007: Interview), which he believes contributed to the boom of pizzica in Salento: ‘Penso che abbiamo contribuito a far explodere il fenomeno della pizzica’ (in Nacci, 2004: 32) [‘I think that we contributed to the explosion of the phenomenon of pizzica’].

He speaks of his motivation to hold the parties as being connected to his desire to move the pizzica away from the realm of the intellectual élite as he saw it, into the popular domain: ‘7arantismo was the dominion of the élite of the left. I don’t like when the left is élite. [...] I wanted to do something popular, and I started to be very populistic. We are all Salentini, we all dance pizzica’ (Winspeare, 2007: Interview). There was a shift not only from the sense of shame associated with tarantism to one of celebration and enjoyment, but also from a personal experience of efficacy, to one of a shared group experience connected through the music: Revivals, Roots and Raves 207 Now, in neo-tarantismo, everybody goes in trance. And they go in trance with the music. It’s the same as when they listen to rock music, but because we have here the tambourine, maybe there is a suggestion of the tarantata. (ibid.)

The use of the tamburello as the instrument of pizzica and tarantism, was absorbed into the rave culture to provide a sense of roots and identity for Salentines, bringing enough of a flavour of the past into the present to allow for the feeling of embodying the history of the land and culture into a very different performative approach and experience. Another new form of music that developed around the time of the early 1990s and was influential in the development of the sense of identity for young people in Salento, was a fusion of pizzica with reggae, rap and ragamuffin, most famously found in the songs of the Salentine group the Sud Sound System. Reggae, perhaps more than any other form, exemplifies the movement of music from the local to the trans-global, and a source and resource for creating not only new musical forms, but also as a shifting means of identification and political resistance in its travels and transforma- tions. Its roots in Jamaica were a fusion of forms such as ska and rocksteady, focusing on themes of political resistance, personal freedom, and the criminal world of the rude boys in Jamaica. The connection to the Rastafarian religion and culture, which migrated from Ethiopia to Jamaica, encouraged songs of resistance and rebellion, as well as black pride. As the music became more commercial, it was appropriated and transformed in different countries with redefined meanings. Reggae's stylistically and semantically 'open' musical form made it easy for local groups to adopt and transform it in their own styles.

The Sud Sound System incorporated reggae music into their own style, creating songs of local resistance and global inclusion. They perform all their songs in their local Salentine dialect, which is a source of personal and regional identity and resistance. Their song, "Le radici ca tieni" from their 2003 album "Lontano," reflects the desire to protect the land and identity of Salento, while embracing the past cultural and ethnic roots of the region and the new cultures and races that were becoming part of it.

Revivals, Roots and Raves 209 This song uses reggae music and local dialect to express the importance of roots, as well as openness towards other cultures and peoples. Salentines are "citizens of the world, but still have their origins in the different civilizations which have inhabited the land" (Messapians, Greeks, and Byzantines), referring to the present identification with the past cultural influences discussed in the Introduction. These worlds are united now with the migration of Jamaican music. The Salentine dialect is equated with Jamaican, and a rejection of the hegemony of Italian. However, the music itself is both rooted in and united with the history of Salento and pizzica, as the introduction and first verse are set to an adaptation of the melody from a version of "Lu rusciu de lu mare" ("The sound of the sea"), one of the most well-known traditional pizzica songs. This song tells of an impossible love between a king's daughter and a soldier in a time when Salento was torn apart by war between the Spanish and the Turks.

The first verse is initially sung by a young woman accompanied by a guitar and tambourine in the manner of a traditional pizzica song, before the reggae music begins, and the verse is repeated in this new style by the group. Thus, the music embodies past and present, a sense of history and identity of being Salentine, with the new global world of fusion and migration, of resistance and pride in the roots of both "self" and "other".

The Sud Sound System are now well-known internationally and have toured and performed throughout the world. However, they were also part of the roots of the revival of pizzica in the 1990s in several different contexts. Liidtke points out that when they first started, they did not want to be labelled as part of the neo-tarantism movement, due to the associations of tarantism as being primitive and shameful. However, with the success of the revival and interest in the zuovi tarantati, the group "have promoted this image for themselves, taking advantage of the new wave of interest in tarantism" (Liidtke, 2000: 298). They had been involved with performing in the raves organized by Winspeare in the early 1990s.

In discussing these raves and the beach parties, Winspeare uses a similar notion of embracing different cultures that is seen in Le radici ca tieni, saying that the feeling of these events was that: "We are all Mediterraneans, we are all Balkans, we are brothers with the Arabs, with the Jews" (Winspeare, 2007: Interview). However, despite Winspeare's stated desire to create a site for pizzica that was populist and moved away from the intellectual élite, it was just such an encounter between an intellectual from academia and the Sud Sound System that furthered the history of neo-tarantism.

The academic in question was the French sociologist and ethnologist Georges Lapassade. He had a particular interest in altered states of consciousness, trance, and rituals from around the world. In collaboration with Piero Fumarola, who has similar interests, they conducted studies and experiments of both tarantism and the new emergence of neo-tarantism in the 1990s, most particularly through the performances of the Sud Sound System and the rave parties. They investigated both the effects that the new forms of music had in establishing a state of trance, and also the ways in which the neo-tarantism movement created a sense of collective identity for the younger generation of Salentines. Fumarola, ‘a pizzica pizzica e la transe del tarantismo sono la risorsa simbolica pit accattivante’ (Fumarola, 2004: 162), believed that the symbols created a sense of local identity. Lapassade highlighted the Sud Sound System as an example of the neo-tarantati, and he and Fumarola conducted experiments in technopizzica and the ‘contaminazi- one della pizzica con il reggae’ (Nacci, 2004: 47). Fumarola became interested in the ‘transe metropolitane’ (ibid.: 46), removing the trance state of tarantism from its historical roots and the countryside into the city, creating a new 'metropolitan trance.' This approach influenced the development of mergings of form and practice, which have continued to occur throughout the spatial-temporal site of Salento.

Lapassade's somewhat reductionist view of both tarantism and neo-tarantism has been criticized. He connected the historical origins to the Greek Corybantic cult and likened neo-tarantism to a range of rituals involving trance around the world. Despite this, he is still regarded with great respect in Salento. Following his death in 2008, publications and conferences are being planned on his work, organized by his former collaborator, Piero Fumarola.

The increasing number of academic researchers studying both the ritual of tarantism and the new world of neo-tarantism impacted the determination and definition of the history and culture, promoting further interest and visits by researchers. Researchers from various disciplines, such as anthropology, cultural studies, history, and performance studies, have played a direct part in the shifting nature of the revival.

Luisa Del Giudice, a Visiting Assistant Professor of Italian Folklore in UCLA from 1995 to 2001, furthered the study of Italian folklore traditions and gave a wider audience to the performance of pizzica music and dance. She began her research on pizzica and Salento in the mid-1990s, collaborating with Luigi Chiriatti and Roberto Raheli. To make the music more accessible, she recorded and translated some songs and helped organize festivals and conferences on the music, including 'Performing Ecstasies: Music, Dance and Ritual in the Mediterranean' in Los Angeles in 2000. The proceedings from this event were published in 2005, with a chapter on pizzica in contemporary Salento by Karen Liidtke, who stated that the 'origins of the term "neo-tarantism" remain, to my knowledge, unclear' (Liidtke, 2005: 37), but that it was suggested to her that the term might have been created by Lapassade. However, in an Editor's Note in her own chapter "The Folk Music Revival and the Culture of Tarantismo in the Salento," Del Giudice affirms in relation to the term "neo-tarantism": "Though not a perfect term because it is one which soon becomes dated, I coined this term in 1996 to refer, in conversation and in interviews, to the folk revival movement which had as its point of reference historic tarantismo. I note with the passing of the years it has become a term with a certain currency." (Del Giudice, 2005: 219)

In her 2009 book Dances with Spiders, Liidtke still states that the origins of the term are not clear, but cites Del Giudice's comment on her own invention of the word, as well as repeating that some people say it was actually Lapassade, and adding sociologist Anna Nacci into the equation as a possible source (Nacci wrote two books on neo-tarantism in 2001 and 2004). (Liidtke, 2009: 23-4). In this way, the term "neo-tarantism" is itself a site of debate on origins and authorship between the academics who are researching a small geographical area with a rich complexity of cultural manifestations.

In whatever way the term first came into being, it is now being used as a means of identification by some Salentines who call themselves "nuovi tarantati." Del Giudice explains that the term is associated with the "physiological urge to dance... That is, when the pizzica is played, those who are tarantati must dance (or vice versa, those who must dance may be identified as tarantati)." (Del Giudice, 2005: 262). This creates a distance from many of the culture-specific features of the historical ritual of tarantism while retaining, or reframing, the factor of the scazzicare, the response to the stimulation of the music, of being moved and carried away through the process, as discussed in Chapter Three.

The interest in Salento generated by academics and practitioners during the 1990s have led to a shift in the local and global perceptions of tarantism and pizzica, resulting in an increased number of visitors to the region, some of whom come for tourism, to enjoy the scenery, beaches, and the culture, and others to take part in the growing number of workshops, conferences, and events surrounding not just pizzica and tarantism, but also the history and culture of Salento. Pizzica has been used as a symbol and commodity not only by practitioners, but also by the tourist industry to attract greater income into the region, and by politicians who use the music as part of their campaigns, recognizing the importance that a cultural performance form can have on influencing voters. (Liidtke, 2005: 27).

Special festivals, such as the Notte della Taranta which will be discussed later in this chapter, have been created as a means to promote both local music, and global links with the "World Music" scene, and other local festivals, both new and old, have also targeted a wider audience than those of the particular town in which they take place. This mixture of forms of music and dance, of the "traditional" and the new, of a search for history and the contemporary, have resulted in some major schisms within Salento itself, most particularly in relation to the debate between the sense of "authenticity" and "contamination." Walter Wiora, writing in the Journal of the International Folk Council in 1949, recounts a dispute that took place 100 years earlier, surrounding the publication of Wilhelm von Zuccalmaglio's collection of German folk songs. Ludwig Erk claimed in 1848 that the songs were not genuine, but were invented or 'fashioned' (Wiora, 1949: 14) by von Zuccalmaglio. Romantic composer Johannes Brahms disagreed and incorporated songs from the collection into his own music, suggesting that it was the melodies in Erk's collections that were not 'authentic' (ibid.: 14).

In Chapter Four, Wiora discusses the notion of 'authenticity' and the dispute between a scholar and a practitioner regarding what each might consider to be musically 'authentic' for their own purposes. Wiora proposes two categorizations: Kategorie (category) and Wertidee (inspiring ideal). He suggests that scholars are interested in the 'authentic' folk song as a fixed object, while practitioners or artists consider folk music as an inspiring ideal, and only what realizes this ideal deserves the honor of being classed as a folk song (ibid.: 15).

Wiora compares this distinction to the phenomenological terms 'Kérper' and 'Lieb', or body as object, and the lived or living body in the world. He states that the inspiring ideal of the Wertidee is as important as the Kategorie in performing the 'true folk song' and that the history of the folk song revival, which includes a romanticized view of 'truth' and ideal, needs to be appreciated as much as the 'drier' sociological scholarship.

Wiora sets up an inherent dualism between 'authentic' and 'inauthentic' as absolute categories, as well as a division between a scholarly approach to folk music, in contrast to that of composers and performers. This notion of authenticity became important during the folk music revival of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, but took on a different connotation during the age of modernity. Erik Cohen points out that "Authenticity" is an eminently modern value [...] whose emergence is closely related to the impact of modernity upon the unity of social existence" (Cohen, 1988: 372). He suggests that through the periods of modernism and postmodernism, institutions and social constructs have lost their meaning, so people turn back to themselves and their roots to find this meaning: "Modern man is thus seen, from the perspective of a contemporary existential philosophical anthropology, as a being in quest of authenticity" (ibid.: 373).

Cohen, in writing on tourism and questioning the idea of 'staged authenticity' and commoditisation, suggests that a motivation for such a tourist experience is seeking the authentic in the 'other' and looking for something that is not part of the 'modern' world: "Recreational tourists, whose concern with authenticity is relatively low, may well accept even a substantially staged product and experience as 'authentic.' This would not be necessarily because they have been misled by the staging, but because even the faintest vestige of, or resemblance to what experts would consider an 'authentic' trait of the product, may suffice for them to play the make-believe game of having an 'authentic' experience" (ibid.: 379).

When questioning the revival and performances of pizzica music and dance in contemporary Salento, these issues are all significant. There can certainly be a tension between what the 'authorities' may decide and define as being authentic, and the types of performances that occur. However, if performance is understood to be process rather than product, then the idea of 'authenticity' is itself a construct. Cohen suggests that authenticity is "not a primitive given, but negotiable" (ibid.: 379) and Buckland, writing in relation to forms of traditional dance and folk culture and rituals, states that authenticity is "more often than not a speculation" (Buckland, 2001: 1).

In this way, as with the previous discussion of 'tradition,' it is the point where 'authenticity' itself is commoditised and marketed into a fixed object that creates the conflict between this and the process of change and fluidity, which is the experience of those who are engaged in the playing and dancing of the forms. This raises the question that has been prevalent throughout this book concerning the problem of origins and an evolutionary approach to forms of music and dance, framed through the chicken and egg dilemma. Is it possible to say at what point in its history and development a piece of music or choreography can be fixed into something that is labelled as 'authentic,' or even at what point it becomes 'inauthentic'?

If traditions and cultures are seen as process rather than object, then the naturally fluid and porous manner in which they develop and encompass different forms which they encounter, and shift in response to them, questions the notion of these traditions as being either authentic or inauthentic. Connell and Gibson point out, "there is, therefore, no particular moment at which any culture somehow becomes inauthentic, in its incorporation of external elements, since society was and is always in flux" (Connell and Gibson, 2003: 27). In discussing the notion of authenticity in relation to traditional music, they go on to state: "Authenticity remains an intangible concept. Essentialist perspectives construct authenticity in relation to concepts such as 'spontaneity' ('live'), 'grassroots' and 'of the people', in opposition to their antithesis: 'manipulation; 'standardisation, 'mass' and 'commercial'". Authenticity in its strictest sense, applied to museum objects, entails a process where historical artifacts are verified as having originated from particular places and being genuinely what they are claimed to be. However, in terms of more fluid and ephemeral aspects of culture, such as music, it is impossible to measure authenticity against any given scientific criteria. Discussions of musical authenticity imply a different use of the term, constituting interpretations of the validity of music from particular contexts and in certain modes of consumption. What is "authentic" is socially constructed in various ways. If authenticity is socially constructed, then it is concerned with the views of those voices who are defining what is authentic and what is inauthentic: it is their own constructed and often disputed version of authenticity, as seen in both Wiora's example of the disagreement between Ludwig Erk and Brahms, as well as in the revival of pizzica music and dance in Salento.

Revivals, Roots, and Raves

The magazine guide to events happening within the region, Qui Salento, discussed a CD entitled Tavantavirus in July 2007, which was sold optionally with copies of the magazine. They described the CD as being "a disc of transition, from the ancient to the modern, from the 'old' to the new, it's a representation of the Southern spirit through the means of 'technology', it is a natural 'contamination' of the old atmospheres with new technologies, new desires, new dances" (Qui Salento, 1-18 July 2007: 75). This description highlights both the importance of the connection between the old and the new, and particularly between the older generation and the younger, as well as using the word 'contaminazione' to explain the mixing of styles of ancient and modern. This term is often used to label such kinds of music, but not necessarily in a 'negative' way. It describes the process of what might be otherwise termed 'mixing' or a 'fusion' of forms, rather than seeing it as a problematic contamination by one form on another (see Nacci's quotation above regarding the 'contaminazione' of reggae and pizzica).

However, there are also those within Salento who do express their concern at such a process which may be seen to threaten the 'authenticity' or 'purity' of the music and dance through the introduction of other or 'foreign' elements, as well as the appropriation of traditional forms and symbols for entertainment or commercial gain. What will be demonstrated in the following discussion of elements including family, bloodline, and the use of particular symbols and words, is the use of what may be considered to be 'old' or from 'ancient times' as the means for demonstrating 'authenticity' and the connection of the past to the present. One key aspect inherent within Salento is the importance of the family, and of traditions being passed through the family line, and the significance of blood and bloodline in relation to the performance and understanding of pizzica music and dance. The notion of the 'tradition bearer' as being the source of the authentic knowledge and practice can lead to a valorization and commodification of the elders as embodying and transmitting this authenticity. This will have a marked impact on those in their families, who then become the heirs of the tradition bearers through their inherited bloodline and learning, and a present manifestation and embodiment of the past traditions and performances. In this way, a musician or dancer can lay claim to presenting the authentic form of the music or dance because they had been taught this by their parents and grandparents. A 'genealogy' of this kind can also be marketed by promoters as providing a 'genuine' version of culture to those wanting to study or experience it, and thus can lead to a sense of competition amongst the practitioners.

The Canzoniere Grecanico Salentino are still described as 'il "papa" (Qui Salento, 1-18 July 2007: 5) of the revival groups in Salento, even though now Daniele Durante and Rossella Pinto's son Mauro has taken over as leader of the group. However, in an article entitled 'Di padre in figlio, la musica nel sangue' (Quarta, 2007: 77) [‘From father to son, music in the blood’], it is made clear that Mauro is the inheritor of the music through his bloodline.

The importance of the family is very significant in Southern Italy, but this feature of music being passed down through the family line is one that also exists in many other musical forms and traditions, including reggae. On 15 July 2007, there was a concert as part of the Respect Salento Reggae Festival held in San Donato, given by Ziggy Marley, the son of Bob Marley. Not only does this demonstrate a festival which makes a connection between the musical and cultural traditions of Salento and reggae (the Sud Sound System were also playing at the event), but the publicity states that Ziggy is 'lerede del grande Bob Marley' [‘the inheritor of the great Bob Marley’], that he has a similar voice to his father, and his music is rooted strongly in his father's traditions and ideals, as well as the Rastafarian philosophy and the land of 'Mother Africa' (Qui Salento, 1-18 July 2007: 27).

The identification of being the inheritor of a cultural tradition through the family and connection to the land, can also be seen in Salento in metaphorical terms relating to blood. Liidtke notes that '[s]ome Salentines speak of having the pizzica in their blood, creating a sense of community defined on the basis of musical DNA' (Liidkte, 2009: 15). The connection with the land and the identity of being Salentine was noted in the Introduction through the writings of Antonio Verri and the idea of the 'sibilo lungo; or the 'deep murmur' and Del Giudice points out that Verri and his work have been an inspiration for the generation of Salentines engaged in the revival Revivals, Roots and Raves 219 (Del Giudice, 2005: 265).

Connell and Gibson indicate that the connecting of music to cultural histories and a sense of "roots" in place can aid in the establishment of authenticity: "Tying music to cultural histories and a sense of "roots" in place becomes an important part of strategies to locate sounds in a cultural plane to buttress authenticity' (Connell and Gibson, 2003: 113). This correspondence between music, blood and land which creates the sense of authenticity is articulated by Raffaella Aprile, writing in the CD notes of the soundtrack to Edoardo Winspeare's film Sangue Vivo performed by Officina Zoé, where he makes a direct correlation between blood, the music of pizzica, and the ¢erra of Salento: Blood that flows ... in the veins, in the heart, in the soul. Blood that, drop by drop, from the deepest silence, penetrates the fissures in the Earth, mixes, and collects in a single vital rhythm. Blood flows, always alive. Its music plays in us and in you, the ripe fruit of notes that spring forth in hypnotic melodies, sliding, filtering, and meshing into the passages in the Earth, mixing with its nerves and pulsing endlessly. Time and memories flow in all of us — alive, they free the melodies of a time gone by, that continues to slip away.

'Sale' (Salt), 'Don Pizzica' and 'Macaria' [three songs on the CD] show not only authenticity, but also the surprisingly contemporary nature of this music - the continuous pulsing in all of us, the centrifugal and hypnotic force of the 'Pizzica. (Aprile, 2000) The rhythm of the pulse in the blood is thus in direct correspondence with the rhythm of the land and the rhythm of the music of the pizzica. In this way, the music itself becomes the embodiment of the land and the blood of the people through the connection of the same pulsing rhythm, so the musicians are playing the land of Salento as much as their own inherited culture. Aprile also states that the music played by Zoé is both authentic and contemporary, and that this occurs in part through the pulsing of the blood which links the old and the new, but also justifies the contemporary because it is still the living blood which is in the veins of the musicians, the blood which links them to the past of both their ancestors and the land. Thus blood becomes a metaphor and symbol of communal identity, as well as authenticity and direct connection to the historical line of the traditions.

Edoardo Winspeare, writing in the notes of a later CD by Zoé, says of this pulse of the pizzica that it is: 'il ritmo del cuore e il respiro, il pulsare della terra. Rimanervi indifferente ¢ impossibile perché il crescendo ostinato dei “battiti” dei tamburelli va dritto al cuore' (Winspeare, 1997) ['the rhythm of the heart and the breath, the pulse of the earth. It is impossible to remain indifferent to it because the rising ostinato of the “beating” of the tambourines goes straight to the heart']. Winspeare explains that he was focusing on the idea of family in making the film of Sangue Vivo, apparent even in the title of 'Living Blood': "The only thing that is important here is the family. The government has many problems. But we have the family. Sangue Vivo is the family' (Winspeare, 2007: Interview). This may offer a somewhat romanticised notion of 'family' and transmission, and certainly there have been members of the older generation who have expressed their concern about the ways in which the younger members have inherited and at times 'contaminated' the music and dance in changing both the nature of the forms, and the ways in which they are performed which may have moved away from the 'older' ways of understanding and playing pizzica.

Renowned musician Umberto Panico speaks of just such an issue in relation to the playing and dancing within a ronda, that had previously been the space/place of a transformational experience through the music and dance, but which today he feels does not occur in the same way. In the past, the musicians would play in the ronde from evening through to dawn, often continuously, and thus needed a strong level of stamina in order to be able to sustain this. However, Panico feels that musicians today do not play for long enough in order for the music to have an effect, partly because they do not have this same level of stamina. He explains that if the circle only lasts for five minutes, it does not have the ability to attain 'un suono ideale che permetta la liberazione di questa magia della musica nostra' (in Collu, 2005: 208) ['an ideal sound that allows for the release of this magic of our own music']. Panico states that it takes at least one hour of playing to find the right rhythm within the circle in order to establish this sense of a magical transformation. He claims that the new ways of playing the music and the form of its performance, with a shortened playing time and too many instruments being played in a ronda, are not able to achieve this. Panico quotes: "Questa musica deve essere cadenzata e precisa; dieci Revivals, Roots and Raves 221 tamburi in dieci minuti o anche in mezz’ora che cosa possono fare?" (in ibid.: 208) [“This music must be measured and precise; ten tambourines in ten minutes or else in half an hour, what can they do?’].

However, there are those of the younger generation who feel that the changes in the music and style of performance are necessary to match the shifts in the socio-cultural world of Salento which have taken place. Apolito speaks of Salento wanting to move towards modernisation, which is also a promise of ‘nuovi tempi’ (Apolito, 2000: 139) [‘new times’]. Tempo can also mean time or speed in a musical sense, and modernisation has also brought its own change in the speed of life in Salento. Liidtke cites some of the musicians from the group Alla Bua stating that they play what they describe as ‘hard pizzica, which is played faster than the music had been previously due to the increased speed and rhythms at which young people live today (Liidtke, 2009: 124-5).

According to the group's website, their intention is still one of cure, but instead of the illness being that of tarantism and its associated socio-cultural conditions, they play now for contemporary illnesses and conditions: 'oggi, similmente, contro la frenesia e la piattezza della societa moderna, una cura a suon di pizzica pizzica, danza forte, calda eliberatoria' [‘today, similarly, for dealing with the conditions of frenzy and the dullness of modern society, there is a cure to the sound of pizzica pizzica, a strong, heated and liberating dance’]. In this way, the group are making a connection back to the healing powers of pizzica within tarantism, but transforming it into a contemporary context, changing the speed and style of the performance of the music, whilst still retaining its inner nature, thus embracing both authenticity and adaptation.

The potential conflict between the older and younger generations can be articulated and sometimes resolved in this way of maintaining a sense of the past, whilst acknowledging the need for change. Ada Metafune speaks of enjoying her position of being situated between the tradition bearers (z portatori) and the new generation, stating that she is in the middle of the two: 'mi piace il posto situato tra i portatorie le nuove generazioni. Io sono in mezzo' (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [‘I like the place between the elders and the new generations. I am in between’]. She attempts to keep both a strong sense of the tradition of the bearers, whilst also finding new ways of performing the music and dance in contemporary Salento. She feels that one of the most important aspects for musicians and dancers today is the need to have respect (rispetto) for the music, dance, and the space of performance. Related to this, in the past, it was important to have respect for the sacred in the playing of pizzica, for example having respect and devotion to San Rocco during his festival in Torrepaduli, which will be discussed later in reference to the pizzica scherma. She speaks of her remembered experience of seeing the musician Umberto Panico from Tricase, who was referred to earlier, playing in ronde some years previously: "Cera una perfetta armonia tra suono, danza, canto, un profondo rispetto, e a distanza di anni ancora adesso mi emoziono. C'era una spiritualita profonda in quelle ronde, perché era realmente dedicata al santo." (ibid.) [there was a perfect harmony between sound, dance, song, a profound respect, and after so many years it still moves me. In those ronde there was a profound spirituality, because it was really dedicated to the saint.]

She explains that Panico had told her that when he plays, it is always with devotion and feeling to the saint, and this is a vital part of the respect for the embodiment of the music and dance which creates the spiritual and inner nature of the playing and dancing. In contemporary Salento, it is not uncommon to see some dark stains on the tamburello, which have been caused by the musician beating the instrument so hard and long that their hands have bled. This blood is sometimes seen as proof of masculinity, or as one musician at a festival said to me, 'it means that the tamburello is no longer a virgin, and there can be a sense of pride in the mark that the blood has left.

However, Pamela Maglie, who has conducted research into the festival of San Rocco and the pizzica scherma, states that in relation to the sacred devotion to the saint, the playing of the tamburello and the blood that comes from the hands can also be seen as a sacrifice to San Rocco in the context of his festival (Maglie, 2007: Interview). This aspect of the sacred has mainly been lost from the playing and dancing of pizzica in contemporary Salento. It tends to be only at the festivals of San Paolo in Galatina, and San Rocco in Torrepaduli, that there is a stronger public demonstration of religious devotion in relation to pizzica.

The introduction of new concerts and festivals now held throughout the region are often divorced from the Church's calendar and space, thus leading to a secularization of pizzica which has also caused some conflict between the generations. However, this is perhaps a better reflection of the modernized world in which the younger generation are on the whole attending Church far less than their forebears, often seeking experiences of spirituality from different, sometimes non-Western or New Age cultures, again resulting in a dispute over the sense of 'contamination' of the socio-cultural and religious space by other or 'foreign' elements.

This is also reflected in the performances of the music and dance, where the mixings or contaminazione of pizzica with other forms has led to intense debate. Ada Metafune and Pamela Maglie have spoken of the 'Proteggiamo Torrepaduli' (‘Let us Protect Torrepaduli') movement that began in 2004, which protested against the young people who were 'contaminating' the festival through their secular approach to the music and dance in the ronde, but also through the introduction of instruments from other cultures, particularly African drums such as the djembe. The Proteggiamo Torrepaduli movement sought to establish a separate zone in the piazza in front of the Sanctuary of San Rocco in order to protect this as a sacred space, uncontaminated by either a secular and commercial approach to the music and dance, or by 'foreign' instruments (Maglie, 2007: Interview). Ada explains that the sound of the djembe in particular disturbed the pizzica scherma dancers, especially the Rom (the Roma or gypsy (zingari) community, who will be discussed later in this chapter in relation to the pizzica scherma), and so this in part led to the tension between the contested views on tradition and adaptation or revival. The contamination of pizzica with instruments and musicians from other cultures is often part of the neo-tarantism culture. This has been noted in groups such as the Sud Sound System, which uses forms like reggae and ragamuffin, and other groups like Alla Bua and Officina Zoé, which have deliberately sought to play with and incorporate musicians and musical styles from Africa, Asia, and the Middle East. Dance movements from these other cultures are sometimes used within the ronde. This contaminazione is not necessarily seen as negative, but rather as a further means of identification with being Salentine, which reaffirms itself through being open to others.

Giuseppe Memmi, former leader of Alla Bua, explains the conflict between the idea of a fixed tradition and young groups wanting to evolve in their own way creatively using forms from other places. He emphasizes the importance of maintaining ethnic roots and at the same time encountering other cultures. Historically, Salento has always welcomed people from the East. However, it is necessary to recognize and respect one's own roots. The strong points of every form of ethnic music must influence the choice of other musical forms. Memmi highlights that 'authenticity' and 'tradition' can be found in both discovering and expressing the 'roots' of a cultural form, while also being able to mix this with other forms in a way that does not threaten the identity of the people or the music.

He also points out that for this to work meaningfully, the 'foreign' music must inherently contain within it the same type of pulse found within the pizzica, which connects the rhythm of the music to that of the heart, blood, and land of Salento. Thus, while it is 'other,' it is able to align itself with pizzica because of this correspondence of rhythm. This leads to a meeting place between cultures where the essence of neither is lost in the process, an expression echoed in the verse of the Sud Sound System quoted earlier, and acts as a means of bringing the past into the present, which does not need a fixing of the music and dance as 'authentic' forms in a place and time, but rather acknowledges and embodies a fluid process of transformation and adaptation.

Transformation and commercialization of symbols

If the music and dance of pizzica demonstrate contested spaces between tradition and modernization, authenticity and contamination, purity and mixing, then this can also be seen in the shifting meanings of some of the objects and symbols of pizzica, tarantism, and Salento, which have undergone a transformation through appropriation by both Salentines in the identification of a past in the present, and of tourism and commercializing of these symbols into objects for purchase. In referring to Apolito (2000: 141), Karen Liidtke suggests that tarantism "is a free-flowing discourse, an image, spot or slogan [...] that can be put to manifold uses. Paradoxically, it is precisely this free-floating attribute of tarantism as perceived today which lends itself to the marketing of this phenomenon as anchored in time immemorial" (Liidtke, 2005: 43). She aptly observes the ability of the symbols and ideas related to tarantism and its history to be appropriated and utilized in a range of ways, often in the attempt to provide legitimacy to the present manifestation by connecting it to the past, and the marketing of this as a tourist attraction.

The changes in the use of these symbols not only provide new meanings for marketing purposes but also for the locals in Salento, as they become transformed into new resources for identity. As Erik Cohen states in relation to the production of "cultural products" for tourists and commercial enterprise:

"For, just as a new cultural product can become with time widely accepted as 'authentic,' so it can, although changed through commoditization, acquire a new meaning for its producers. Thus, what used to be a religiously meaningful ritual for an internal public, may become a culturally significant self-representation before an external public. Moreover, the two kinds of meanings are not necessarily mutually exclusive but could be additive: new meanings may be added to old ones, which persevere into new situations." (Cohen, 1988: 382)

This can be seen in the additive meanings given to the symbol known as "il dio che danza," or the dancing god. In 1970, a cave, now known as the Grotta dei Cervi (Cave of the Deer), was discovered by the Gruppo Speleologico Salentino. The cave is on the Ionian coast at Porto Badisco, the place where, according to Virgil's Aeneid, Aeneas landed in Italy before going on to found Rome.

The cave contains a series of extraordinary Neolithic paintings made out of red ochre and bat guano, that are a mixture of images of animals and hunting, as well as geometric patterns and shapes, spread out over the walls. One of these images appears to be that of a dancing figure, with short vertical strokes on top of its head. This has been interpreted by some of the neo-tarantati as being "il dio che danza" or "stregone dan-zante" (De Giorgi, 1999: 209), the "dancing god" or the "dancing wizard." Together with images from the caves which have been interpreted as being a tambourine and a spider, it is used as "proof" that the ritual of tarantism existed in some form in the Neolithic period, so that it is part of the ancient history of the land and the people who lived there.

It is pure speculation to interpret the images in this way. But the enculturation of the symbol into neo-tarantism has created an identification for some Salentines of a continuity of ritual and magical practices connected to the land and the music and dance. The symbol has become increasingly used on "cultural products" such as t-shirts, printed on tambourines, and in images and promotional material used by some of the music groups and tourist companies.

Similarly, other symbols and objects have been used to create such a connection to the past. Hobsbawm, quoted earlier, points to this use of "materials" from the history of cultural practices in the establishment of new or adapted traditions in the present through re-using symbols from the past. As well as the symbol of the dancing god, there are other verbal and visual images which have been used in this way. Del Giudice indicates that some music groups have named themselves after the Greek past of the region, connecting to the supposed Greek roots of tarantism: 'Arakne Mediterranea' (Mediterranean spider), Ghetonia (barrio in Griko), Novarakne (new spider), Zoe (life)'(Del Giudice, 2005: 240), as well as Alla Bua, whose name means 'other cure' in Griko. The spider symbol, the most recognizable feature of tarantism, is abundant on posters, websites, cards, clothing, and souvenir items produced for tourists. Other symbols associated with tarantism, such as the tamburello, are also available to buy as 'cultural products', some produced for display rather than for playing (see Illustration 6 for an example of the image of a spider on souvenir tamburelli sold in Otranto). The symbols of the past are now available for sale throughout Salento, and particularly at the times of the festivals. These festivals have sometimes been invented with a genuine desire to preserve and revitalize the music and dance of the past, yet have become commercial products that have served to draw attention to pizzica on the global stage, attracting new swathes of tourists to the land of Salento.

Illustration 6. Tamburelli decorated with images of the spider for sale in Otranto. (Photograph: Jerri Daboo)

The widespread development of large-scale music festivals has been part of the growth in musical tourism, and the connecting of a type of music to a particular location. The tourist and cultural pilgrimages to places such as Nashville, Woodstock or Glastonbury, which have become associated with a specific music or type of performance event, or the memory of such an event in the case of Woodstock, encourages an increase in the tourist development of that location in relation to the promotion of the concerts and festivals. Connell and Gibson explain this connection between place and musical tourism:

Music and space are actively and dialectically related. [...] Some tourist destinations have developed because music (or the performers themselves) had some connection with those places. [...] Music is a cultural resource bound up in how places are perceived, and how they are promoted. It is one means by which places can be represented in wider mediascapes, shaping local or regional identities; and, by design or default, music influences the images that attract tourists. [...] Music festivals have become common features of music tourism industries. [...] [M]ost festivals are explicitly commercial, either from the point of view of tour promoters seeking out fruitful markets in which to stage festivals, or of local planners seeking ways to boost local economies. (Connell and Gibson, 2003: 192, 221, 245)

For Buckland, speaking of traditional dance festivals, there are also the important elements of nostalgia and exoticism linked with authenticity: the use of a dance to evoke former or authentic contexts of performance may often be encountered in the public domain. Performances of traditional dances in international festivals and in tourist displays owe much to a twin embracing of the powers of nostalgia and exoticism. (Buckland, 2006: 14) Malcolm Crick, in discussing the notion of ‘staged authenticity, points out that ‘what in a culture is not staged? What does cultural authenticity consist of? (Crick, 1989: 336). If culture is seen as being a process rather than a fixed object, he asks: ‘if change is a permanent state, why should the Revivals, Roots and Raves 229 staging bound up in tourism be regarded as so destructive, and why should the changes be seen in such a negative light?’ (ibid.: 336).

The festival was focused on the Grecia Salentina, or Greek region of Salento, which consists of the small towns of Calimera, Carpignano Salentino, Castrignano de’ Greci, Corigliano d’Otranto, Cutrofiano, Martano, Martignano, Melpignano, Sternatia, Soleto, and Zollino, with additional towns including Alessano, Otranto, and Galatina being included in the locations for concerts over the years. The first event in August 1998, directed by the Neapolitan musician Daniele Sepe, consisted of a series of concerts held on one evening in nine of the towns, after which the musicians gathered in the Piazza San Giorgio in Melpignano, where they played, sang, and danced for several hours to a crowd of 5,000 people. Over the years, the festival has grown in popularity and length, with more concerts being added over the days preceding the final concert in Melpignano, until the time of the tenth anniversary event in 2007, where there was a series of sixteen Notte della Taranta concerts held over eighteen days, culminating in the final night concert in Melpignano, which attracted a crowd of over 100,000 people, and was broadcast both nationally and internationally. The extraordinary growth of the event has helped to propel pizzica and the culture of Salento from the local to the global stage, attracting tourists for the festival and to explore and enjoy the region, and increasing the visibility, sales, and tours of pizzica groups. Alongside this, there have been disputes within Salento about the effect that this has had on the music. Within the local papers at the time of the concerts every year, there are debates concerning whether the concerts have led to a ‘contamination’ of the culture, or if they reflect the shift that was happening within Salento anyway. In his Introduction to the book La Notte della Taranta 1998-2007, Sergio Blasi describes the purpose behind the festival from the perspective of both celebrating and enhancing the cultural life of Salento:

In the first half of the Nineties, a group of young administrators of the Grecia Salentina had, by a lucky coincidence, government responsibilities each one in his own community. We suddenly realized we had the privilege of deciding and then making the choices able to influence the turn of coming events. We have been squabbling with each other and the first choice we made was to overcome the differences, to try to be an ‘area, a territory starting again from itself, from its most ancient identity, from a common language by then out of use and doomed to decline and oblivion. A Grecia Salentina handling the problem of winning the challenge against modernity not trying to be the North [...]. Therefore we pinned our hopes on culture, the extraordinary historical and architectural heritage, an unpolluted environment, traditions on which concentrate to win the challenge. The challenge of growth, progress coming out from our wish of liberation that could make that history, that tradition a mainstay of our project. In this context, the Istituto Diego Carpitella first and then La Notte della Taranta were created. Tradition was considered not as a fossilization, a stone round our neck, but ‘knowledge of the people’, a part of culture able to provide relevant information on the evolution of human history and their places. [...] [The music] was a tonic, a remedy for the anxieties, crisis and solitude of global citizen, able to unite generations with rhythm, labour and love songs, but also to take on itself the universal need of friendship and knowledge.

Blasi states that the festival aims to be a challenge to modernity, to create a link back to the pre-industrial past, while also allowing for the process of change within the music, particularly with the meeting of other cultures, and maintaining a local identity that was opposed to that of the industrial and modernised North. The contradictions between preserving tradition and entering the global stage are embedded in the development of the festival. There have been a wide range of pizzica musicians and dancers who have performed in the concerts over the years, some of whom are attempting to rediscover the traditional songs and instruments as well as the efficacious potential, others who are freely adapting and ‘modernising’ the music, sometimes including fusions with other forms. Additionally, a number of international and well-known musicians from outside Salento, as well as popular musicians from within, have been invited to participate in the Notte della Taranta experience. Joe Zawinul, the founder of the Weather Report, became the artistic director for the final concert in Melpignano in 2000; in 2002, the Israeli singer Noa performed in Melpignano, and in 2003, Stewart Copeland adapted and performed in some pizzica songs on the final night, bringing in African and jazz rhythms and sounds into the traditional music. For the tenth anniversary concert in Melpignano in 2007, the final song, the well-known Kalanitta sung in Griko, was performed by Giuliano Sangiorgi, the lead singer of the highly popular Salentine rock band Negramaro, with the 100,000 people in the crowd joining in the chorus. The success of the concerts has certainly established a direct connection between music and place, as Connell and Gibson suggested, heightened by the connection to the land and identity already discussed. This has made Salento into a place for musical and cultural tourism, as well as being increasingly promoted as a holiday destination due to the weather and beaches, resulting in an increase in economic growth for some Salentines. Yet apparent growth can also act as a mask for the underlying problems of unemployment and lack of prosperity that still exist in the region. As 6 Thename for the group is taken from negroamaro, the famous black and bitter wine of Salento. 232 CHAPTER FOUR Buckland pointed out, another factor involved in such public festivals can be the sense of nostalgia and the exotic in relation to the culture. This has tended to be a feature of Salento through history, as has been seen throughout this study, and has certainly been reemphasised through the increased spread of interest in the music and dance, as well as the history and culture of Salento, with its stories of people dancing to cure themselves from the bite of a spider. The music itself can become objectified into being seen as the embodiment of this exotic view of the Mezzogiorno as becoming the representation of the ‘past in the present’, a place where modernity has passed by, as suggested by Blasi. I spoke with one Italian man after we had both attended a Notte della Taranta concert in Otranto in August 2007. He had recorded the music on his MP3 player, and happily played it back to me, saying that he was from Bologna, so a Northerner, and that he loved coming to Salento to experience the ancient past, the traditional life that was no longer present in the industrial North, but which he could hear in the music of the pizzica, now captured on his player. He also travelled to Salento every year for his summer holidays, to enjoy the relaxed lifestyle and landscape of the South, though bringing with him the technology which represents modernity and industrialisation in the form of his MP3 player to capture and preserve the music which identifies the traditional past for him. As well as a commodification of the music, the history and symbols of the culture have also been turned into ‘cultural objects’ available for sale. The logo of the Notte della Taranta consists of a picture of a spider, with a heart at the centre of its body, its large single eye gazing up at the moon casting multi-coloured auras. A whole series of merchandise now accompanies the festival, sold at stalls at the sites of the concerts, with t-shirts, posters, CDs and books available as ‘Official Products’. The Notte della Taranta festival has succeeded in promoting the land and culture of Salento, and been one of the driving forces behind the revival and development of the performances of pizzica music and dance. Although Blasi may nostalgically claim that this is a way to preserve Salento from modernity, it is by its nature an event of modernity: a secular festival, which utilises technology as its basis and means of dissemination, and a source of identity and release for those coping with the stresses and conditions of modern life. The contradiction between the need to express and protect a local identity alongside an embracing of others, which has been explored throughout this chapter, is also a feature of the festival as a representation of the nature of Salento. An article in Qui Salento describes the coming together of musicians and musical forms from different cultures as being the 'straordinaria forza dell'incontro delle differenze. E Panima del Salento' (Qui Salento, 15 August-September 2007: 7) [‘extraordinary force of encountering differences. This is the soul of Salento'].

The next section examines another festival in Salento that has grown in popularity over the last few decades: the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli. Similar issues of tradition, reinvention, authenticity, contamination, appropriation, and secular and sacred are manifest, bound up with the performance of a dance that enacts and embodies contests over territory, honour, and pride: the pizzica scherma.

The Pizzica Scherma and the Festival of San Rocco

8 August 2001

On my first evening in Salento, I was drinking wine with the others who were participating in the workshop in Parabita. We were standing outside, in the courtyard of the Historical Archive run by Aldo D'Antico, when some of the musicians present began to play. At one point, Ada Metafune went into the space with a young man, the rhythm and speed of the pizzica music changed, and someone whispered to me that they were going to dance the scherma. What followed next seemed to me to be like two spiders fighting together, or the mating dance of scorpions which looks like both fighting and courtship. The flowing circular movements combined with the sudden, fast darting moments of attack with the index and middle fingers of the hand extended to imitate the blade of a knife, appeared to transform the music and feeling of pizzica from being a dance of playful enjoyment to one resembling a martial art or street fighting form accompanied by music, such as capoeira or hip-hop.

The next day, Ada spoke of her experience of dancing the pizzica scherma, usually only performed by men, as being of importance for her not only in being able to express herself physically in this way, but also of 'taking her place in the circle.'

15 August 2001

In the evening, I went to visit the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli for the first time. After seeing the procession of the statue of the saint being carried around the town, visiting the inside of the Sanctuary of San Rocco, followed by watching the fireworks which are a competition between local towns to see who produces the best display, and strolling around the many stalls of the market festooned beneath the avenues of the /uminarie,' we gathered amongst the pressing crowds of tens of thousands of people in the space outside the Sanctuary. At about 11pm, Giuseppe Memmi and some other musicians with amburelli forced open a space in this crowd, pushing back people to create a circle, around the edge of which they began to play and sing. Two young girls went into the centre of this circle, and began to dance the pizzica pizzica. Suddenly two large older men broke into the circle and pushed the two girls out, and began to dance the scherma. I was very surprised, as I had not previously seen this type of aggressive behaviour in Salento. After a few minutes of the two men dancing, Giuseppe stopped playing and left, saying that the space of the ronda had become 'contaminated by their energy and actions. As I walked around and observed the other rode, I noticed that sometimes the dancers were adding movements from other martial forms such as kick-boxing and karate to the scherma movements. Watching the men dancing in this way, I had an understanding that when Ada talked of the importance of taking her place within the circle, she meant both being present and visible in the space of her local community, and also being able to step into the physical space of the circle in order to dance.

On August 15, 2007, I visited Torrepaduli for the festival yet again. Everything seemed to be the same, but with more visitors. I had been to the home of Ada Metafune nearby a few days before and was struck by the extreme shift in the site of Torrepaduli, which had been a quiet, dusty, small town, to the brightly lit, noisy, chaotic, and crowded space it had become for the festival.

Walking around the ronde that formed outside the Sanctuary after midnight, I felt disappointed watching the quality of some of those dancing the scherma, who seemed to me to be performing the movements with a lack of clarity and inner connection.

At about 1 am, a group of people arrived who all knew each other, some from the same family. They posed for a group photograph and then chose a spot on the piazza that had more light to form a ronda. I managed to get to the front of the circle and watched as they started the scherma. It appeared that this ronda contained dancers who were well-known and respected, and also expert exponents of the form.

As I watched, two men would enter the circle, some wearing the colored ribbons (de zacareddhe) available to buy from nearby stalls. These were referred to in Chapter One, and Illustration 7 shows such a stall in Torrepaduli at the festival. The men took each other's right hands, held high in the air, circled each other, released their hands, and moved to the edge of the circle. To the constant beating of the tamburelli being played around the circumference, the men began the flowing, circular movements of their arms, stepping around the circle with their eyes always fixed on the other, until suddenly moving towards each other with a kick or dart of the hand with two fingers extended to try to touch the other. When one succeeded, the loser went back into the crowd, and another dancer would step into the circle to challenge the winner.

As this continued, I admired the skill of some of the dancers from the group who had created this circle in particular and seemed very familiar with the subtleties of the movements. Some of these men were also directing the circle, deciding who should fight with whom, and if a rule was infringed, they would step in to stop the fight. The energy standing at the edge of the circle watching this became highly concentrated, with the sounds of the tamburelli and the intensity of the fight of the dance. At one point in the middle of a fight, two men suddenly paused very close to me, holding their positions, staring intently into each other's eyes for nearly twenty seconds. It was an extraordinary moment, reminding me of some of the great exponents of martial arts that I have seen who could focus their energy in this way. In another pairing, one elder moved with such lightness and skill that he did indeed seem to be a dancing, fighting insect flowing and circling, enticing his prey in towards him for the kill. It was only afterwards that I discovered that the group in this ronda consisted of some of the leading figures in the performance of the scherma, all of them Salentine, in particular connected to the family of the late Raffaele Donadei, who had been of great importance in the continued presence and practice of the dance in Torrepaduli, as well as others who learnt from him, and danced with him over the years of the scherma being used as a means for resolving issues of honour and disputes over pride and territory.

These ethnographic ‘moments’ of some of my experiences at the festival of San Rocco are based around the complex and fascinating performance of the pizzica scherma. The scherma (‘fencing’ in English) is one of the three forms of pizzica music and dance as they are often classified today, along with the pizzica pizzica and pizzica tarantata, as discussed in the Introduction. However, there is much debate concerning the scherma and its associations with pizzica, and indeed whether it can even be considered as a dance. There has been little written about the pizzica scherma in English, so this next section will seek to examine the possible origins and developments of the form, and its performance at the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli.

Not only is the form and its history fascinating in itself as an example of a mixing of fighting and dance, it also demonstrates the strong connection between culture, identity and place which is inherent throughout this study. This is in relation to Salento and the performance of pizzica, and additionally introduces two further elements into the picture: the criminal underworld and malavitosi families of the region, and the immigrant Rom, the Roma or zingari (gypsy) community whose own history has been fundamental in the development of the scherma. Although on the surface it is perhaps more difficult to see a connection of the scherma to tarantism and the other forms of pizzica, there are still themes in common particularly, via the association with San Rocco, to healing, and personal and social transformation, as well as the resolution of conflict.

San Rocco is an important saint affiliated with healing, who has a strongly devoted following throughout Europe (he is usually known as St Roch or Rock in Britain). He is one of the thaumaturgic saints which, though a word not often used in English, is common in Italy to refer to those saints who are connected with miracles of healing, and often have been either doctors or performed acts of healing during their lifetime. San Rocco was born in Montpelier, France, in approximately 1295. When he was twenty his parents died, and he gave away all his wealth and began a pilgrimage to Rome. He arrived in Italy during a time of severe plague, and became known for looking after the sick in hospitals along the way, where he is reputed to have performed miracles of curing those smitten with the plague through prayer and making the sign of the cross on the afflicted. He fell ill himself, and went to live in isolation in a hut in a forest near Piacenza, where the legend tells that a dog which belonged to a local nobleman brought him bread, which enabled him to survive (Illustration 7 shows the statue of San Rocco in Torrepaduli, which includes the dog). It was due to his ability to cure the sick, as well as his own survival, which led to his cult becoming established throughout Europe in the following centuries where the Black Death and other plagues were rampant. 8 There is some dispute over which is the best term to describe the community. Melchioni (1999) suggests that the correct word should be zingari (gypsies) because ‘Romy refers to a specific ethnic group, whereas zingari encompasses all such groups under the one term. However, many of those I spoke with felt that the word ‘zingari’ can have negative connotations, and both Salentines and the migrant communities themselves used the word Rom (Italian for Roma or Romany) when speaking with me, so I will use this term to represent this group in this study. 238 CHAPTER FOUR Illustration 7. Torrepaduli, 15 August 2007. Top: the uminarie (illuminations). Bottom left: the statue of San Rocco in the Sanctuary. Bottom right: stall selling Le zacareddhe (ribbons). (Photographs: Jerri Daboo) Revivals, Roots and Raves 239 In Salento, San Rocco is associated with the small town of Torrepaduli, part of the commune of Ruffano in the south of the region, 22 km from the Jinibus terrae, the edge of the land, at Santa Maria di Leuca. He has become part of a triangle or fraternity of three healing saints in specific towns in this part of Salento, each associated with particular conditions: San Paolo in Galatina, connected to tarantism; San Donato in Montesano, related to those afflicted with epilepsy; and San Rocco in Torrepaduli, linked to healing victims of plague. As well as the affiliation with San Rocco, the space of the Sanctuary has itself become one of experiencing healing, and today contains relics and testimonials from those who claim to have been healed. In this way, there is a direct correlation between a specific place, and the identity of both a medical condition and a saint who cures it, attracting pilgrims to that place to pray to the related saint. Melchioni explains that through this, the three saints have become ‘brothers’ in the collective imagination of Salento (Melchioni, 1999: 18). In the way that Galatina is known as the ‘land of San Paolo, Torrepaduli is seen as being the ‘land of San Rocco; or in dialect, ‘u paese te Santu Roccu’ (Inguscio, 2007: 27). Leonardo Donadei, the son of Raffaele, also indicates that the connection of San Rocco to the fighting of the scherma is in part due to the infliction of wounds, blood and pain: ‘un santo delle piaghe, del dolore, della piaga del sangue, é la tradizione di questo paese’ (in Monaco, 2006: 17) [‘he is a saint of wounds, of pain, of the sore of blood, the tradition of this land’]. The feast day of San Rocco occurs on 16 August, which nowadays coincides with the national summer holiday in Italy. Within Torrepaduli, this has for many centuries also been the day of a large market-fair, traditionally agricultural, which drew in crowds from the surrounding areas to trade goods in the last main fair of the summer before the autumn arrived. Many would come the day before and stay over-night, and it was in the playing of music and dance during these nights that the performance of the scherma developed into a particular cultural manifestation, created by the coming together of the different groups present. It is, once again, difficult to point to a precise origin of the scherma, nor to state with any real certainty the way in which it became established into the form in which it is seen today, and there are many factors which have played a part. Luigi Tarantino acknowledges the complex origins of the scherma by stating that ‘non esiste un'originale [...] ma una lunga genesi’ (Tarantino, 2001: 12) [‘there isn't an original source, but a long genesis’. He suggests that there are several historical antecedents, including sword dances (danze della spade) performed throughout medieval Italy and other parts of Europe, duels for resolving matters of honour, and the influence of the Rom community merging their own form of fighting and knife-dancing with the Salentines. Tarantino also mentions the influence of sword dances, duels, and the criminal underworld as potential contributors to the development of the scherma.

The sword dances were often highly choreographed means of practicing movements with the sword, and sometimes replaying or re-enacting historical battles. Within the scherma, there is a coming together of fighting and dancing, although the movements are improvised rather than choreographed. Tarantino suggests that the scherma is a more recent development than the much older European sword dances (ibid.: 13). The scherma's connection with the tradition of duels using weapons, even with a knife instead of a sword, may indicate the more 'rusticano' rather than aristocratic form, as Tarantino observes.

The duels are often fought over a matter of honour which needs to be resolved, with particular rules to be followed, and a code of 'omerta' or 'silence' surrounding the event of the duel (ibid.: 34). Raffaele Donadei points out that '[g]li schermatori hanno un loro codice d'omert®' [‘the fighters have their code of silence’] (in Monaco, 2006: 10). Both Raffaele and Leonardo Donadei state that the scherma originated in the streets and in prisons by the malavitosi, the criminals (ibid.: 11, 22).

Tarantino suggests that there is evidence of 'accademie di scherma di coltello' (Tarantino, 2001: 33), schools of knife-fighting within prisons, provided by none other than Antonio Gramsci, mentioned in Chapter Three as a major influence on the work of Ernesto De Martino. Gramsci was imprisoned for his political views and, during his imprisonment, wrote not only his notebooks but also an extensive number of letters. In a letter to his sister-in-law Tania, Gramsci described the events that occurred when he was being moved across different prisons in the South of Italy, including a prison in Caianello, about 60 km north of Naples:

Entertainments were organized in my honor: Romans improvised a splendid actors' school. [...] Apulians, Calabrians, and Sicilians exchanging lessons on how to wield a knife according to the rules of four regions of southern Italian low life (Sicilian, Calabrian, Apulian, Neapolitan): Sicilians against Apulians, Apulians against Calabrians. There's no fighting between Sicilians and Calabrians because of the enmity between the two, even a practice session turns into something serious and cruel. The Apulian is the master of all the rest, an invincible knife-wielder who uses a secret, deadly technique surpassing all others. One sixty-five-year-old Apulian, who others looked up to, despite not claiming any 'regional' honors, beat the champions of the other 'regions'; afterward, he battled with a young Apulian of excellent build and amazing agility, held in awe by the rest. For half an hour, they went through all the moves there are, one after another. Grandiose, unforgettable scene for everyone, actors and spectators alike; the revelation of an extremely complex underworld with its own passions, points of view, codes of honor, and cast-iron hierarchy.

The weapons were simple ones: spoons rubbed against a wall to leave whitewash marks on clothing. (Gramsci, 1975: 84) This indicates that such knife-fighting practices were performed within prisons, and different regions of the South would compete against each other. The use of spoons with chalk to mark clothes to demonstrate a successful strike echoes the use of the two fingers to represent the knife within the scherma as an alternative to actual weapons. Gramsci also observes that the Sicilians and Calabrians would not fight each other, as these bouts would end in a more real combat, which was not the aim of the event, nor within the codes that governed the fighting in this context.

He states that the Apulian elder was the best exponent of the form, and within the scherma today, the contest is still one of regional pride, but also of a more local nature, where those from the towns close to Torrepaduli such as Taurisano will fight against those from Gallipoli or Taranto who come to the festival of San Rocco, for pride and defense of the 'space' of the land that is represented and manifested within the site of the ronda.

Whatever way that the families connected to the criminal underworld were significant in developing the scherma, they are still acknowledged as being the best exponents of the form. Pamela Maglie explains about the malavitosi, that 'loro sono il pit bravi tiratori di scherma' (Maglie, 2007: Interview) 'they are the best fighters of the scherma'], and fights over honor and pride, as well as the rigidly upheld rules of combat and a code of silence, continue to feature in the scherma at the festival of San Rocco.

The other major influence in the development of the dance is found in the migrant Rom community in the south of Salento. There have been waves of migration into Southern Italy by Rom from Eastern Europe, including the Peloponnese, Kosovo, Macedonia, and Albania over the past seven hundred years (see Melchioni, 1999: 8-9 for an overview). They came in part to trade, often in horses, and this occupation still plays a major part in the community today. Some of these traders settled in the region, particularly in the southern towns such as Taurisano and Casarano, where there are a number of significant Rom families, including the Bevilaqua and Rinaldi. There has often been a difficult history of integration of these families into the native Italian communities, and even today, there tends to be a separation between them. However, Melchioni suggests that it was a coming together of the two groups which led to the particular form of the pizzica scherma as it exists today. She suggests that on the night of 15 August, when Salentines would come to spend the night before the fair in Torrepaduli, some of the Rom would also come in preparation for trading horses and selling iron goods in the fair the following day. Just as the Salentines would sing and dance pizzica pizzica in ronde in front of the Sanctuary of San Rocco, the Rom would likewise form circles, playing, singing, and dancing their own cultural forms. The Rom also practiced particular sword and knife dance forms such as the Calus (see Giurchescu (1992) for further information). Melchioni posits that in the shared space of the piazza during the night, the two groups in the different ronde began to influence each other, leading to what became the pizzica scherma, with the fighting aspect of the dance accompanied by the pizzica beat of the playing of the tambourines (Melchioni, 1999: 22). Tarantino additionally suggests that it is possible that the Rom community from Calabria, who have their own form of the scherma, brought this to Salento when they came for the fair (Tarantino, 2001: 39).

The participation of the Rom dancing the pizzica scherma is a particular feature of the festival of San Rocco, however, there is still some dispute about whether they really had such an influence in the origin of the dance. Both Leonardo Donadei and Alfredo Barone state that the dance which the Rom perform is not the same as the scherma undertaken by the native Salentines. They feel that the Rom’s version is more like a dance, specifically a form of tarantella (in Monaco, 2006: 16, 19), and Leonardo Donadei believes that the scherma should not be seen as being a dance at all, but rather a martial art (in ibid.: 16). This determination of difference may also be connected to a desire to make a clear distinction between the communities, and of wanting to preserve the idea of the scherma as being ‘purely’ Salentine, without any influence from outside. However, the pizzica scherma as it is performed today certainly appears very similar when danced by both the Salentines and the Rom, and it is most likely that there has been some level of influence by each on the other.

Ada Metafune states that some Salentines claim they taught the dance to the Rom, but in fact, the Rom already had their own form, and these two became united in the spatial-temporal location of the festival of San Rocco, thus creating a new form of embodied action through the specific socio-cultural conditions which emerged from the event of the festival. Ada Metafune has danced the scherma with both Salentines and Rom, and believes that the difference between the ways in which they perform the dance is informed by their own identity and connection to the land. She states that the Rom tend to be faster in their version of the scherma, and that they are more upright and perform more jumping and skipping movements in comparison to the Salentines. The Rom are overall faster and more agile, as she describes it, ‘come gazzelle’ (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [‘like gazelles’]. She explains that the Salentines have a lower center of gravity when they dance, their postures are deeper, and the movements are directed towards the earth. She interprets these differences by identifying the Rom as being a nomadic population, and therefore less rooted, so they tend to hop or jump more, to be more upright and less grounded than the Salentines, for whom rather ‘noi abbiamo bisogno di radici anche nella danza, il nostro baricentro deve stare molto basso per prendere forza dalla terra’ (ibid. "During the festival of San Rocco, the dance and identity of the Salentines find a connection with the ground and culture of Salento. The festival, which had declined in attendance, was revived in 1982, leading to a growth of interest in the event. However, this revival also led to disputes over the contaminazione of the music, dance, and space of the ronde.

The scherma, a dramatic re-enactment of knife-blade movements, was not always the same. In the past, actual knives were used, leading to fatalities. The festival provided a place to settle scores, with incidents of murder and vendetta in Salento, particularly in the Torrepaduli area. The scherma used to be dangerous, and was practised with knives. It was often over family disputes or a woman, and the fights were postponed to be resolved in the spatial-temporal location of the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli." He cites a ritualized phrase and response in dialect that would be given. One would say: ‘Ne vitumu a Santu Roccw’ ([‘T’ll see you at San Rocco’]) as a challenge to the other who, if they accepted, would reply: ‘a Santu Roccu ne vitimw’ ([‘at San Rocco I'll see you’]) (Tarantino, 2001: 37). Thus, the festival became the site where such conflicts were resolved without resorting to spilling blood in the heat of the moment of the occurrence of the offense. In addition, greater respect could be gained from the scherma and its resolution being witnessed in a public place.

Even though fingers are used instead of knife-blades, the movements of the dance still embody aspects of a real fight, with specific codes of honor and offense, which acts as a means for resolving conflicts, as well as an expression of pride in the winning of the bouts. Ada Metafune explains that sometimes the circle where the dance is performed is headed by an elder, known as the capironda (head of the circle), who directs and acts as a referee over the bouts that take place within it. He sometimes decides who will be allowed to dance with whom, observes closely to make sure no one breaks the rules, and can stop the fight if this happens (Metafune, 2007: Interview).

The target area for striking the body through a touch (tocco) with the fingers is on the torso, from the neck to the waist. The face, in particular, must not be touched, and it is a grave offense, especially among the malavitosi, for this to happen. One hand, usually the right (though I have seen dancers who use their left hand) acts as the knife, with the index and middle fingers extended and the others curled down when making a strike. The other arm is used for protection and covers the torso and vital organs of the body. This arm would have been wrapped in a jacket in the past to protect it from an actual knife-blade, but now the jacket is not used.

The initial movement when the two dancers first step into the circle together is a saluto, or salutation. They approach the center of the ronda, and clasp each other's right hands, then turn around a few times before releasing the other's hand and moving to the edge of the circle. This is a very important move, and symbolizes that the duel is to be amichevole, or friendly (Tarantino, 2001: 24), and that they agree to abide by the rules and will act with respect to each other. This is the significance of offering an open hand to the other: to indicate that the fight will be undertaken in friendship, with no intention to harm the opponent.

If at any time during the fight a rule is infringed, such as striking a forbidden part of the body, then the offender must approach the other to apologize, and they embrace to show that this has been acknowledged, before continuing the dance. After the saluto, the two stand at opposite sides of the circle facing each other, with the legs apart, looking the other in the eyes. They will sometimes mime the movement of opening or unsheathing the knife with the arms extended above the head, and then the arms are opened and wave to the left and right. This is also an opportunity to study the opponent. After this, the two move around the circle, crossing one foot over the other, with knees bent, and the arms moving in circular, sinuous movements, sometimes using the whole arm, sometimes just the hand with the wrist rotating in circles, looking almost like the movements of a snake. When ready, one of the dancers will make a quick movement of the hand towards their chest, which is an enticement or incitement of the other to attack them. There then follow moments of alternation between the circling round each other, and suddenly darting forwards for an attempted strike. As one hand strikes, the other hand and arm defends the body from a counter-strike by the opponent. When one of the dancers has achieved one or three strikes on the opponent, depending on the particular rules of the ronda, the other acknowledges defeat and moves back into the crowd at the edge of the circle, then either the winner or the capironda chooses the next opponent to come forward for the following bout. (See Illustration 8 for examples of the saluto, strike, and kick in the scherma).

The rules and code of honour and silence that govern the scherma, as well as its history, demonstrate the focus on its performance by men. However, Ada Metafune has been one of the few women who have studied and practiced the dance in Torrepaduli (see Illustration 8 as a ‘moment’ of Ada demonstrating the scherma). She explains that her decision to learn the scherma in such a male-dominated world was in order to explore and enjoy her ‘male’ side and energy, to speak through her body, and defend her territory (Metafune, 2007: Interview). The strength of the movements within the dance, as well as the fighting aspect when dancing opposite a man, allow her a release and freedom of expression which goes beyond what is possible in the pizzica pizzica. She says that this has been important for her in finding her own sense of openness and sensuality as a woman, as well as taking her place within her local society, to refer back to the comment earlier about the scherma being a means to take her place within the space of the circle. In this way, the ‘taking her place’ refers to both the physical site of the ronda in which she dances, as well as the wider area of Torrepaduli, in which she lives.

Although Ada is well-respected within the community, it is still unusual for a woman to be seen dancing the scherma, and she has spoken of occasions where a man would refuse to enter into the ronda with her to do the scherma, and for her to even invite some men to dance with her, particularly those older than herself, is an infringement of the rules. However, Ada deliberately chooses to do so because she likes dancing with the elders as she appreciates their skill and quality, even though she is sometimes rejected. On one occasion, when an elder refused to dance the scherma with her but instead agreed to dance the pizzica pizzica, he said to her: ‘tu stai al tuo posto’ (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [‘you stay where you are’], indicating that she needs to remain in her position defined for her both within the dance, and the society. Ada, though she knows she is breaking a rule, explains that this is important for her because ‘nel mio spirito, quindi io cercherd sempre di continuare, perché duellare fa parte di me’ (ibid.) [‘it is in my spirit, so I'll always try to continue, because to duel is part of me’). Thus the spatial-temporal location of the ronda becomes a site of contestation for her in terms of her own embodied experience of expressing herself as a woman in the society, of being heard and seen by the community, and transgressing the norms of behavior by women which have been established. She is a unique example in this respect, and she now sometimes also includes the scherma in her dance classes with girls in order to allow them the opportunity to access the particular nature of embodiment of the play between fighting and dancing which the scherma offers. This chapter has traced many threads through the contemporary performances and uses of pizzica music and dance in Salento, with numerous complexities surrounding questions of revival, authenticity, ownership, and tensions between old and new, sacred and secular, tradition and modernization. The shifting meaning of symbols, contexts, and performance material all indicate the nuovi tempi, the new times for pizzica and the Salentines, where the sense of shame (vergogna) once associated with tarantism, has now been transformed into that of pride (orgoglio) in being Salentine, and in the culture of the land, and the relationship between culture, place, and identity.

The following Conclusion will address questions of the changing nature of efficacy within pizzica, and whether there can be still be any sense of ‘healing’ for those who dance at the secular festivals today. At the beginning of this chapter, I suggested that a relevant question might be ‘Whose present is it?', and what has been revealed are many presences, many voices, and forms of embodiment, which all form part of the experience of the new times that lie ahead within the region of Salento.

Conclusion: Vestiges of transformation

Archaeologist Michael Shanks, who has also worked with performance practitioners, suggests that archaeologists study the remnants from the past. In his discussion of Ichnography, or dealing with the impressions of what was in the past, he makes the distinction between traces and vestiges. Traces are the material remains from the past: shards of pottery, columns left standing, pieces of bone. Vestiges, however, are what is not present. The word comes from ‘vestigium’ in Latin, ‘ichnos' in Greek, giving the implication of footprints from the past, the ghosts which remain in the traces of those who were once present. The combination of traces and vestiges creates what Shanks calls the ‘non-absent past'. This is found in the gaps or absences in the physical presence of the traces, which do not tell the complete story of the past. This offers an invitation to fill in the spaces, seeing an object as it was, but in a different way. Thus, the archaeologist gives a voice to that which is ineffable, which is past and lost, and yet has the remains of traces and vestiges in the present (Shanks, 2009).

This has been a similar process to the investigation of the history and contemporary presences of tarantism and pizzica within this book. What have been examined are a combination of traces and vestiges, of footprints and ghosts from the past found within the material remains of documentation and oral history, but also in the gaps in-between where the voices have not been heard. These footprints of those who have danced the ritual of tarantism have been sedimented into the body, culture, identity, and terra of Salento and the Salentines, who still feel the ghosts and traces of those who have danced and played before them. In this way, history is made flesh in the presence and present-ness of the performance in the particular temporal site and ‘moment' in which it occurs and is embodied.

As Peregrine Horden states in relation to the history of the use of music as therapy throughout the centuries: “Today's vestiges apparently reveal yesterday's full-blown activity” (Horden, 2000: 249). In giving voice to the past, but in a changed way as Shanks suggests, as well as seeing the present practices in relation to past traces and vestiges, the next section will examine the process of transformation and efficacy within the past and present embodiments of tarantism and pizzica. This questions the changing nature of the experience of the process within the music and dance in the different historical and socio-cultural contexts, and each in their turn leave sedimented layers of traces and vestiges for present and future voices to hear and to respond.

Healing, transformation, and forgetting of the self
The revival and re-working of pizzica and the symbols and history of tarantism within Salento have demonstrated complex issues of tradition and identity through the embodiment and experience of cultural performance practices. In attempting to address the connection of past to present, of the traces of the ritual of tarantism in contemporary Salento, it is useful to ask if any element of the efficacy inherent within the ritual is still perceived to occur in the experience of playing and dancing pizzica in the spatial-temporal location of the modern world. Or, is there a different understanding and phenomenological engagement with the notion of ‘illness’ and ‘being healed’ which may be conditioned by the history and symbols of tarantism, and yet is not the same. A Salentine woman informed me that: ‘I think I was treated by pizzica sometimes when I danced it, like every woman of the Salento.

The consideration of what ‘being treated’ by the experience of the dance might mean raises questions of the definitions of illness and healing, and the importance of understanding these terms as being culturally conditioned. Medical anthropologist James Waldram offers the following suggestion of Conclusion 253 the difference between ‘curing’ and ‘healing’ in relation to the efficacy of traditional medicine:

Curing refers to a primarily biological process that emphasizes the removal of pathology or the repairing of physiological malfunctions, that is, disease, while healing refers to a broader psychosocial process of repairing the affective, social, and spiritual dimensions of ill health or illness. Together they describe sickness. (Waldram, 2000: 604)

In this way, curing may be seen as an attempt to provide a more permanent solution to a condition at a biological level, whereas healing is a means of dealing with a crisis as it arises which may be not only physical, but also due to repression, socio-economic problems, or stress. Thus healing can be a temporary relieving of the bodymind, a transformation in the moment, without offering a pill which will ‘cure’ the particular biomedical symptoms for good. However, Waldram also points out that curing and healing are not necessarily completely separate experiences: it is erroneous to assume that biomedicine only ‘cures disease’ or that traditional medicine only ‘heals illness, or that they are completely distinct phenomena. It is also erroneous to assume that only illness, and not disease, is culturally constructed. (ibid.: 604-5)

Both curing and healing are determined and defined by particular socio-cultural positionings, as was certainly seen in the medical writings and definitions of tarantism in Chapter Two. However, the notion of healing as a process rather than a cure as a one-off solution is certainly useful in understanding the efficacy of tarantism and the contemporary experience of pizzica. For Waldram, "healing may also be a lifelong process in which total recovery, however understood, is never achieved" (ibid.: 611). This offers a way to approach the 're-bite' or reoccurrence of the ritual process within tarantism, which was the reason given why many of the medical and scientific writers in Chapter Two labeled the arantati as being 'fakes, because it indicates that a one-off cure in a biomedical sense does not occur. If tarantism is framed within the context of healing as process, then it can be seen as an efficacious means of coping with a particular crisis which is potentially created by a response to both personal and socio-cultural conditions, but does not necessarily resolve or change the conditions themselves in a permanent way. This establishes a means of dealing with the crisis in the moment created by circumstances over which the person themselves has no ability or power to change or control, thus there may be a need to repeat the healing process over a period of time to treat these crises as they arise, rather than effecting a permanent 'cure'.

To repeat Peregrine Horden, tarantism is a 'culture-bound syndrome, or folk-illness; with social and psychological "poisoning" rather than a "biological threat" with a performance that is learnt rather than a cure that is administered' (Horden, 2000: 250), or for Karen Liidtke, 'the healing of the illness within such a cultural system is often the management of the underlying disease, rather than its cure' (Liidtke, 2000: 270). Kay Gardner cites dance anthropologist Allegra Snyder discussing this culturally determined potential of dance forms such as Haitian Vodun, Sufi dancing and Balinese trance dancing, as means for healing:

"The very tensions that for most of us must be held in check, until for some they explode and because they have exploded must be hidden off in a mental hospital, in other societies have been accepted and are actually in the realm of the commonplace." (Snyder, American Dance Therapy Association Journal (1972) in Gardner, 1997: 100)

If it may be possible to approach understanding the experience of tarantism and the re-bite of the ritual in this way, it can additionally offer a suggestion for how pizzica music and dance can be considered as efficacious in the very different conditions of contemporary Salento. To repeat Del Giudice quoted in Chapter Four, the zuovi tarantati of today may be understood to have a 'physiological urge to dance. [...] That is, when the pizzica is played, those who are tarantati must dance (or vice versa, those who must dance may be identified as tarantati)' (Del Giudice, 2005: 262). The irresistible urge to dance was discussed in Chapter Three through the notion of scazzicare, or the stimulus of the music to incite and excite the movements of release through the dance. In this way, the dancer experiences the feeling of being 'carried away' or removed from their sense of self through the inner and outer movements. Within neo-tarantism, this experience of scazzicare can still occur, though framed in a very different context to that of the specific socio-cultural manifestations of tarantism. As Roberto Raheli states about the results of the process of the development of pizzica music: 'today we have a music constructed to "capture the mind', and it makes it possible for us to be taken by the pizzica without requiring the tarantismo ritual side of the phenomenon' (Raheli, 2005: 127). In other words, there can be an experience of being carried away or captured by the music, without needing the particular features of being a tarantato in the former sense. Clearly, there is a difference between the performance and process of tarantism as has been described throughout this study, and that of the nuovi tarantati dancing in festivals, clubs, and beach-parties in the modern world. The vestiges from the past may still be present in the symbols, landscape, and songs, yet the changes in the socio-cultural environment create a different type of experience of embodiment of the dance movements to those presented by the ¢arantati of the past.

One vestige which has continued is the question of entering into a state of trance. In Chapter Four, Georges Lapassade was seen to have used tarantism as a resource, transformed through the rave culture, to explore the notion of trance as a modern phenomenon. In the past, the condition of the illness and healing of tarantism was that the ¢avantata would enter into a state of trance as she danced, and this would in part prove that she was a genuine sarantata, or as De Giorgi states: “Tutti i tarantati autentici entrano in “trance”’ (De Giorgi, 1999: 92) [‘All the authentic ¢avantati enter into “trance”’]. In the world of neo-tarantism, a state of trance is still often described as being present in the experience of the dance, even if transformed into a more ‘modern’ version. Fumarola used the term ‘transe metropolitane’, referred to in Chapter Four, as a means to describe the condition of those who now live in the urban environment. Alla Bua play their music at a zuovo tempo, a faster speed, to match the change in pace of life, and the faster and more insistent rhythmic beat found in rave music which raises the pulse rate and creates a state of being often leads to the dancer describing themselves as being ‘in trance’.

Roberto Raheli suggests that instead of using the term ‘trance’, another way to explain it is as an experience of ‘andare fuori, to go or spin out, ‘that 256 Conclusion is, to go outside one’s normal state of consciousness, to lose sight of one’s immediate surroundings’ (Raheli, 2005: 263). This connects back to the experiences of musicians and dancers discussed in Chapter One, where there can be a ‘forgetting of the self” in the process of being absorbed in the action of playing, dancing or acting. This experience is generated by both the inner, phenomenological world of the bodymind, and also by the outer socio-cultural circumstances and environment operating together in acontinuum to create the factors that can lead to the specific state of being ina particular moment. To repeat Shilling from Chapter One, ‘action, expe- rience, and identity arise from the ongoing interaction and transactions that occur between the internal environment of the embodied organism and its external social and physical environment (Shilling, 2008: 4); and likewise Csordas: “To attend to a bodily sensation is not to attend to the body as an isolated object, but to attend to the body’s situation in the world. The sensation engages something in the world because the body is “always already in the world” (Csordas, 1993: 138). Thus inner and outer experi- ence and conditions combine to create the state of being in the action of a particular moment in a specific spatial-temporal location. ‘The sense of release and ‘forgetting of the self” that may be experienced by someone dancing pizzica in certain situations today, whether choosing to label it as ‘trance’ or not, can lead to a sense of well-being that may be described as efficacious.

This is the potential meaning of the comment by the Salentine woman cited earlier as saying she felt healed when dancing; that she could experience a release from the sense of self through a heightened state of being and feeling of presence in the world through the experience of performing the movements of the dance in response to the urging of the music. The heightened presence is established through the embodied experience of the changes in pulse, breathing, movements, and focus in the moment of the dance, and also in the specific response caused by the playing of pizzica music related to the history and identity of the culture and land, indeed the rhythm of the land itself. Both these conditions create the particular experience of efficacy in that moment.

In 2007, I was at an open-air nightclub near a beach in Salento where the DJ was playing a mixture of pop and rock music. The mainly young people present were enjoying dancing in response to this. However, at one point, the DJ put on some pizzica, and everyone present suddenly erupted in a joyful shout and began to dance much more freely and energetically than before. It is not just about the movements of dancing, it is about dancing pizzica, and the particular transformative experience that this can create due to both the nature of the music and the identification with a cultural history and embodiment.

Robert Desjarlais, writing about Membe Bombo, a Yomo shaman in Nepal, states that the rituals he uses work ‘to negate a sensibility bound by loss, fatigue, and listlessness and create a new one of vitality, presence, and attentiveness. [...] Membe changes how a body feels by altering what it feels. [...] The activation has the potential to “wake up” a person, alter the sensory grounds of a spiritless body, and so change how a person feels’ (Desjarlais, 1996: 143). In this sense, pizzica also operates to ‘wake up’ the bodymind through the experience of scazzicare, and this waking up leads to the heightened sense of awareness and presence in the moment, and the potential for transformation of the bodymind through changing the way it feels and experiences.

For Salentine musician Roberto Raheli, speaking on the pizzica music used in tarantism, there is a ‘rhythmical side whose function it is to obsess, to haunt the ¢avantata, and a melodic side which must surprise and wake her up’ (Raheli, 2005: 127). This type of experience, as repeated from Chapters One and Three, can lead to a dissolution of the distinction between subject and object, or a sense of ‘being at one’ with the embodied action and environment, and the sense of Stanislavsky’s notion of perezhivanie or ‘experiencing’, where the sense of a separate ‘T’ is forgotten in the present moment through the action of the dance. It is this experience and engagement which creates the sense of emergence of the bodymind in each moment, and the potential for this to be experienced differently to the ‘everyday’ self, with all the stresses and problems which are present in that everyday world.

Chapter Four observed how neo-tarantism is often understood as a way of treating ‘modern’ illnesses and conditions, such as stress and a sense of fragmentation of the self, rather than the conditions present in former times that were healed by the ritual of tarantism itself. Certainly, there are contemporary examples of performance and the arts being used in this type of way to create an efficacious means to relieve the pressures of a crisis as it arrives, particularly in response to external socio-cultural-economic circumstances beyond the control of the individual. This can be seen within contemporary studies of self-harm, which is defined by Babiker and Arnold as any act that involves intentionally inflicting pain to distract from or counteract emotional distress, feelings of guilt, shame, and provide an emotional outlet for expression. Self-harm is a coping strategy for dealing with unbearable emotional pain and distress that cannot be articulated. (in Bhat and Taylor, 2004: 11)

Chapters Three and Four discussed how both tarantism and neo-tarantism have been described as ways of coping with the crises and pressures of life, and the dance being used as a 'safety valve' for relieving these pressures in a culturally conditioned manner. The author has previously conducted research on the high incidence of self-harm among Asian women in Britain, finding that it can be a way to cope with self-hate, low self-esteem, and needing to punish themselves due to feeling shame and guilt. The code of honor expects women to uphold the family's honor, be dutiful and obedient, and tolerate domestic violence. If they don't adhere to this code, they can bring shame on their family and be ostracised by the community. (Daboo, 2007: 58-9)

Clearly, this is a different socio-cultural and ethnic example occurring at a different time and place. However, issues of shame, honor, repression, and violence in relation to women, in particular, have been an important feature of this study of tarantism and the historical positionings of those from Salento, along with issues of oppression and conforming to defined gender, class, and cultural roles. Some of the Salentines the author spoke with told of difficult stories involving sexual abuse and domestic violence experienced by ¢arantate they knew, and how the pain and suffering from these experiences were often expressed through and relieved by the ritual of tarantism.

Although the situation for women has changed, there are other pressures, including stress, work, socio-economic hardship, and the rapid development within Salento itself, which may lead to the need for some form of release. If these pressures cannot be relieved or articulated, there can be a build-up of physical, mental, and emotional tension. The Newham Asian Women's project points out that it is this build-up that can lead to self-harm as a means of release. They suggest that a long-term way of dealing with the pressure is to 'encourage alternative ways to express feelings and emotions, e.g. talking, writing, drawing' (Bhat and Taylor, 2004: 14), and theatre, dance, and music have been used in similar ways. Although not making a direct correlation with self-harm, it could be suggested that the culturally conditioned experience of the movements of pizzica dance can lead to a sense of release and relief from the problems of everyday life, thus providing a means to alleviate the pressure which is otherwise not expressed or articulated. If the underlying socio-economic or personal conditions do not change, there is a need for the "healing" as opposed to "cure" through regular releases to relieve the continual build-up of pressure caused by these conditions. Dance as an embodied medium of expression can create a space of transformation and forgetting of the self through absorption in the action of the movements and music. This process can allow for confrontation, release, integration, and assimilation, as suggested by Anna Halprin in Chapter Three. If there is a need, one can attend an occasion where musicians are playing, and the music creates a process of scazzicare, urging the bodymind to move. This breaks the feeling of being "stuck" in a bodymind state, leading to a change in the state of being through the process of the dance, until the dancer feels they have experienced release.

This does not mean there needs to be a self-conscious sense of "illness" and "healing" but simply feeling "the need to dance" and the enjoyment and pleasure of the experience of dancing, resulting in "feeling better." As Halprin stated, "the dance changes the dancer" (Halprin, 1995: 14). The process of change experienced through the dance can lead to efficacy when the build-up in pressure becomes too much to bear. This happens through the body and the embodied experience, which is able to express and release in a culturally conditioned and acceptable form that allows for this sense of change.

In Chapter One, I mentioned a Salentine woman who would dance at night on the beach, accompanied by her husband and neighbor, in a private space of transformation and efficacy. Ada Metafune explains that pizzica is about liberation from repression "perché ti permette di esprimere con il corpo quello che non riesci ad esprimere con le parole" (in Tarantino, 2001: 98) [because it allows you to express with the body what you can't express with words]. It is not simply the dance steps and sounds of the music that create the efficacy, but the whole history and socio-cultural environment bound up in the experience of the performance.

This reinforces the notion of the need for both a phenomenological and socio-cultural, or inner and outer, investigation of the "moment" to understand the nature of that experience and the potential for transformation within it. As Chris Shilling from Chapter One stated:

Thus pragmatism's insistence on the human potential to "make a difference" turns what sociologists have sometimes treated as exclusively socially determined organisms into phenomenologically aware, active body-subjects whose corporeal properties enable them to intervene creatively in the world. At the same time, pragmatism's recognition that embodied actions are shaped in part by the distinctive properties of the social and natural world also avoids the dangers of viewing actions as emanating from monadic subjects who are hermetically sealed from other people and from the material contexts in which they live. (Shilling, 2008: 4)

It is this potential ability to "make a difference" that can offer the potential for change within the bodymind, which can be experienced as "feeling better" that happens through the engaged embodied action of the performance. It is indeed, perhaps, the nature of performance itself that creates and allows for the possibility of a spatial-temporal framework in which this can happen. Jill Dolan, writing in "Utopia in Performance," suggests that performance "provides a place where people come together, embodied and passionate, to share experiences of meaning making and imagination that can describe fleeting intimations of a better world" (Dolan, 2003: 2). This potential for the particular experience of the moment of performance, in its nature of both constant presence and ephemerality, can allow for the belief that things can be different, that there may be "the possibility that in its insistent presence (and present), my fellow spectators and I might connect more fully with the complexities of our past and the possibility of a better future" (ibid.: 5).

These moments lift everyone slightly above the present, into a hopeful feeling of what the world might be like if every moment of our lives were as emotionally voluminous, generous, aesthetically striking, and intersubjectively intense. (ibid.: 5) Utopian indeed, but this is also the potential inherent within the experience of the ritual performances of tarantism, and that of contemporary Salentines dancing pizzica. Although different in form, context, intention, and outcome, it is the ability of the experience of the body in the action of the dance and music that offers the possibility for change and transformation, a glimpse into the way that things can be different to how they are usually seen.

To repeat Michael Chekhov from Chapter One, it is this desire for transformation that can lead actors to feel the need for characterization. It can also be the drive, the scazzicare impulse, which sets up the need and response in the body to a particular type of music to move in certain ways, in a specific space and time, and change the feeling of the bodymind and its surroundings through a forgetting of the self in the act of the performance. This, as Halprin states, is where and why the dance changes the dancer.

The long history of tarantism, with all the appropriations and silencing of the voices of those who suffered, and needed to relieve the suffering through a ritualized performance experience, united in the symbol of the spider and St Paul, may have disappeared from the lives and land of Salento, and yet the vestiges, the footprints from the past, are still embedded in the bodies, minds, hearts, and landscape of those who dance and play music today. It is this experience, the joy of dancing to pizzica, along with the pain of the history of the land and its people, which combine to provide the site where past and present unite in an experiential "moment" of being at one 262 Conclusion with the bodymind, the community, the history, and the serra of Salento.

As Dolan says of her ideas in her book: "The utopian performative moves me into the theoretical and experiential realm of affect, into the live, present-tense relationship between performers and spectators in a particular historical moment and a specific geographical location. This work tries to describe the most ineffable, most difficult aspect of performance to capture, to manipulate and to 'prove': how it makes people feel." (ibid.: 65)

For the Salentine woman for whom dancing pizzica is a means for healing, or for Ada Metafune wanting to take her place in the circle and speak with her body through the dance, it is the presence, the experience of being fully in the present moment through the embodied performance, which changes the way they feel. This is bound up with the past history, as was shown in Chapter One where the sight, the embodied presence of the prior ¢avantata had such an effect on those seeing her in Galatina. A glimpse of a vestige of the past, still present, if in a different way and much altered world. The spiders may have gone from the land of Salento, but the tamburello still plays the pulse of the earth and the beating of the blood of those who dance in the present. Afterword August 2007, I travelled to Galatina on a hot, dusty afternoon. I knew that it was siesta time, and everything would be closed, but I wanted to walk through the town and see the buildings when it was quiet. The streets were deserted and the sun beat down as I walked from the station to the Piazza San Pietro, with the large church dedicated to St Peter and St Paul in its Baroque splendor. The empty square in front of it made me remember the footage from the film of La Taranta, of seeing screaming women running and crawling in circles on the festival of St Paul, watched by a crowd of people. Today, there was silence and stillness. I turned round to the small doorway that leads into the chapel of St Paul, where the sarantate would go to experience the re-bite of the ritual each year, and to my astonishment saw that it was open. All the buildings in the rest of the town were closed for the afternoon, and the chapel itself is only very rarely unlocked. I had no idea why that particular afternoon the door was open. I went inside, and stood alone in the space that had held so many ‘moments of tarantism’ within it. It seemed tiny in comparison to seeing it on the ethnographic films. How had so many women been able to fit in there, dancing and climbing on the altar? I sat down on one of the stone benches, and thought about all those women; their stories, their suffering through the many centuries when their lives were recorded and used by medical practitioners and scientists to prove their own point. And yet in this space, it is the lived presence of the tarantate which still breathes in the air.

I thought back over my own time of researching the ritual, of coming to Salento and learning the dance and music, of speaking with many people, and making friends. This was part of my research I hadn’t expected at the beginning. I also had not known, nearly ten years ago, that my own body would go through transformations beyond my control, and that due to arthritis, I now live with the label of being ‘disabled.’ However, even though I may not be able to perform all the movements of the pizzica pizzica any more, I know that when I hear the music, something stirs in me, and even if the external movements are limited, inside I am still dancing, my pulse is racing, the blood is beating in response to the tamburelli.

I had not expected this either. Weaving my way between being academic and practitioner, researcher and performer, my journey echoed back to me off the walls, along with the vestiges, traces and footprints of all those who had undergone such a profound experience within the small space. I stayed for about an hour on my own in the chapel, and felt immensely grateful for the opportunity to be there and spend time with the memories and reflections of the past in the present. Eventually I got up, and walked through the doorway back onto the Piazza, dazzled by the blazing sun and blasting heat outside. I took some photographs of the doorway and the outside of the building. The bar next to the chapel was open, so I went in, and asked the owner for a drink of juice with ice. He said that he had noticed me taking photographs, and asked if I would like him to move his car which was parked near the chapel doorway, so I could get a clear picture of it without the car. I thanked him, but said it was fine, as I would prefer to record the scene just as it was, rather than try to manipulate it in any way. "Ah?" he said, rolling his eyes, "another researcher!" I smiled, and gratefully drank my juice.


=================================================\n\n\n

Choreomania: Dance and Disorder
Kélina Gotman

A number of significant events have transpired during the writing of this book over the past decade. Most recently and saliently, the refugee crisis in Europe, resulting from war in Syria and neighboring countries, displacing millions, has forced nations to reckon with the porosity of their borders and questions of priority and privilege. Uprisings in the Arab world, as well as in Greece, London, and New York, have suggested waves of change and an upsurge of popular opinion against the corporate classes; we have only just begun to see the effects of this spirit of resistance on economic and government strategies. In universities, the overwhelming dominance of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) subjects in structures of funding and reward, over the increasingly beleaguered and rapidly atrophying arts and humanities disciplines, has provoked much soul-searching among those who are still tied to the idea that the arts matter more than as instruments of public impact. All of these issues find a place in the fissures of this book, which while dealing with nineteenth-century fantasies of medieval and colonial outbreaks of dancing and song, uncovers a whole history of thinking about the forms—the choreographies—of unrest. In particular, this book rethinks the modern formation of a nineteenth-century fantasy, 'choreomania', which emerged across scientific disciplines to designate the spontaneous and uncontrolled movements of crowds and the jerky and seemingly inelegant movements of bodies subject to fits and starts. In the concatenation of these misfirings and misformations of bodies and body politics, a whole series of prejudices against spontaneity unfolds, suggesting widespread anxieties about impulsiveness and irregularity—as well as their grotesque spectacularization—which I argue subtend contemporary biopolitical life. At the same time, this book argues that dance, as a discipline, cannot be separated from the history of science and the social sciences. Dance serves as the site where bodies become public, and it infects audiences with erratic and spontaneous gestures. The "dancing disease," choreomania, represents a complex set of medicalized and anthropologized ideas about a disorderly social body that jerks uncontrollably, affecting those around it.

The flip side of this story is the story of control, as Michel Foucault (1926-1984) wrote, about the nineteenth century becoming a time of increasing regimentation. This book contributes to Foucault's discursive history—his genealogy—of the nineteenth-century scientific and political institution of madness as a site of sequestration and constraint. Simultaneously, it opens this story to new lines of thought around dance and the role that ideas about disorderly dance play in the process of disciplinarization.

The author hopes that this history of disciplines—called a "choreography"—will help reconfigure the "two cultures" divide that we are still entrenched in today. The aim of this book is to write a history of ideas about dance and to carve out a space of thinking about the way jaggedly moving bodies and crowds have come to signal the best and worst of modern biopolitics.

The book argues that movement itself is neither good nor bad; it is not more desirable than stillness, nor should it be criticized for epitomizing the regimes of stress, hyperproductivity, overperformance, and precarity. Yet, the relationship between movement and freedom is wrestled with in this book, particularly the privilege that comes with the freedom to move. Constraints on movement, such as in the current refugee crisis, signal constraints on political power and agency. Being able to move means being able to reaggregate and realign, disrupting choreographies that enable the smooth and efficient functioning of social and political life.

In summary, movement is "good" when it represents the capacity to move: the freedom to be still or to exercise a wider range of motions and displacements than is normally allowed. What We Do with That Possibility: A Book about Disorderly Dancing.

CHOREA, CHOREOMANIA: CONCEPTS IN MOTION

This book aims to intervene into ways we think about dance; and ways we imagine dance to be embedded into the fabric of scientific ideas. Indebted to the thinking of Foucault, and to some of Foucault’s successors in the postcolonial and dance and performance studies fields, notably Edward W. Said (1935-2003), this book traces a discursive history of ideas about dance—specifically, the dancing disease—in nineteenth- and early twentieth-century colonial medical circles.

Discursive history, often likened to ‘historical epistemology’—a term employed to denote histories of previous ways of knowing—takes as its primary object the way things are talked about in their time: the discourses, languages, and methods of circulation by which ideas have come to take shape and spread. Importantly for the story I tell here, discursive histories do not always heed disciplinary boundaries; instead, histories of ways of thinking often take shape on interdisciplinary terrain.

In the case of the dancing disease, this history—what I will later refer to as a ‘genealogy’, after Foucault, and further, given its particularly motional quality, as ‘choreography’—reconfigures the way we understand modern disciplines taking shape. This approach to the history of ideas about dance and discipline is further informed by an understanding of Foucault’s work articulated by his long-time friend and interlocutor, philosopher Gilles Deleuze (1925-1995).

Following Deleuze’s reading of Foucault’s method, I argue that the formation of modern ideas about choreomania is rhizomatic: it moves, multiplies, and branches out in non-linear ways. But choreomania's genealogy may also be read according to what Deleuze describes of Foucault's method as ‘topology’, a description of the spaces in and through which concepts may be imagined to form. In Deleuze’s account of Foucault’s work, topologies emerge through both linguistic and material processes. There are two types of space: associated space (espace associé), which is characterized by meeting and cross-pollination, and correlative space, where discursive enunciations encounter material subjects and objects, as well as other concepts.

Discursive zones of intensity are temporary clusterings of ideas, attitudes, and beliefs that may become rigidified and canonized through institutional means but are always on the move. This book describes not only a set of topologies but also the choreotopology of the dancing disease, its journey through discursive and institutional spaces, and the choreography—the movement—of this choreotopology as it clusters and transforms, revealing a sea of disciplinary changes on the way.

The book argues that fantasies of unwieldy and disruptive motion—likened to dance—saturated modern medical writing about dancing crowds, and that these ideas in turn reveal modern ways of thinking about the past as unruly and dance-like. Further at stake, then, in this book, is the history of ideas about dancing bodies in public space and the way public space itself is imagined in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to be constantly threatened by a resurgence of dancing motions.

This book argues that modern ideas about the dancing disease as an ancient frenzy re-emerging in present times permeate contemporary notions of the body politic: the way bodies move in and have the capacity to move public space. Choreography, as Foster points out, ‘began its life as the act of reconciling movement, place, and printed symbol’; the notion of ‘choreography’ worked with in this book suggests that ‘printed symbol’ is itself subject to movement; that place is inscribed in a bodily trajectory; that the history of thought is itself choreographic. Choreography is not merely "the art of dancing" (the Oxford English Dictionary definition, as Foster points out); nor is it, more anciently, 'the art of writing dances on paper'—nor is it even, in Foster's more expansive definition, 'a plan or orchestration of bodies in motion' (whether of office workers, troops, or traffic lights). It is a manner of articulating a concept and practice of—and in—motion; of irritating the border between these; irritating the very notion of 2. Gilles Deleuze, Foucault (Paris: Les éditions de minuit, 2004), 16. All translations mine unless otherwise indicated. 3. Deleuze, Foucault, 16. 4, Susan Leigh Foster, Choreographing Empathy: Kinesthesia in Performance (London: Routledge, 2011), 15-17.

Choreography renders motion (gestures, attitudes, gaits, intensities, trajectories) visible, intelligible, as form. At the same time, it is the very motion of bodies—books, pens, people—carrying this form, translating and further transforming it. Choreography thus shows 'planned' and 'orchestrated' or, conversely, unplanned and non-orchestrated (even untraced and unrepeatable) motion, occasioning the event of embodied discursivization—we might say, the practical concept—of form; specifically, the intelligibilization of order and disorder. Disorder, I submit, is the practical concept against which order comes to light; it emerges as a moving figure of thought, in the choreographic labour of articulating scenes and events.

Choreography in the sense I propose thus suggests an act of articulation, one that negotiates a border zone between order and disorder, planned and unplanned motion. Choreography may be understood as an apparatus of articulation investigating the part movement plays in structuring how we see, talk about, or embody relationships between order and disorder, historically and aesthetically. In this sense, choreography takes place between language and archive, where the archive is embodied as well as written or notated; choreography passes between systems of meaning, serving as an act of translation, at once a reinterpretation and reinscription of prior forms, returning to and moving prior systems of order along.

Choreography in this sense may further be understood as the art and science of highlighting, even disrupting, practices and concepts of orderliness; and of the disciplines—bodily, artistic, and scientific—that shape and entrench or query this partition. Choreography—as a practice and zone of articulation, a choreozone—thus moves; it performs a perpetual act of reorganization. As a manner of articulating ways of moving and vectors of thought, choreography is fundamentally historical and historiographical, always going somewhere and coming from somewhere, passing through, carrying a residue. As such, choreography constitutes a manner of seeing and writing a relationship in the present to a concept of motion from the past.

To write—to do—choreography is, in what follows, to articulate shifting zones of resonance (and dissonance) arising between moving ways of figuring order and its distempers. This does not have anything necessarily to do with concert dance forms, such as ballet or jazz or tap—and indeed this book will deal only very fleetingly with recognized dance genres. Rather, in what follows, choreography refers to a way of organizing bodies in a discursive field, that by which concepts and practices of organization are deployed and move across disciplinary as well as geopolitical terrains. As such, choreography arbiters bodily order, and the spaces through which this 'order' moves. Significantly, it is the language, genealogy, and historiography—the moving archive—of that arbitration that I rest my attention on here. In this regard, this book also resonates with recent writing in movement and mobility studies, arising as an interdisciplinary cluster to describe the circulation of bodies and ideas in an emergent 'global' modernity. And the book questions the disciplinary foundations of performance studies and dance as fields that, in different ways, imagine themselves to arise transhistorically and transnationally from out of post-disciplinary moments paradoxically reinscribed into the disciplinary structures of their respective markets. The symposium titled ‘Undisciplining Dance’ at the University of Auckland and the multisite ‘Fluid States’ iteration of Performance Studies international testify to a new vigorous movement in these fields to rethink disciplinarity and (transnational) geographic culture. But more work remains to be done to historicize these disciplinary imaginaries and rethink the foundations of dance and performance within a global, multidisciplinary context not separated from colonial or scientific methods; and importantly founded in the same ‘anecdotal’ methods cultural theorist Sean Cubitt argues serve as the humanities’ and some social sciences’ special purview, one that distinguishes these areas of inquiry, he argues, from science. This book not only shows dance and performance long embedded in scientific and social scientific methods and imaginaries, steeped in colonial administration (and violence) but also shows that these imaginaries were articulated with writing methods just as anecdotal, rhizomatic, and cross-disciplinary as current-day performance studies and dance. The discursive history this book traces, then, compels us to rethink the cultural trenches scientific, social scientific, humanities, and arts scholars continue to build up and imagine we are able occasionally radically to trespass. At its most militant, this book argues for a reconsideration of the way dance must continue to be construed across fields; and the way the history of fields themselves must always be taken globally and relationally.

In order to articulate the notion of choreomania as a concept, a few things have to be put in place. First, what is a concept? How do concepts relate to the reality they are meant to describe? In order to answer these questions, I engage with a broadly vitalist strand of thinking articulated among others by philosopher of time and memory Henri Bergson (1859-1941) and later by Deleuze and his long-time collaborator the anti-psychiatrist and activist Félix Guattari (1930-1992), all thinkers of the transformative quality of philosophy. For Bergson, a concept is like a photographic still: it temporarily captures an aspect of reality; but reality, Bergson argues, moves more fluidly and quickly than the concept does. Choreomania, as a concept, never quite captures the reality of the events it attempts to describe. My use of ‘choreomania’ is indicative: whereas writers I discuss in these pages employ the term from time to time, they also speak of epidemic chorea, chorea major, and demonomania. Medical language, like other languages, moves, and whereas the history of choreomania is a history of by and large medical ideas about disorderly corporeality—spuriously linked to ‘chorea’ as an individual movement disorder—the broader notion of choreomania I describe here stretches to the outer reaches of psychiatric and sociological history to encompass far less clearly medical movements. This mobile nexus of ideas, this choreozone, is thus what I call choreomania: a history of ideas about an epidemic disorder, a dancing plague, as it shifts across fields of knowledge and geographic terrains. In order further to help articulate the choreomania concept, and the notion of a concept—as well as the history of concepts—as such, I draw from Deleuze and Guattari’s final joint work, What Is Philosophy? (1994 [original French Ed, 1991), in which they argue that the task of philosophy is none other than to articulate concepts. But, they argue, following Bergson, concepts have to be understood as fluid and changeable. Concepts are never fixed. Rather, concepts shift and transform as they border other concepts. The history of a concept, Deleuze and Guattari write, ‘zigzags’.° It passes through what they call ‘planes of enunciation’—areas or zones of speech, thought, and expression. Intellectual history in this view follows what I further call a choreographic trajectory, an intellectual and material zigzag, a history of bodies and ideas moving. The history of ideas is a history that moves in fits and starts. Choreomania, I argue, is an idea that moved quite a lot. In fact, for much of the history of ‘choreomania’, this term did not appear; instead, a range of associated concepts designated erratic and abrupt, as well as highly infectious, forms of corporeality, all of which looked somewhat like dance: ‘chorea minor’, also referred to in neurology as ‘chorea’, ‘Sydenham’s chorea’, or ‘Huntington’s chorea’, as I show further in chapter 3, describes individual jerks and tics, occasionally hereditary, often among small children. ‘Chorea major’ was conceived in medical history as the epidemic form of this individual neurological disorder. It was often described as ‘St. Vitus’s dance’, a term confusingly also used by medical writers to refer to the large movement of dancers taking to streets in the late medieval post-plague world (chapter 2). These same writers used ‘choreomania’ more or less interchangeably with ‘chorea major’ and ‘St. Vitus’s dance’. Further terms included the ‘dancing mania’ or ‘dance mania’, Die Tanzwuth in German, and the dansomanie in French. What arrests my attention is the complex of ideas shifting through this cluster, this choreo-zone in the history of ideas about movement. I use the term ‘choreomania’ therefore as shorthand to designate a broad spectrum of medical, historical, and anthropological approaches to collective disorderly motility, while pointing to the unstable history the term reveals. What interests me is the way this cluster of ideas formed and spread, and how in its many strands, the idea of choreomania—as an epidemic, spasmodic dancing disorder—describes thickly entangled areas of thinking about history, modernity, and the body.

ANOTHER ORIENTALISM

'Choreomania', then, designates at once the object and its critique. In this regard, I have been deeply influenced by Said's work on Orientalism, as a way of thinking about a substantial strand of intellectual and academic life—a complex of disciplines, in the case of Orientalism—and the ideological undercurrents that discursive analysis can bring to light. For Said, Orientalism suggests the idea that the Orient is a singular entity that therefore can be studied. This idea is fascinating and revealing, he argues: in order for the 'Orient' to be construed, as something that the 'West' might study (and dominate), a whole complex of disparate peoples and places have to be brought together and compared. Particularities are flattened; histories romanticized, hyperbolized, and rewritten. People as far away as Egypt, Iran, and China are discussed, in the Orientalist imaginary, as one. So, too, the viewer in Orientalist discourse is largely invisible: the West, for the Orientalist, is not problematic—only the Oriental subject merits an ambivalent shower of blame and praise. Although the rise of whiteness studies in the last decades has attempted to remedy this blind spot in Western intellectual history (and in many respects, this book can be seen as a means to theorize whiteness as a fantasy articulating obscure others), Orientalist discourse continues to pervade foreign policy and popular opinion on a proliferation of border politics and contemporary wars. [My aim with the analysis of choreomania is to articulate ways in which a complex of ideas about awkward and irregular movements are similarly conflated in nineteenth- and early twentieth-century scientific and social scientific fields, from the history of epilepsy and psychiatry to religious convulsions, ecstasies, and ‘jerks’, and from late medieval St. John’s Day dancing to cargo cults. As such, this book reveals a deep suspicion against irregular motility—a preference for smooth, regular, and predictable movements over spontaneous or abrupt corporeal acts. Choreomania, I argue, is not just like Orientalism, as a complex of ideas bringing disparate actions together under one discursive roof; it is saturated with Orientalist prejudices against obscurity, unintelligibility, primitiveness, and Eastern-inflected Dionysianism. In this view, unruliness, childishness, and spontaneity are described in the medical literature as simultaneously animal and ancient, historical and organic. The discursive history of choreomania, then—the history of this idea’s transformation and spread—describes ways of reading bodily motion, and ways this reading itself can be construed as a conceptual act: an act of philosophy determined by the material realities of its authors’ routes. This book thus continues Said’s project of uncovering intellectual blind spots in the learned institutions of nineteenth-century Europe and America. But whereas Orientalism reveals a pervasive prejudice against Middle Eastern and African subjects and the dark, dangerous, and sexually loquacious femininity they were meant to embody first and foremost in the Orientalist academic field, this book reveals pervasive prejudice against spontaneous gestures and the suspect movement of crowds portrayed in medicine and the social sciences. The fields I describe—the history of medicine, neurology, psychiatry, psychology, sociology, anthropology, ethnography, history, and popular journalism—are all influenced by the Orientalist moment. But this book shows that the Orientalist construct can be taken further, to describe a range of nonverbal actions and the imbrication of bodily events in modern science. ‘Choreomania described everything from the moral and mental degeneration of so-called primitive people to the seemingly contagious and mechanistic behavior of male and female bodies. As such, the node choreomania describes suggests a way of thinking about public corporeality as dark, dangerous, and ultimately unknowable, but also comedic and bizarre. The cryptic quality of ‘choreomania’ thus extends the Orientalist spectrum to include erratic gestures and a complex of neurological disorders that further tie the elusive other into a discourse on social politics and medicine, setting whole casts of ‘marginals’ apart. Said’s debt to Foucault is one I also share. In particular, this book shares an affinity with two central concerns of Foucault: the status of the outcast or ‘abnormal’ (often ‘marginal’) person 6, Edward W. Said, Orientalism (New York: Vintage Books, 1994). 7. ‘Whiteness’ is a complex and still not nearly often enough historicized term, in spite of the rise of critical whiteness studies since the early 1990s. On the moving borders of ‘white’ culture, see especially the pioneering work of Vron Ware, Beyond the Pale: White Women, Racism, and History (London: Verso, 1992); Noel Ignatiev, How the Irish Became White (New York: Routledge, 1995); Karen Brodkin, How Jews Became White Folks and What That Says About Race in America (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1998). My usage best approximates what Ware, following John Hartigan Jr., describes as a ‘racial situation’, a basically anti-essentialist view of race that sees the construction and experience of whiteness, blackness, or what have you as being fundamentally relational; this not only historicizes the question Donna Haraway poses to Ware, as she recounts it (‘When did English women first think of themselves as white”), but also situates the fraught question of race in a changing national and international context. ‘Whiteness’ then becomes something not only constructed, but implicit, spectral, and shifting, as well as deeply contextual, mapped onto a host of interrelated political and social concerns, including nationalism, gender, war, etc. See Ware interviewed in Bolette B. Blaagaard, ‘Workings of Whiteness: Interview with Vron Ware’, Social Identities 17.1 (2011): 153-161, 155.

Introduction + 5 and the institution of knowledge. With Foucault, I seek to understand how discourses about otherness emerge in given historical periods, which institutional and intellectual conditions enabled their articulation, and how new fields of knowing were constituted around this stipulated ‘other’ as an object of understanding and eventually biopower. As Said and Deleuze point out, Foucault was interested not only in structures of power and enclosure but also in a conception of life as the excessive, the surplus lurking beyond systems of language, discourse, and idea.® This book seeks to understand how this surplus—this excess vitality—came to be contextualized in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as a dancing sort of disease, a hyperbolic, feminine, and queer sort of expansive gesturality spilling beyond the individual body into public space. What I argue, then, following the historian and philosopher of science Ian Hacking, is that choreomania is not a stable ontological or medical category. Writing about so-called multiple personality disorder, Hacking argues that today’s diagnostic categories cannot be transposed onto past events; we cannot retrospectively diagnose behaviors and beliefs, because these, and the philosophical and affective systems around them, change.® Similarly, I do not diagnose—nor do I aim to re-diagnose—choreomania, for example to argue that it was or was not ‘actually’ one or another type of cultural phenomenon or disease. Instead, this book argues, there were in a sense never any ‘real’ choreomaniacs. There is a vast and rich literature about something called choreomania, and a breathtaking range of events that constitute what I call the choreomania repertoire, from late medieval and early modern St. Vitus’s dancers to tarantati in early modern Italy, eighteenth-century convulsions, modern Abyssinians, American religious enthusiasts, and factory workers. By the twentieth century, millennialist movements in Melanesia and Polynesia multiplied the sites for dance-like ‘disorders’, just as Native American Ghost Dancers were understood by at least one influential government anthropologist to be participating in a variation on the same. In twentieth-century dance halls, tango and animal dance aficionados all enjoyed a dancing ‘craze’ of their own, compared once again in medical and popular literature to medieval dancing epidemics. In all instances, symptomatic resemblance and loose genealogies widened the choreomania family tree, just as the concept of the dancing disease came to be so capacious as to signal almost anything or anyone that moved too much and too erratically. This approach is slightly different from writing the concept of choreomania ‘sous rature’ (under erasure), the figure of speech Jacques Derrida (1930-2004) employs in Of Grammatology (1998 [orig. French ed. 1967]) to describe how some terms have to be written to indicate their problematic aspect as well as their unavoidability as terms for analysis. Rather than merely erase or supersede some words with 8. Edward W. Said, ‘Michel Foucault, 1926-1984’, in Jonathan Arac, ed., After Foucault: Humanistic Knowledge, Postmodern Challenges (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1991), 1-11, 5. Foucault's Nietzschean inheritance emerged most forcefully when he witnessed the Iranian revolution in 1979 and for the first time confronted, Said notes, the ‘entirely collective, involuntary excessiveness which could not be herded under conventional rubrics like class contradictions or economic oppression’ (9). Foucault’s work on madness has been vigorously criticized by historians bent on upholding an empirical approach to the study of the past as opposed to Foucault’s ‘symbolist abstraction’. See H. C. Erik Midelfort, A History of Madness in Sixteenth- Century Germany (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999), 7. See also H. C. Erik Midelfort, ‘Madness and Civilization in Early Modern Europe: A Reappraisal of Michel Foucault’, in Barbara Malament, ed., After the Reformation: Essays in Honor of J. H. Hexter (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1980), 247-266; Arthur Still and Irving Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness: Studies in Foucault's Histoire de la folie’ (London: Routledge, 1992); Colin Jones and Roy Porter, eds., Reassessing Foucault: Power, Medicine, and the Body (London: Routledge, 1998). Whereas these studies decry the broad brushstrokes of Foucault’s writ- ing, they also underplay the philosophical and aesthetic value of the figures of thought he brought to his subjects and the labour of concept formation he contributed to the history of ideas, the only field with which he claimed any real affinity. For a cogent defence of Foucault's work against vitriolic critique by ‘the historians’, see esp. Colin Gordon, ‘Rewriting the History of Misreading’, in Still and Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 167-184. Recent publication in English of Foucault's unabbreviated History of Madness, ed. Jean Khalfa, trans. John Murphy and Jean Khalfa (London: Routledge, 2006), replacing the long popular (and highly contested) much abbreviated version Madness and Civilization (London: Routledge, 1989), as well as his lectures at the Collége de France, have brought new vigour to Foucault studies, and a new appraisal of the rigour of his historiographic and philosophical thought. See e.g. Mark D. Jordan, Convulsing Bodies: Religion and Resistance in Foucault (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2015). Wendy Brown, in Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution (Brooklyn: Zone Books, 2015), represents a new body of writing on Foucault’s interest in governmentality. On the reappraisal of Foucault’s Histoire de la folie prior to its recent unabbreviated translation into English, see esp. Still and Velody,

In this book, ‘choreomania’ implicates historicity, antiquity, and primitivism, but also incoherence, heightened affect, and excess, to encompass nineteenth-century fantasies of historical and colonial others, and a far greater category of otherness pertinent in cultural critique today. Specifically, choreomania signals an order—and disorder—of expressive affect by which the body politic falls dramatically into disrepair. This book thus reads the way the medical and social scientific language of the dancing disease came about: the institutional, ideological, political, and cultural worlds within which this cast of ‘marginals’ came to be imagined. In this regard, this book can be considered alongside works such as Lamont Lindstrom’s Cargo Cult: Strange Stories of Desire from Melanesia and Beyond (1993), which traces the genealogy of the term ‘cargo cult’ within academic anthropology, particularly in the Pacific region, and its ‘spread far beyond that discipline’. Lindstrom, by his own account, is concerned ‘with the stories we tell about cargo cult, not with their historical and ethnographic accuracy’. Rather than take the notion of the cargo cult as a stable referent used to designate a coherent set of practices and beliefs, he is interested in what narratives of cargo cults say about anthropological ‘desire’. As he puts it, ‘Cargo cults are Melanesian, but cargo cult accounts belong to us’. Similarly, this book tells us about modern scientific desires and imaginaries of dance. Yet my emphasis is slightly different from Lindstrom’s. While tracing the genealogy of ideas about choreomania in medical history first of all, this book also discovers how such a nexus of ideas moves through fields, including colonial medicine, sociology, medical anthropology, and ethnography; this book’s story then is also about interdisciplinary cross-pollination and the movement of ‘desires’. I also stick less closely to the singular label ‘choreomania’, discovering a network of fantasies having to do with incoherence, illegibility, awkward gesture, heightened movement and affect, collective seizures and trances, mass delusions, frenzy, and popular obsessions, which meet in the term ‘choreomania’ but also exceed it. ‘Choreomania’ thus comes to stand in for an interconnected set of discourses and desires articulated across fields in nineteenth- and twentieth-century intellectual life, spilling out into popular culture and sensationalizing journalism. These interconnected discourses reveal shared fantasies according to which the ‘epidemic’ encroachment of bodies on public space and fitful motions come to be seen as two sides of one pathological phenomenon. This book in this regard tells a prehistory of the dance and performance studies fields, excavating literature about disruptive movement imagined to emerge from ancient time to upend modern social and political life. TORQUE The chronological framework covered by this book coincides with what cultural theorist Hillel Schwartz has characterized as the period between 1840 and 1940 when ‘movement transforms’. * As he writes, “between 1840 and 1940, children and adults alike would slowly be rehearsed into a habit of gesturing and a repertoire of ‘streamlined’ gestures.”5 These were “central to the new kinaesthetic—clean, fluid, curvilinear gestures moving from the center of the body outward through uninterrupted but muscularly well-controlled rhythmic impulses.”a This curvilinearity was what10. For a pertinent discussion of Derrida and Crapanzano’s notions of writing ‘under erasure’ and in quotation marks, respectively, see Elfriede Hermann, ‘Dissolving the Self-Other Dichotomy in Western “Cargo Cult” Constructions’, in Holger Jebens, ed., Cargo, Cult, and Culture Critique (Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, 2004), 36-58, 37-38. 11. Lamont Lindstrom, Cargo Cult: Strange Stories of Desire from Melanesia and Beyond (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1993). 12. Lindstrom, Cargo Cult, 12. See also Martha Kaplan, Neither Cargo nor Cult: Ritual Politics and the Colonial Imagination in Fiji (Durham: Duke University Press, 1995), esp. xii-xiv. 13. Lamont Lindstrom, ‘Cargo Cult at the Third Millennium’, in Jebens, ed., Cargo, Cult, and Culture Critique, 15-35, 16-17. 14. Hillel Schwartz, ‘Torque: The New Kinaesthetic of the Twentieth Century’, in Jonathan Crary and Sanford Kwinter, eds., Zone 6: Incorporations (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 71-127, 77. 15. Schwartz, ‘Torque’, 91. 16. Schwartz, ‘Torque’, 91. Introduction + 7 Schwartz calls torque, the kinaesthetic tor- sion of the body according to an axial rotation or twist, as of a coil or spiral unwinding itself. This modern preference for clean, smooth curvilinear motion echoed through the sciences of graphology or handwriting, orature, and modern dance. Paramount in social scientific theories of motional fluidity, Schwartz argues, was the ‘social intelligibility’ of gesture: as a true expression of a soulful impulse, an intelligible gesture suggested trustworthiness, forthrightness, and a wholesome, honest, and expressive civic spirit.1 This was contrary to what Schwartz notes was a concomitant ‘late nineteenth-century epidemic of apparently uncontrollable gesture—an epidemic of tics, choreas, convulsions, aphasias and strangely impermanent but recurring paralyses that left so many women of all classes invalids’.1 This book picks up this minor literature, and draws this second history of mid-nineteenth- to early twentieth-century kinaesthetic philosophy into fuller view, also edging Schwartz’s chronological frame slightly further back by a decade to the 1830s, when medical historian and pioneer epidemiologist J. F. C. Hecker (1795-1850) articulated his theory of epidemic dancing and (indirectly) gestural dislocation. In ‘The Dancing Mania’, Hecker bridged his own historiographical interest in contagion—especially what he was first to describe as the ‘Black Death’—with anecdotal accounts of religious movements in Europe, America, and the colonial world. The awkward, spasmodic, convulsive movements of dancing manias emerged with even fuller force in a fin-de-siécle discourse on hysteria, including female (and colonial) ‘hysteria’: these were the ‘twitches, seizures and paralyses’ or ‘hysterical attacks’ Sigmund Freud (______ THE ARCHIVAL REPERTOIRE
In tandem with (and in counterpoint to) Schwartz’s concept of torque, this book reveals a discursive history of convulsive bodies and crowds traversing the long century between 1830 and the 1940s, and founded in centuries of prior convulsive bodies and crowds imagined by medical and anthropological writers in this period. Performing what I call a brand of exuberant comparativism, these writers collaged and compared histories of convulsive corporeality in often slightly haphazard feats of archival recuperation. This yields what I am calling a morphing, plastic, archival repertoire of gestural events.

As distinct from what Diana Taylor has influentially called the static and hegemonic ‘archive’ of written texts, opposed to a more fluid and bodily ‘repertoire’ of oral and performative events, the archival repertoire comprises a mobile, piecemeal set of archival objects, including written texts, images, and live observations travelling with their writers across the globe.

The archival repertoire is not fixed or hegemonic, though it is written, by and large: like bodily performances, it is subject to constant transformation, imitation, repetition, and recuperation; it is a loose and changing set of references that writers draw up and reimagine.

At the same time, the writers I discuss here, enthusiastically collecting histories of convulsive events, remain persistently opaque in their writing with regard to the gestures themselves. It is rarely clear exactly what the ‘choreomanias’ looked like, or what ‘choreomaniacs’ were doing when they frothed, fell, and raved. But I argue, the relative illegibility of these gestures in medical and ethnographic texts reveals the very phantasmatization of this choreic movement as an epidemic disease. Indeed, the lack of careful choreographic description tells a powerful story in itself: that of the language of approximation, fictionalization, and fantasy of disorderly bodies set in motion as writers recuperated and repeated one another’s narratives, spotting further instances of choreomania: awkward bodies, falling bodies, bodies prey to fits and starts. 

Rather than trying to rehearse their attempts to collect case studies, this book tells the story of the discursivization of ‘dance manias’: the language with which the figure of choreomania was roughly drawn. Modernity For the purposes of this book, I define ‘modern’ as that which posits the new in contrast to the old. In sociologist Henri Lefebvre’s (1901-1991) terms, modernity is that which ‘[bids] for knowledge’. ‘By modernity’, he writes, ‘we understand the beginnings of a reflective process, a more-or-less advanced attempt at critique and autocritique’.2 Modernity can be defined as that which turns on itself, and onto the world around it, to articulate, explain, and make intelligible what is perceived to have been previously unknown or unknowable and obscure. In this respect, modernity can be understood as a process of intelligibilization; it is not just a historical period, an art movement, or a political platform, but a motion towards thought, no matter how misconstrued this thought may appear in retrospect. Indeed, modernity continues to construe thinking, in this view; to revise its understandings; to move, in a sense, intellectually forward. As I am positing in this book, this movement ‘forward’ is also a movement back, as scientists and other writers in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries sought to read bodies and movements in the present day with reference to antique lore. They gathered images and anecdotes, narratives, chronicles, and case studies, illuminating the present by way of the past. This scientific backlighting of modern corporealities with a reach to ancient history, and to the fiction of the antediluvian, automatic animality it was meant to uphold, produced an uncanny present, haunted by a felt sense of the past as boisterous other. Modern science looked forward; but as I suggest further in the next chapters, it did so, controversially, by also looking anxiously and inquisitively behind. In this regard, this book is in close conversation with Ramsay Burt’s Alien Bodies: Representations of Modernity, ‘Race’ and Nation in Early Modern Dance (1998), in which he argues that modernity constructs itself in relation to ‘alien’ (often African) others, and that modern dance can be construed as a criss-crossing between European and African, American, and African-American forms of bodily being, all of which become uncomfortable with the rootlessness modernity brings about. ‘Alien’ bodies, for Burt, are uncannily other: they are not entirely at home in their own ‘modern’ selves: they are awkward, foreign, and yet familiar. What’s more, these ‘alien’ bodies represent an uncanny alterity that is not only the dancer’s but also the viewer's: alterity is a shared fascination, ‘inscribed . . . within the most intimate interiority of the self’.” National and racial identity in the interwar years Burt examines (the 1920s and 1930s) are thus tensioned by a contrary motion towards foreignness, primitivism, and exoticism, embodied in Katherine Dunham’s (1909-2006) African-American dance or Josephine Baker’s (1906-1975) ‘savage’ grace. Thus ‘collective identities’ come to be shaped by exclusionary politics as well as the figures of exclusion against which such politics are imagined. Burt’s concern, to rethink narratives of modern dance, proposes to write a history that forages at the live and moving repository of information about kinetic history. See André Lepecki, ‘The Body as Archive: Will to Re-enact and the Afterlives of Dances’, Dance Research Journal 42. 

periphery of the white European dancing subject, towards conceptual structures informed by discourses and histories of colonialism and decolonization, psychoanalysis and urbanism. This book reads an earlier incarnation of this movement of cultural cross-pollination and ambivalence, of anxious doubling and phantasmatic others, emphasizing the discursive structures within which forms of embodiment are described as alien and uncannily familiar. I argue that nineteenth-century colonial modernity construes itself also in relation to ‘alien’ others: primarily ancient and foreign. But in doing so, this colonial scientific modernity constructs an abstract ‘alien’ subject against which it attempts again and again to counterpose itself. This is not only a dancing subjectivity, but a form of embodiment that spills beyond the disciplinary spaces genealogically inhabited by ‘dance’ practice. Figures of twisting and writhing bodies, impulsive, gregarious, and in disarray, all shape an experience of modernity structured by the repetition of narratives about the antiquity of these uncannily ‘alien’ forms.

Further borrowing from Paul Gilroy, I suggest that ‘modernity’ can thus be construed as looking uncomfortably two ways, forward and back: just as the ‘Black Atlantic’ suggests a trade between American and European shores, crossed by slave ships, Enlightenment ideals, and other paradoxes of the purportedly rational modern world, so too modernity in this book looks forward and back, here and elsewhere, in a dizzying zigzag, what Gilroy terms a rhizomorphic journey that slips continuously between historical regimes. Significantly, scientific modernity in the colonial age construes itself in relation to the other and the ancient in a constant to and fro as nauseating as perpetual sea voyaging.™* Although this book posits an intellectual history extending roughly from the 1830s to the 1940s, highlighting the chronological coincidence of ‘modernity’ with the rise of modern nation states and the institution of modern scientific and social scientific disciplines, ‘modernity’ as a feeling of difference with respect to the past also comes into play in this book as early as the early modern period. Paracelsus, born Theophrastus von Hohenheim (1493-1541), influentially set his ideas about Chorea Sancti Viti against what he saw as his contemporaries’ outdated, superstitious views. In his opinion, they wrongly believed dance manias could be attributed to Satanism and witchcraft. As I show in chapter 3, Paracelsus claimed direct experimental knowledge as opposed to what he saw as his peers’ backward-looking dogma. Modernity in this view is saturated with the past, and as such appositional; it posits itself in contrast to something prior, holding that apposition as fundamental to its own modernist claim. Modernity requires the past—even a highly exaggerated and fictionalized version of the past—against which to set its novelty. Modernity in this sense also privileges a discourse of experimental reason, claiming nearly everything that came before as mere belief. Modernity, and the set of discourses I examine, privilege experimental modes of knowing, an epistemic thrust that is appetitive, that ‘keeps wanting’ to know. The modern epistemic appetite I describe accumulates, seeks, forages, rag-picks. But modernity also articulates its own notions of history and antiquity, against which to define itself. It is this fantasy of history—as restless, exuberant, hypermotional or hyperkinetic, and hyperemotional—that is the subject of this book. So whereas Sloterdijk, André Lepecki reminds us, has argued that modernity is defined by its constant motion and busy-ness, the version of modernity this book explores imagines its own business as rational and purposeful, opposed to the purposeless and disorganized motion of choreomania: a disease always construed as occurring in the past and on foreign shores and affecting allegedly superstitious, pre-modern, aimless subjects even in the present day.”° Anecdotes of dance-like happenings in factories and hospitals—epidemics of jerks, twitches, and falls periodically described among young women—likewise reinforced the scientific discourse positing dancing manias as epidemic corporeal movements spurred on by high affect. Women, colonial subjects, and people from the 23. Burt, Alien Bodies, 5-10. 24. Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (London: Verso, 1993), 3-4. 25. André Lepecki, Exhausting Dance: Performance and the Politics of Movement (New York: Routledge, 2006), 7, 12-14. On Sloterdijk’s notion that any critique of modernity is fundamentally a critical theory of movement and ‘mobilization’, see Peter Sloterdijk, La mobilisation infinie: Vers une critique de la cinétique politique, trans. Hans Hildenbrand (Paris: Christian Bourgois, 2000), esp. 42-48. Originally published as Eurotaoismus: Zur Kritik der politischen Kinetik (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1989). See also Peter Sloterdijk, ‘Mobilization of the Planet from the Spirit of Self-Intensification’, TDR: The Drama Review 50.4 [T192] (2006): 36-43. 10 + INTRODUCTION past all seemed, through the lens of the dancing disease, to suffer from keen sensitivity and an acute capacity for imitation. As mimics, these choreomaniacs—in effect the vast majority of human beings—performed their antiquity and alterity by being imitative, in other words, by engaging in like movements. Not only did they appear similar to one another, but as such their individuality apparently dissolved; they became a crowd, a vital, pulsating mass, a movement. And although women figure prominently in a num- ber of the cases I describe, they were not alone in suffering from the putative dancing disease. Yet its implicit femininity, allying primitive others with ancient, infantile, and irrational bodiliness, made choreomania an Orientalist construct that extended the idea of general dissolution—and dissoluteness—to collective, spontaneous dance. Modernity in this regard is not only simul- taneously curious and haughty about the past, but—to borrow from Said, who borrows from the language of music—contrapuntal. The exile, Said writes, sees himself always ‘against the memory’ of another environment.” The scientific language of modernity sees itself always in counterpoint to ancient histories and what it construes as other, foreign (often non- European) ways of moving; and it is fascinated with disorderly figures of collectivity. This ver- sion of scientific modernity defines itself in rela- tion to a perpetually rehearsed fantasy about the past, which it posits as unknowing, unquestion- ing, automatic, uncontrolled, and swarm-like. Modernity's past is not always or only that of the ancients, individual figures of authority, who may have been surpassed by modern science; rather, modernity's past from this perspective is that of the horde. And yet, as narratives about choreomania show, hordes only crystallize at particular moments, which bring the past into view, highlighting the cyclical, and occasionally wave-like, quality of history's motion.

History, Genealogy, Method

My purpose in writing this book has been to extend the scope of dance studies to cases of unchoreographed movement at the borderlines of dance, where it has been theorized as an epidemic disease. I show that vivid medical interest in history and alterity in the nineteenth century informed and complicated modern notions of the inchoate body politic, which 'dance manias' come to describe. My method is genealogical.

In this regard, I draw from Foucault's concept of genealogy as that which seeks the 'events of history, its jolts, its surprises, its unsteady victories and unpalatable defeats'. In turn drawing from Friedrich Nietzsche's (1844-1900) notion of genealogy (articulated most influentially in On the Genealogy of Morality [1887]), Foucault describes his genealogical method as being opposed to standard writings of 'history', inasmuch as, unlike history, genealogy does not search for origins or first causes.

'History is the concrete body of becoming', Foucault writes, 'with its moments of intensity, its lapses, its extended periods of feverish agitation, its fainting spells; . . . only a metaphysician would seek its soul in the distant ideality of the origin'.

Genealogy, for Foucault, instead signifies a radically embodied historical writing traversing various fields, contexts, and discursive regimes or modes of speech and writing. There is no supra-historical subject, no essence or transcendental object of historical analysis for Foucault; instead, the 'genealogist' considers the past by looking at discrete, interrelated elements of messy, vital, bodied life and the ways they have been described, controlled, and categorized.

But whereas Foucault's genealogical method appears to signal a philosophical interest in regimes of signification—modes of scientific, legal, and political knowledge deployed in everyday life—the vital strain in his description also highlights bodily metaphors and a bodied experience of historical events. History's fits and starts, its 'feverish agitation', suggest the uneven progress of historical events and its aleatory quality, its live processes of configuration and continual reconfiguration.

History, in this view, and genealogy, as its most appropriate method of study, is not only a history of the body as it is imagined through time but also a history by the body; and, most intriguingly, a history that is performed in a bodily way: erratically, spontaneously, fitfully, spasmodically . . . in short, choreographically.

I have taken this corporeal approach to the work of writing a genealogy to task. Shuffling through archival and government records and correspondence, medical compendia, early journals, chronicles, annals, sketches, drawings, photographs, dance manuals, missionary writings, history books, ethnographies, and other objects I hoped might reveal shreds of information about 'choreomania' as it was configured in the last couple of hundred years, I found myself performing a genealogist's dance, proceeding in fits and starts through medical history's often haphazard depictions of the strange and elusive 'dancing disease'. On some occasions, I got up to dance, as when I finally found a description of one of these intangible instances of choreomania: the Ghost Dance, genealogically linked to the paradigmatic St. Vitus's dance by its first and arguably most influential ethnographer, James Mooney (1861-1921). The Ghost Dance involved a shuffling side step to the left. This I could do. But what did the movement reveal? So little; perhaps, that dance 'manias' were also at times calm, peaceable events. What was 'manic' or excessive, as I detail in chapter 9, was the length of time the shuffling was performed; an attendant climate of fear and anger; and the concerted legal and government efforts to suppress this as a wasteful expenditure of time and energy, as fraying archives housed at the Library of Congress revealed.

The Ghost Dance was a collective movement, performed by people in concert; it suggested a heightened affective state, exacerbated by an atmosphere of political tension leading to radical crisis. My own tentative embodiment of the shuffling motion prompted an experience of focus, a concentric gathering of energy, which the narratives and drawings I encountered corroborated, against the grain of official narratives and media illustrations I also read (as I detail in chapter 9). Although it is well known that the Ghost Dance was primarily an anti-colonial resistance movement, attempting to set what I read of these gestures in my body helped me better to confront the chasm between what I knew, poorly, and what I could not possibly know; between a fragile archive and a lost event. Yet in that chasm, lies another story; the story I have sought to tell.

Dance history is always partial, necessarily imperfect; but narratives remain that tell of ostensibly salient events, and those can be traced. To do that work of tracing—to perform that choreographic analysis—may help us grasp what histories have been told; grasp how language shapes our lives, and how it has constituted a site of (choreographic) biopower. Thus we may continue to query 'dance', reimagining its contours—including at the outermost edges of the 'dance' archive.

INTERDISCIPLINARY FORMATIONS: DANCE STUDIES ON THE EDGE

Following Foucault, I have sought to re-entangle the history of nineteenth-century thinking about disorderly bodies in public space within a broadly multidisciplinary field. My intention has been to understand how conditions for the concatentation and dissemination of knowledge about bodily alterity emerged, and how the vicissitudes of individual travels created intellectual chimeras out of ethnographic and scientific observations.

At stake, then, in this book is the history of disciplines, specifically the history of interdisciplinarity as it underpins the contemporary dance studies field. The late sociologist and public arts theorist Randy Martin (1957-2015) reminds us that interdisciplinarity presents a political thrust rooted in a post-1960s multicultural moment, during which contestation, from Black Power and the feminist movements to gay pride, sought to unhinge the disciplinary finality of the old subjects and replace these with heterogeneous, volatile, often politically vulnerable fields of inquiry. Martin also reminds us that, according to political theorist Michael E. Brown, disciplines have always had interdisciplinary foundations. This book seeks to take these claims further, and explore the interdisciplinary foundations to what continues to be a radically interdisciplinary field in the sense Martin proposes. While Martin invites dance scholars to recognize dance's inherent ability to intervene in broader political (and disciplinary) arenas, as a form of action that takes mobilization as its primary thrust, this book suggests that dance studies also has to continue to destabilize itself if it is to maintain its radically interdisciplinary political potential. This resonates with Mark Franko and Annette Richards's call for dance, music, and performance studies to destabilize themselves. [29] Randy Martin, Critical Moves: Dance Studies in Theory and Politics (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998), 189.

This is not to say that these fields should necessarily or always ‘do’ history in a strictly material sense, reconstructing past performances, uncovering props and playbills, but that they should also theorize and conceptualize the very historicity they seem always to elude. This book seeks to examine the way historicity—as the affective and intellectual experience of history, its history-ness—comes into play in the conceptualization of dance (and political movement) as that which returns, that which haunts the present from out of the past.

Dance is not just an aesthetic form or force for mobilization, but an interdisciplinary figure, and concept, with institutional histories and schools of training that nevertheless becomes itself continually through repetition. Yet this is a repetition with difference: each reiteration and recuperation of a ‘dance’ cluster—a set of ideas about what constitutes dance, where it resides institutionally, and what it emerges from historically—reconfigures what dance is and might be. It is not sufficient, Martin argues, in response to Foster, to posit periods or modes of making, reading, or writing dance. [11] Instead, the discipline moves. The discipline of dance is not just constituted interdisciplinarily; it is constantly becoming interdisciplinary again. It must, to retain its especially mobilizational quality, continue to move; to falter; to start. It must continue to move jaggedly, in an organized and in an unrehearsed fashion; to reconstitute its congresses and playhouses; to go down back alleys and find dance in the furthest reaches of the social sphere. In doing so, it troubles the boundaries of ‘dance’ and the politico-aesthetic delineation this term inspires.

As such, this book does not showcase ‘dance’ exactly; readers seeking detailed descriptions of jetés, pirouettes, and entrechats may find the pickings slim. Instead, this book describes the emergence of new ideas about spontaneous fitful dancing as a figure of thought, a conceptual node at the heart of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century ways of thinking about history, politics, and corporeality. In this respect, this book performs a discursive analysis, an intellectual history; but also a theoretical intervention into ways of thinking about unruly collective and singular corporealities. This book thus allies itself with histories of thinking about dance in the margins of history and culture. More particularly, this book adds new matter to historiographical and theoretical thinking about anti-dance prejudices in modern thought. Ann Wagner has convincingly shown that the history of American popular culture is rent through with a puritanical, anti-dance (choreophobic) prejudice. *Similarly, Anthony Shay has argued that Islamic ‘dance’—and choreophobia in Iran—can only be construed as such through a broadly Western lens, inasmuch as ‘dance’ only exists as a distinct social and aesthetic category in the West.° The writers discussed in this book do not always call what they look at ‘dance’, but amalgamate epilepsy, chorea, social movements, and processions in a history of epidemic disease implicitly (if not always explicitly) aligning bodily movement with a disorder disrupting the industrial West.

THE MOVEMENT OF ABSTRACTION

This book thus emphasizes gestural migration, not quite the gesture of bodies on- (or off-) stage, but the migration of intellectual gestures—what I call their ‘translatio—across discursive terrains. This has meant leaving the embodied, proprioceptive, kinesthetic experience of a dancing self behind. I have done so not without some apprehension, and of course an alternative history of the ‘dancing disease’ might seek to know how collective movements, upheavals, tics, and unwieldy gesticulations felt to those performing them. But in order to write a history of moving ideas about disorderly dance and movement, I have chosen to privilege a discursive methodology that takes the language of movement itself as its object. In doing so, I have followed a line of reasoning articulated by historian and art critic Blake Stimson as the ‘gesture of abstraction’.

Abstraction is a process of describing, categorizing, and ultimately displacing vital events onto a discursive plane. But the paradox of abstraction is that this process shifts and transforms the event itself just as it attempts to capture it. In the discourse on choreomania, dance seems to be nothing but disorganized gesture, heightened affect, irregular motility, and a theatrical predisposition to corporeal and social imitation. Yet in this articulation of inarticulacy, this conceptualization of formlessness, and this abstraction from movement, a different notion of dance emerges. Bodily activity comes into the history of ideas as a site for articulation, forming, and abstraction (as gesture). Medical writing that rejects the possibility of aesthetic form in movements described conversely brings about a concept of movement wherein ‘dance’ emerges as the possibility of taking shape—as the incipient process of conceptualization. Without being returned to the abstract realm of the idea (as if dance had ever been separated from intellectualization in the first place), dance appears on the scene of medical history as the arguably far more productive potential for ideation. In that regard, dance contains within it the seeds of all the disciplines and discursive histories imputed to it by writers keen to take the plunge into this apparent primeval muck. In other words, the very pre-lapsarian, prelinguistic, and inchoate quality of the dancing manias described by medical writers and anthropologists in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries throws up a notion of dance that positions it at the vanguard of intellectualization, and so too science. Hecker, Charcot, Freud: Another History of Hysteria

Besides continuing a rich set of conversations spearheaded by Foucault, Said, Gilroy, Foster, Martin, and Burt, among others, my aim in these pages is to pursue a line of thinking on the relationship between science and dance influentially established by Felicia McCarren and Joseph Roach. In The Player's Passion: Studies in the Science of Acting (1993), Roach plumbed the depths of scientific language and the history of medical theories about actors’ motions and emotions decisively to show that scientific literature is inextricably bound up with theatre and dance. In doing so, he laid the ground for further explorations between philosophy, science, medicine, and performance, opening up dance and performance studies to deep interdisciplinarity. McCarren further offers a groundbreaking analysis of nineteenth-century concert dance and the medical language of madness in Dance Pathologies: Performance, Poetics, Medicine (1998).

In many respects, this book picks up where McCarren left off, offering a parallel history of the discursive links between dance and madness in modern science. But whereas McCarren focuses on stage dance, particularly ballet, this book looks at scientific literature on epidemiology and public space. This book also draws McCarren’s work slightly further back in time, to consider early nineteenth-century literature on epidemic hysteria reaching back to the medieval and early modern periods. In doing so, this book resituates Charcot's experiments in conversation with earlier medical theories emphasizing not just individual disease and feminine complaints, but the epidemic disorders of nations. This book thus contributes to McCarren's work an account of collective, not always female, dance pathologies, and the movement of nineteenth-century thinking about global and transhistorical corporeality.

Charcot stands as a crowning figure in the history of modern ideas about hysteria, and this book aims to respond to a wide array of writing in this field, from Mark S. Micale's influential Approaching Hysteria: Disease and Its Interpretations (1995) and Elin Diamond's Unmaking Mimesis: Essays on Feminism and Theatre (1997) to Georges Didi-Huberman's Invention of Hysteria: Charcot and the Photographic Iconography of the Salpétriére (2003 [orig. French ed. 1982]). Closer still to this book, Rae Beth Gordon's brilliant analysis of the cultural history of 'hysteroepilepsy' in relation to avant-garde (especially cabaret and film) performance in gesture and trace, need not be equated, as deconstruction often seems to suggest; instead, gestures such as those performed by moving (dancing) bodies can be understood productively to occupy space and so to enable action (and thus politics). See Mark Franko, ‘Mimique’, republished with a new introductory note in Noland and Ness, eds., Migrations of Gesture, 241-258. On the concept of the gesture in dance, see also Sally Ann Ness, "The Inscription of Gesture: Inward Migrations in Dance", in Noland and Ness, eds., Migrations of Gesture, 1-30. Susan Leigh Foster was instrumental in laying the groundwork for thinking about the relationship between reading and writing dance as imbricated systems of meaning, after Foucault, Hayden White, and Roland Barthes, in Susan Leigh Foster, Reading Dancing: Bodies and Subjects in Contemporary American Dance (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986). 14. Introduction
Why the French Love Jerry Lewis: From the Cabaret to Early Cinema (2001) and Dances with Darwin, 1875-1910: Vernacular Modernity in France (2009) set the stage for my reading of gestural excess. In the former, Gordon offers a dazzling account of ‘epileptic singers’ in Parisian cabarets and the close relationship between Charcot’s clinic and the artistic avant-garde. Her analysis of comic performance in the late nineteenth century attributes the awkward, jerky performance style so popular in Parisian cafés-concerts to psychiatric and physiological theories of bodily dysfunction, further linking these choreographic trends to a rising fashion for gesticulatory grimaces, tics, and automatisms in early French cinema. Analysing racialized movement, particularly the cakewalk, in Dances with Darwin, Gordon presents a compelling picture of complex relationships between popular entertainment, primitivism, and modernism in the sexually charged Parisian underworld in the fin de siécle. This book adds to these histories a collective slant, foregrounding epidemic dancing and genealogical relations in the medical and anthropological writings circulating at that time. What’s more, this book draws the genealogy on hysteria once again slightly further back, reinscribing it into earlier concerns with national excess and popular revolution. So whereas McCarren and Gordon concentrate their histories on Paris, the epicentre of Charcot’s world, this book describes the circulation of ideas about disorderly corporeality in colonial medical circles as Charcot’s ideas made their way to colonial shores. As such, this book offers a slightly different angle on the scientific study of jagged corporeality, ricocheting far beyond the French capital. I argue that the modern story of ideas about hysteria can be situated half a century earlier than it is most commonly described, and its political undercurrents can be reconsidered. So while the French surrealist poets Louis Aragon (1897-1982) and André Breton (1896-1966) famously declared hysteria to have been the nineteenth century’s ‘greatest poetic discovery’ in an article from 1928, dating this ‘discovery’ to 1878, earlier writing on hysteria—specifically its epidemic, dance-like form, choreomania—describes a far more ancient and collective type of gesture than even Breton allowed. Choreomania describes a distinct subtype of hysteria, convulsive and epidemic; it also presents a potent fantasy of collective disintegration far more politically grievous than the figure of the individual hysteric influential in late nineteenth-century avant-garde and scientific circles. Thus although Gordon has argued that hysteria was occasionally mentioned in the popular press as early as the 1830s as a disorder connected with hypochondria, convulsions, tetanus, and St. Vitus’s dance but was far more widely discussed and therefore culturally significant by the century’s close, this book argues that the 1830s in fact constitute a highly significant chapter in this ancient malady’s modern conceptualization. I show that hysteria went through a rarely acknowledged but highly significant conceptual phase in the 1830s, when it described a far more plural, ecosophical ‘disorder’ linking jerks and twitches, political movement and ecological upheaval.

MOVEMENT’S ‘IMPOSSIBILITY’: REARTICULATING THE FIELD

Why write about choreomania today? The history of this ‘strange delusion’ haunts contemporary social, political, and choreographic thinking. What Lepecki has called 'choreo-politics' and 'choreopolicing' and Foster has described as 'choreographing protest' posit moving bodies in public space, operating according to barely visible choreographic lines. Yet, the dances in these political movements are recognizable as dissensual, organized, agented events in which people wilfully come together to move history forward—or, at least, laterally (typically, in cases they describe, leftwards). For Lepecki, choreopolitics suggests the movement of possibility—the 'not yet' that Hannah Arendt (1906-1975) submits defines our relationship to politics, as she observes that we have not yet learned 'how to move politically'. Lepecki sees this as a challenge and an invitation to think what it might mean to marry the kinetic and the political, to see choreography as a tool for experimenting with manners of moving politically—finding structures of freedom in motion. This means confronting, even staging, the cultures of control that demarcate our daily lives—choreographies of crowd control that enforce these 'choreopolice' mechanisms—thus highlighting a practice of boundary-making and an embodied system of order which may be transgressed, trespassed, or exposed.

For Foster, choreographies of protest describe intelligent bodies engaging in collective action together, whether spontaneously or not; bodies reading other bodies suggest a wilful coming together that enacts grassroots activism. With Lepecki and Foster, attention to the political potential of bodies moving together against structures of disempowerment presents a groundswell of opportunity for writing critical histories of movement and dance, thinking the collective shapes and distributions of order (and disorder) that surround us, and, I further highlight, the discursive histories that articulate these. Indeed, the investment of dance theory and dance history in political movement reaches to the heart of the discipline, where it engages bodily action and events organized (or, conversely, disorganized) to produce meaningful forms of social life.

The typically hyperbolic language of disorganization characteristic of choreomania narratives found in the pages of medical and ethnographic journals and compendia, colonial correspondence and government archives, adds to the urgency of these analyses a murkier, messier tone. St. Vitus's dance, the tarantella, the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard in early eighteenth-century Paris, the Abyssinian tigre-tier, the imanenjana in Madagascar, and other episodes of so-called choreomania perform distinct political movements and public presence. But these movements and presences come to be framed in terms that highlight a lack of organization; they appear to eschew choreographic purpose. Some are not dances at all but dance-like neurological disorders cast as instances of an epidemic dancing disease. Yet in every case, the language of disorder casts moving bodies in an act of mediation: the archival repertoire of corporeal and choreographic disorder reveals a complex history of stories about transgression, revealing the spectre of bodily order against which these choreic bodies trespass. This choreomaniacal concept of movement approaches what Giorgio Agamben has described as movement's ‘impossibility’, its status as the ‘indefiniteness and imperfection of every politics’. For Agamben, the ill-defined, under-theorized, and historically ambivalent concept of movement represents all that eludes political organization.

Although the political meaning of ‘movement’ dates to the first part of the nineteenth century—specifically the French July Revolution of 1830, which pitted the Parti du Mouvement (Movement Party) against the Parti de Ordre (Party of Order)—and although the German political theorist Lorenz von Stein (1815-1890) posited ‘movement’ in opposition to the static state in The History of Social Movements in France (1850), movement, Agamben insists, has more recently become allied to state-sponsored fascist politics. Reading Arendt, he notes that twentieth-century appropriations of the political concept of ‘movement’ foregrounded demagogical and populist organizations whose totalitarian discipline moved far away from the open-ended, non-teleological flux of movement as lack, residue, and imperfection: as the ‘threshold’, as he puts it, ‘between an excess and a deficiency that marks every politics’. In this book, ‘movement’ figures at once as political and as gestural excess, imperfection, and indeterminacy. Movement is that which emerges in the nineteenth-century scientific field as a node within which corporeal actions in the public sphere acquire meaning by virtue of their hermeneutic opacity, their unwillingness to signify, their aesthetic and political deficiency.

André Lepecki, ‘Choreopolice and Choreopolitics: Or, the Task of the Dancer’, TDR: The Drama Review 57.4 [T220] (2013): 13-27, 13. See also Hannah Arendt, Was ist Politik? Fragmente aus dem Nachlass (Munich: Piper, 1993), 13. Susan Leigh Foster, ‘Choreographies of Protest’, Theatre Journal 55.3 (2003): 395-412. Giorgio Agamben, ‘Movement’, in André Lepecki, ed., Dance (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012), 142-144, 144. Agamben, ‘Movement’, 142. Giorgio Agamben, ‘Movement’, 143-144. While Agamben further reminds us that ‘movement’ was long theorized in science and philosophy, at least beginning with Aristotle (384-322 BCE), whose notion of kinesis represented the strategic link between power and action—specifically, power’s acting qua power, its capacity to act—the new political movements of the nineteenth century bring a different sort of urgency to the question of movement in public space, and to what we may construe as biopower. Here, I show, movement comes to be enmeshed in a political sphere, without leaving behind the organic, the biological. Science, philosophy, and politics in the nineteenth century are entangled in a complex of ideas about human aggregates erupting into chaotic, disorderly movement, particularly during times of social revolt cast as disease. In most of the cases I describe, these movements are not construed by their observers in the political sense, as social organization, or as choreographed intercession. Instead, these movements are conceived as excrescences in the human landscape, intimately accompanying historical change, as its corporeal sign and reflection. This change is not only social or political, but ecological: plagues, famines, and floods all serve as the landscapes within which 'choreomanias' erupt. Bodies, in this view, move in tandem with social, political, and ecological upheaval, in what I describe, following Guattari, as an ecosophical conception of movement disorder (construed in a collective, political sense) and of movement disorders (to designate individual conditions).

As a branch of philosophy that considers the entire ecological sphere as grounds within which concepts emerge and transform, ecosophy posits the radical lack of hierarchy between different aspects of mental, social, and environmental movement. Bodies within this paradigm pass transversally across institutions and ideas about 'nature' in a general ecology of thought and action that co-constitutes environments within which ideas like science, politics, and dance emerge and take shape.

In this regard, my work engages with a number of conversations on social and political movement (and movements) at the limits of dance, including Andrew Hewitt's Social Choreography: Ideology as Performance in Dance and Everyday Movement (2005), which emphasizes the way movement aesthetically embodies social order, and Martin's Critical Moves: Dance Studies in Theory and Politics (1998), which understands dance as a social process, a means by which bodies gather, and the ends by which this gathering produces or reveals mobilization.

Whereas Hewitt and Martin both emphasize the broader social and cultural field within which dance emerges as the crystallization or intensification of performative movement, this book reads the discursive history of movement's disorderly exceptions: the way narratives of choreographic unrest create figures of order which they are set against. Disorder is not only positively defined; its description structures a fantasy of orderliness whose disruption choreomanias exemplify.

My approach further offers a distinct view of disability within the dance and performance studies fields, and another history of alternative mobilities founding modern science. So whereas Ann Cooper Albright, Petra Kuppers, and many others have offered groundbreaking work on dance and disability foregrounding identity and social politics of difference in a normative social sphere, this book repositions the question of 'movement disorder' onto broader historical terrain to interrogate ways of thinking and writing about incoordination, disjunction, and eccentricity as crowd conditions embedded into the fabric of sociopolitical life and its imagined prehistories.

In this regard, my work engages with the emerging areas of gesture, movement, and mobility studies, cross-pollinating anthropology, history of science and medicine, performance studies, and theatre and dance, among other scientific, social scientific, and arts and humanities disciplines. These broadly interdisciplinary areas, exemplified by recent titles including Fiona Wilkie's Performance, Transport and Mobility: Making Passage (2014) and Carrie Noland and Sally Ann Ness's Migrations of Gesture (2008), suggest the reconfiguration of disciplines in an academic landscape in which scholars continue to be intellectually restless despite increasing institutional pressures to streamline, to become ever more marketable and paradoxically, ever more disciplinary. On the contrary, the proliferation of new cross-disciplinary fields of study in the last decades suggests the continued reorganization of our ways of thinking about movement and discipline. Yet whereas Noland and Ness's [superscript 44] brilliant work on gesture offers productive ways of reading barely choreographed movement at the limits of dance, their focus on the experience of the body—kinaesthetic sense—differs markedly from my own interest in the historical discourse of disorderly movement in a broadly scientific arena. Noland's emphasis on writing as a gestural act, a form of inscription and therefore movement, nonetheless prefigures what I offer here. Indeed, this book seeks to engage with the problem of writing as movement in a disciplinary, a discursive, and a material sense: this book traces the movement of ideas across centuries and disciplinary terrains, from medieval Latin chronicles to travel diaries and textbook histories of the new colonial nation states. This movement, I show, takes place as medical and other writers carry texts and concepts with them throughout the colonial world. These writers read one another, teach each other's theories, repeat examples they hear of or read about in scientific journals, operating much like Deleuze and Guattari's figure of the orchid and the wasp, cross-pollinating one another's writing, at home and overseas.

This does not mean mobility in itself is good. This book instead works through a field of thought about corporeal dislocations, and their locations and relocations in a shifting disciplinary arena. This book further responds to a recent surge of writing about dance and science, and the scientistic worldview with which much of this writing has been approached. Scientism understands science to constitute the greatest, most objective method and authority, and the most reliable as well as the most socially sanctioned approach to conceptualizing body, mind, disability, difference, dance, and theatre, among other things. In a climate in which the arts have had to fight bitterly for a place in elementary, high school, undergraduate, and graduate education as well as public policy, science, particularly medicine and neuroscience, have served as handy allies to help fund and legitimize otherwise precarious fields. Kinaesthetic empathy, mirror neurons, and body-mind education in particular have significantly reconfigured the way dancers, dance historians, and educators think about the dancing body in motion, allying research in experimental neuroscience with experimental dance practice. Influential writing by Glenna Batson, Dee Reynolds, Deirdre Sklar, Lena Hammergren, Bettina Blasing, and others suggests that scientific research can productively illuminate the way we understand motion on and off the stage, including particularly the way we watch dance.** Without disputing the urgency or cogency of these finds, this book seeks to present a slightly different story, articulating the discursive history and genealogy of dance's broad entanglement with science, tracing very old interactions between ideas about dance, humanistic method, and scientific history. I show how a prehistory of the current 'cognitive revolution' or 'neuroturn'[superscript 45] with which artists and critics have sought to explain creative movement can productively complicate notions of priority and precedence; and thus also trouble the perceived gaps—and seemingly novel bridges—between dance and medical science posited in contemporary popular and academic discourse. Throughout this book, I show that fantasies about dance and locomotion—particularly disruptive locomotion—suffuse scientific writing, enmeshing ideas about history, modernity, and politics with ideas about imitative gesture. Scientific method appears to be far less "objective," systematic, and in this sense "scientific" than aleatory, narrative, and in some respects quintessentially arts-like. Collage, montage, and hearsay constitute the primary methods of choreomania's articulation.

In addition to the mentioned studies, a few other titles are worth mentioning to provide a discursive context and critical genealogy for this work. In "Foules en délire, extases collectives" [Delirious Crowds, Collective Ecstasies] (1947) and "Lenchantement des danses, et la magie du verbe" [The Enchantment of Dance, and the Magic of the Word] (1957), the much-overlooked French historian of religions Philippe de Félice (1880-1964) offers a comparative analysis of dance ecstasies around the world, emphasizing spiritual rapture. His work influenced, among others, Elias Canetti's (1905-1994) now classic Masse und Macht [Crowds and Power] (1960). Both offer insight into histories of gregarious corporeal formations and the implicit power politics spiritual ecstasy enables. Also in the mid-twentieth century, the Swedish pharmacologist E. Louis Backman (1883-1965) compiled a broad array of narratives about religious and popular dances, many from Greek and Latin sources. His deep archival work makes this a useful and much-cited source on dance 'manias', but Religious Dances in the Christian Church and in Popular Medicine (1952) spuriously attributes all such dances to ergotism—a form of rye poisoning—generally over-medicalizing Latin descriptions.

Drid Williams briefly mentions dance manias, including St. Vitus's dance, in Ten Lectures on Theories of the Dance (1991) but does not delve into the complex history of gestural events likened to St. Vitus's dance in medical literature on choreomania. And while Barbara Ehrenreich offers a celebratory account of communal dancing in her effusively upbeat Dancing in the Streets: A History of Collective Joy (2007), she too neglects the long and complex biomedical history of public dances and their extensive pathologization in colonial medical and anthropological literature.

More recently, Gregor Rohmann in Tanzwut: Kosmos, Kirche und Mensch in der Bedeutungsgeschichte eines mitelalterlichen Krankheitskonzepts [Dance Mania: Cosmos, Church and Man in the Emergence of the Idea of a Dancing Disease in the Middle Ages] (2013) and Johannes Birringer and Josephine Fenger in their edited volume Tanz und WahnSinn/Dance and ChoreoMania (2011) point to a rich array of events associated with the medieval 'dancing mania', from Greek concepts of enthusiasm (Rohmann) to choreographic practice (Birringer and Fenger). Both offer useful insight into the myriad ways 'dancing manias' have been figured historically and culturally, but once again largely elude the vast history of colonial representation the discursive history of 'choreomania' also occasions.

From a theoretical and methodological standpoint, Stephen Muecke's short 'Choreomanias: Movements through Our Body', published in the Moving Bodies issue of Performance Research (2003), comes closest to sharing the critical investments I present here: with Muecke, I aim to think about the biopolitical and bio-philosophical histories of dancing crowds, and discourses on abnormality attributed to fitful dancing in colonial medical culture.*® I add to Muecke's brief study a far longer glance at the extended institutional and political genealogies by which the choreomania concept emerged and transformed. I also present Hecker as the under-acknowledged predecessor to the master of bodily fits, Charcot; and, by extension, to Charcot's most famous student, Freud. This view positions choreomania at the base of a whole field of thinking about primitivism, fitfulness, femininity, and taboo.

There are many things this book does not do. It does not go into the vast and by now extremely fraught terrain of possession, with which dance manias may be equated, though I offer alternative readings of possession culture in chapters 8 and 10 in particular, replacing this term with Agamben's in my view more productive concept of ecstasy-belonging, a notion he uses to describe a monarch's special status in a political system, and which I employ to read performative entanglements engaging possession culture in revolt. Similar to Michael Taussig’s notion of medicine as the appearance of 48, this book examines the historical distinction between scientific and some social scientific methods. Sean Cubitt, in ‘Anecdotal Evidence’, presents a study on the differences between arts and humanities methods and scientific methods, published in NECSUS: European Journal of Media Studies 2.1 (2013): 5-18.

Stephen Muecke, in ‘Choreomanias: Movements through Our Body’, Performance Research 8.4 (2003): 6-10, discusses disease in medical discourse through the reification of complex social relations. This enables the author to bring notions of theatricality into full view, as they move onto ethnographic terrain in later chapters. The choreomania concept morphs to reveal an increasingly anti-theatrical concern with feminine and colonial deceit, a concern nearly absent in earlier readings of the ‘choreomaniacal’ Middle Ages.

This book does not attempt a comprehensive account of so-called dance manias worldwide. Instead, it performs a genealogy of the choreomania concept in the long nineteenth century, following the traces of particular writers as they read one another, offer new anecdotes, and continue a history connected, link by link, to narrative precedent.

The book traces the fantasy of movement's surfeit across 'fields': lands and discursive encounters. Following Gilroy's and James Clifford's shared investments in the homonymous interplay between 'roots' and 'routes' in colonial politics and cultural translation, the author traces the 'routes' and returns to imagined 'roots' performed by scientific writers, according to the vicissitudes of their administrative appointments, affiliations, and appetites.

The book proceeds at once roughly chronologically and geographically, moving from Europe through the colonial world to end up provisionally in America. It grounds itself in the proliferation of writings spilling out of and into Hecker's text, particularly the paradigmatic 'dance mania', the medieval St. John's (or St. Vitus's) dance, and the Orientalizing annotations offered by his English translator, Benjamin Guy Babington (1794-1866).

Chapter 1 traces the institutional history of Hecker's writing in 'The Dancing Mania' through various translations, particularly its publication history in the English-speaking world. The rest of the book shows how this history of translation and scientific dissemination decisively enabled multiple additions to and importantly the Orientalization of the choreomania figure and concept in ensuing decades.

Chapter 1 also considers epistemological and methodological problems associated with writing a history of epidemic dance in the literary scientific world of the nineteenth century. Chapter 2 presents the first paradigmatic case of 'choreomania', the medieval St. John's dance (retrospectively described as St. Vitus's dance), further presenting the author's central concern with Foucault's history of 'madness' and the way a history of 'choreomania' extends this to cases of unchoreographed dance at the edges of the social and human sciences. The chapter highlights the Eastern-inflected Dionysianism with which nineteenth-century writers, including Hecker and Nietzsche, viewed the purportedly orgiastic Middle Ages; the author contrasts this with their own reading of Latin chronicles and annals, suggesting that this demoniacal plague, as it was often described, actually constituted a form of social fête and, often, dancing migration. Chapter 3 moves to the early modern writings of Paracelsus on St. Vitus's dance, importantly offering the first practical and theoretical amalgamation of dancing crowds with medical theories of gestural spasms, which would define centuries of writing on the 'dancing disease'. The chapter considers Agamben's notion of purposeless gesture, a term he employs to denote chorea's proximity to dance, specifically its non-narrative, non-teleological aspects, a 'purposelessness' that, later chapters show, would become central to the deployment of criticism against 'choreomania' as movement devoid of (in fact inhibiting) productive labour.

In chapter 4, I turn further to the question of meaningless gesture, specifically as this came to describe early eighteenth-century popular religious practices among the French Convulsionnaires (Convulsionaries) of Saint-Médard, a heterodox group of enthusiasts performing acts of contortion and dissidence in the margins of the nation's capital. I argue that Convulsionaries' effusive poses, however, suggest more than a hysteroepileptic brand of acting out, as Charcot would later contend, and reveal instead a spirit of political contestation resonant with emerging theories of psychiatry emphasizing feminine and queer sorts of gestural and emotional excess.

Chapter 5 takes the notion of excess gesture and pathological contagion further into the terrain of early sociology and the modern theorization of unruly crowds. Beginning with the dramatic upheavals of the French Revolution and their recuperation into early crowd theory, the chapter foregrounds a discursive genealogy linking revolutionary movements and the emergence of nation states with involuntary Jerks' among religious enthusiasts in the American South. The chapter importantly introduces the rise of crowd theory to describe (often disparagingly) the imitative gestures and mimicry particular to large, roused groups of people, a line of theorization that would become increasingly central to later theories of choreomania overseas.

Chapter 6 centres on Charcot and the rise of neurology, as well as (far less often noted in studies of his work) the historiographical aspects—or 'retrospective medicine'—he and a number of his collaborators engaged in at the Salpétriére hospital in Paris, methods that I show would decisively influence the way choreomania, as a putatively ancient disorder, would become translated and exported into medical theory overseas. The chapter argues that Charcot's recourse to ancient images, artifacts, and narratives set the stage for a significant methodological shift in scientific research from laboratory to fieldwork; and, importantly for the discursive history of choreomania I tell here, from colonial medicine to anthropology, hastening the journey of the 'dancing disease' onto colonial terrain.

Part II draws the discourse on choreomania further into colonial territory, and introduces substantial case histories. Chapter 7 turns to the southern Italian tarantella and the Orientalist exoticism imagining southern Italy as a gateway to Africa and the East. The chapter emphasizes comparative methods in medicine and anthropology and the discourse on sex, fakery, and lies that articulated choreomania as a feminine and colonial disorder of duplicity. Woman, Freud wrote, was a "dark continent", like Africa, unknowable and other; as a disorder of colonialism and femininity, choreomania becomes a "dark continent", obscurely ancient and also as such nearly unfathomable. Chapter 8 moves further into Africa and South America, to Madagascar and Brazil, where travelling physicians, including some of Charcot's students, meet live instances of political turmoil they read as yet another example of the dancing disease. Significantly, choreomania now comes squarely to signal the "disorder" of anti-colonial revolt. Drawing primarily from Scottish missionary physician Andrew Davidson's (1836-1918) colonial medical writing on the disease-like protest known as the imanenjana, as well as from the French-trained Malagasy physician Dr. Andrianjafy’s reinterpretation of the imanenjana as a malarial type of neuromotor disease, I argue that choreomania becomes imagined as a disorder of political contestation and regime change, displacing the polite antiquarianism of earlier nineteenth-century readings.

Chapter 9 moves to the American Plains, where a further political movement, the Ghost Dance, highlights cultural contestation in response to widespread repression of Native Americans together with the rise of government-sponsored ethnographic studies. The Ghost Dance, which Mooney likened to St. Vitus's dance, provided him with a phantasmatic link between current events and earlier instances of the so-called dancing mania, positioning Native American dancers in a genealogical line with ancient ecstatics and collective delusion. Perpetuating the Orientalist trope by which antiquity and alterity meet in a convulsive, feverish display of excessive dancing by colonized subjects, the discursive history of the Ghost Dance especially highlights the politics of popular discourse on energetic waste and cultural war.

In chapter 10, I turn to a further set of case histories of choreomania in the South Seas, extending the scope of the "dancing disease" and its purported sightings to the far reaches of Antipodean life, as cargo cults and other liberation movements further complicate the genealogical relations between social bodies in distress and their (obliquely) imagined prehistories. Chapter 11 finally turns to the rise of popular dances in America—the tango, animal dances, and dance marathons—likened in medical literature to medieval dance manias, further entrenching the literature on choreomania in an Orientalist and now an increasingly racist discourse on darkness and the supposed pathological angularity of gestural disinhibition. This final chapter further inscribes the racialized body—increasingly, a black body—into the Orientalist prejudice against obscure and unknowable others.

The coda ultimately brings the discussion on choreomania into the twenty-first century, to reflect on my own methodological moves in tracing this genealogical history of the dancing disease as a history of dance in an expanded field; and Introduction + 21 the implications of this extended genealogy for thinking about concepts of dance imbricated in the geo-choreopolitics of protest. Every study is determined by its author's places and privileges. This book has been written from the standpoint of a woman long trained in classical ballet, modern and contemporary dance, and Argentine tango but also long attuned to the ambivalence and unpredictability of dancing crowds. From the center of a mosh pit at a Nirvana concert in Montreal to a rave in the English Cotswolds, my adolescence and early adulthood were marked by moments I experienced as uninhibited dancing and the intoxication that came with what a good friend and I saw as being high on life. But with these high points came moments of anger and frustration. When a friend of mine was (as I learned subsequently) taken away by police to a psychiatric hospital because she refused to stop dancing at a protest, I was livid. This offense on the part of the local authorities epitomized to me everything that was wrong with political life: the coalescence of forces of law with the forces of capital to camp down on a young woman taking up public space; spirited expression throttled; protest confined. This book attempts to reckon with a few of these issues, horribly incompletely. But I hope to have marked out a small area for reflecting on the meeting point between control, abnormality, and disinhibition, as well as the language of dance where it meets those of political disorder and disease. I hope this work will inspire more studies of dance, psychiatry, and colonialism, and the discourse on imitation that has branded uncontrolled movement as quaint, at best; at worst, as dangerous and unthinking.

AFFILIATIONS, AUDIENCES, AND INSTITUTIONS
'Every writer on the Orient . . . assumes some Oriental precedent', Said writes, 'some previous knowledge of the Orient, to which he refers and on which he relies'. So too, Said writes, highlighting the institutional ecologies within which such ideas take shape, 'each work on the Orient affiliates itself with other works, with audiences, with institutions, with the Orient itself'.

The Orient, as an occidental construct stretching from India to Africa and the Middle East, emerges out of pre-existing fantasies about the East assumed by Orientalist writers to be commonly shared, and extends these to produce an evolving fiction without origin or centre, even if the fiction may be concerned with both. This is a fiction that simultaneously draws on geographic regions that are real and arbitrarily connected in the Orientalist imagination; and it spins new imaginaries about this expansive terrain—the so-called Orient—by shifting and spreading the terms of its discourse rhizomatically.

Orientalist works, in this sense 'affiliate' with others to construct the Orient, which they simultaneously rewrite. This chapter examines the discursive and institutional history—the affiliations and the fictions—informing Hecker's work, Die Tanzwuth, which I argue shapes the nineteenth-century emergence of the choreomania concept, though Hecker, I submit, is not alone 'author' of the modern notion of choreomania. Rather, Hecker participated in (and was in many respects at the helm of) a moment in medical science in which the very movement of modernity appeared as a discourse of experimental reason and pragmatic application, but also a literary pursuit, engaged in historiographic antiquarianism. Concepts and figures of thought among medical writers reprised ancient, often mythic tropes: in the case of choreomania, most prominently, Dionysian bacchanals. The following chapter foregrounds the way the choreomania concept emerged in the nineteenth century, out of other literatures and figures of thought, in tandem with a whole set of historical, material, and institutional transformations. This chapter is about method, and how method is determined by institutional configurations, audiences, and the vicissitudes of individual presses and societies, co-determining ecologies of production and circulation.

This chapter argues that 'choreomania' could only emerge as it did in the long nineteenth century, and that it is fundamentally reflective of the modern industrial West. The discursive history of 'choreomania' reveals an emergent set of concerns about collectivity, crowds, and disorder saturating medical and scientific thought, at a time when scientists sought to countermand an economic and political rush to the future with queries about origins, and about the human and ecological past.

'Choreomania' becomes allied with—in many respects, a variation, expansion, and transformation of—Orientalism, a force of plasticity morphing and migrating at the time, and like choreomania concerned with precedent. With Hecker, choreomania became a disorder of collective chaos increasingly mapped onto marginal bodies seeming to impede the rise of modern nation states. 'Choreomania' with Hecker and writers after him signalled all that was primeval and disruptive among groups of people apparently not yet moving rationally or smoothly—not yet demonstrating the modern, curvilinear quality of torque.

The history of choreomania thus describes what Bergson calls the biophilosophical motion of transformism, by which biological entities and thoughts evolve, without a first cause or origin. Concepts and bodies, Bergson argues, unfold over time, displacing a moving centre through acts of invention and reduplication. Concepts thus have no 'history', no origin (even if they may be concerned with these), only present iterations that are continually displaced; in this sense, concepts perform choreographic trajectories, often weaving through discursively or institutionally marginal sites.

This process, I submit, constitutes a 'marginal' function, which we may see in contraposition to Foucault's notion of the 'author' function, by which an author must be understood as an assemblage composed of many parts: editor, publishing house, social and institutional moment, and a whole discursive sphere determined to value such a thing as an 'author', and so to produce the fiction of a subject meant to inhabit that role. The 'marginal' function takes into account such assemblages, and further suggests that concepts move across 'authorial' sites through repetition, recuperation, and translation: translators' footnotes, later editions, and the whole critical apparatus defining and rewriting a work in later iterations shift the site of the work's instantiation. The margin becomes the space within which works migrate and, almost imperceptibly, transform. Writers in Hecker's wake drew fulsomely from his text, sometimes citing him, often not. He was excavating, collaging, and extrapolating from earlier scenes. Choreomania thus arises as writers pilfer from one another, splintering and redirecting vectors of information, recapitulating and expanding on an ever-shifting set of archival scenes. There is no fixed ‘centre’ to the choreomania story; only a perpetually moving and constantly returned-to cast of illustrations, to which more were periodically added. Although Hecker’s writing on St. Vitus’s dance gains the consistency of a paradigm inasmuch as it is by far most often repeated and rehearsed, it does so, I venture, because his writing offers the plasticity and partiality of the example, rather than the rule. The concept of choreomania

EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE is a zone of intensity in the history of nineteenth- and twentieth-century modernity, a clustering of cases that never quite cohere yet grow and morph across continents to describe the disorderly movements of crowds and individual disorders purported to echo and portend these. Knowledge in the story I tell here is thus not disciplined but anarchic: it borrows and steals, overhears, exaggerates, jumps between eras, and performs rash comparative acts. Knowledge of choreomania, or more often knowledge about choreomania, flits between neurological practice, historical speculation, exoticizing aside, and the amateur’s passion for collecting outlandish tales. Choreomania, then, is constructed from discursive bits, assembled and reassembled, moving through disciplinary nodes and losing, or acquiring, new traits on the go. As an idea about bodies spilling out of bounds, choreomania itself spills out of bounds, morphing, recuperating figures of thought—about spontaneity, Dionysus, the Middle Ages, plague—across fields, without stopping for very long at any one. In this sense, this book—rather than showing an increasingly rational scientific mindset in nineteenth-century modernity, what Foucault calls a history of veridiction (véridiction), describing scientific and governmental processes of truth-making (rather than earlier regimes propounding truth or vérité)—offers a history of scientific literature concerned very much with neither.’ Veridiction held little sway for writers on the dancing disease, who offered narratives as if their dramatic power alone suggested the intuitive validity and literary interest of their study. Dramatic narratives—composed of brief and loosely connected scenes of dance-like ferment—constitute this disorder’s primary site of discursive instantiation, its performative coming-to-be. Choreomania became itself through discursive repetition.

SCENES AND SCENARIOS
Although I describe ‘scenes’ and ‘scenarios’, borrowing Diana Taylor’s term, and the distinction between them is slight, it is nevertheless worth noting. A ‘scene’, in the Foucauldian sense I employ, suggests an embodied event without finality or necessarily the implication of repetition. A ‘scene’ is a portrait of actions and events derived from the annals of the past: people engaged in bodily activity, whether or not the exact contours of their motions, intentions, or outcomes may be clearly determined. A ‘scenario’, closely related to a ‘scene’, further denotes what Taylor describes as the quality of repeatability—what she calls the ‘paradigmatic’ aspect that implies ‘a schematic plot, with an intended (though adaptable) end’. Scenarios are social scripts that precede the fixity of a written script, but nonetheless anchor cultural and historical realities in particular modes of narrative and performative interaction. A conqueror once again subjugating a native woman may participate in a ‘scenario’ that predates a script that may later describe it, but which constitutes, by its paradigmatic status, a whole mise en scène telling performance historians of the forms of action that characterized bodily and cultural being in the past. Whereas some of the ‘scenes’ I describe constitute ‘scenarios’ of a sort—repeatable, familiar forms of action that encapsulate historical and cultural realities in a more or less paradigmatic way— I am mostly intent on describing scenes that, when repeated by Hecker and others, become themselves paradigmatic.

The archival repertoire moves scenes along through footnotes, gossip, and asides; and becomes a ‘scenario’ describing medical thought in formation as it comes to be scripted into medical literature. In effect, there never is any textbook choreomania, any hegemonic fixity to the choreographic score; it is never exactly a diagnosis, but remains, through its iterations, a collection and collation of scenic events. Choreomania in this regard was a literary and performative diagnosis: dance manias never gained a ‘truer’ reality than on the medical page and in its margins—margins themselves written by and large overseas, as writers continually recast choreomania as an epidemic of dancing and disrepair recurring offshore. Reconfiguring thus the terms put forward by Taylor, this genealogy—and choreography— suggests an archive of moving bodies; but also, significantly, a repertoire of archival movements and turns.


Obscuritas Antiquitatis

ARCHAEOLOGY, GENEALOGY, CHOREOGRAPHY
This book thus takes Foucault’s notion of the discursive formation out of the realm of archaeology and genealogy into what I describe as choreography, a system of motion and transfer. Archaeology and genealogy are two overlapping methods Foucault presents, primarily in Les mots et les choses: Une archéologie des sciences humaines [The Order of Things] (1966) and Larchéologie du savoir [The Archaeology of Knowledge] (1969), as well as Surveiller et Punir [Discipline and Punish] (1975) and his essay ‘Nietzsche, la généalogie, lhistoire’ [‘Nietzsche, Genealogy, History’] (1971) to describe his work quarrying the past as a set of layers or strata, relations and conversations, not moving teleologically towards increasing rationalization or better governance but comprising their own more or less coherent logics (their discourses). Hecker’s essay “The Dancing Mania” engages such a choreographic motion. His essay appeared in multiple editions after its initial publication in Berlin in 1832, including translations into Dutch, French, and Italian. Also immediately translated into English by the London-based Sydenham Society’s Orientalist treasurer, B. G. Babington, Hecker’s essay marked the first of the Sydenham Society’s publications, distributed to all its members. A third English edition of Hecker’s text, significantly, became available for the general public in 1859, the same year as On the Origin of Species by Charles Darwin (1809-1882). The work of Charles Darwin, "On the Origin of Species: The Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life," was concerned with origins and presented a teleological progression. Hecker's work, "The Epidemics of the Middle Ages," was translated into English and consisted of three essays: "The Black Death," "The Dancing Disease," and "The Sweating Sickness." In 1859, a short essay titled "Child-Pilgrimages" was added, which the editors considered valuable as it was the first and only English translation of Hecker's work.

Hecker's work on dancing manias gained popularity through various media outlets, including magazines such as the Penny Magazine of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, Fraser's Magazine for Town and Country, Chambers’s Journal of Popular Literature, Science and Arts, Popular Science Review, St. James’s Magazine, and Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine. His depiction of dancing manias spread nearly verbatim and informed general reference works such as the Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge (1888).

Hecker's monograph, "Die Tanzwuth, eine Volkskrankheit im Mittelalter," was first translated into Dutch and published in 1833. The French translation, "Mémoire sur la chorée épidémique du moyen Age," was published in 1834, followed by the Italian translation, "La Danzimania, malattia popolare nel medio-evo," in 1838. Hecker's three essays were first collected and translated into English in a single volume, "The Epidemics of the Middle Ages," published in 1835. The work was reprinted twice before being released for the general public in the standard 1859 edition. In 1865, Hecker's trio of essays was re-edited in German and published as "Die Grossen Volkskrankheiten des mittelalters: Historisch-pathologische Untersuchungen." 

 Based on the Real-Enzyklopädie of Herzog, Plitt and Hauck, 3rd ed., 4 vols., vol. 1 (London: Funk and Wagnalls, 1891), 602. This encyclopedia appeared in numerous versions throughout the latter half of the nineteenth and early twentieth century, from Johann Jakob Herzog's (1805-1882) original German edition, the Realencyklopädie für protestantische Theologie und Kirche, published in 28 volumes.

For the general English reader able to procure a copy of Hecker's text in its 1859 edition or to learn about it in popular magazines, choreomanias constituted a new sort of historical curiosity, weird and wonderful. Described in nearly comical terms in popular journals, Hecker's depiction of dance maniacs emphasized physical eccentricities and emotional fervor, characteristics folded into an increasingly fashionable discourse according to which epidemic contagion was typical of modern life. General and scientific interest in popular epidemics was growing.

Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, by popular historian Charles Mackay (1814-1889), published in London in 1841 and 1852, reprinted in 1856, and again in multiple further editions in the century and a half to follow, catalogued every sort of common mania for the general reader, from the 'tulip mania' to witchcraft delusions, attributing all these to human beings' apparently universal propensity for gregariousness and imitation. Although Mackay omitted dance manias in his compendium, a new foreword in 1932 by the American financier Bernard M. Baruch (1870-1965) did not fail to make the link.

The cycling epidemic was a further copycat disorder alluded to with a mixture of humour and gravity in the popular press. Like the dance mania, it portrayed excess locomotion among its enthusiasts, particularly worrisome when these were women. In the case of choreomania, however, epidemic dancing motions significantly went nowhere. They erupted as excess energy and affect rather than as the ability to escape constrained quarters and become thus independent. Choreomaniacs, unlike cyclists, seemed instead to lose their capacity for independent motion. Movement of every sort was becoming, more than ever before, an object of study and overarching principle uniting philosophy, politics, and science. In the words of physiologist Claude Bernard (1813-1878), movement fundamentally defined behaviour. In studies conducted by Etienne-Jules Marey.

"Movement, in Marey's terms, 'is the most important act, in that all other functions employ it to actualize themselves.'"* This biological and aesthetic principle extended to the political realm. For anarchist philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809-1865), movement defined all of politics and economics: 'Le mouvement est; voila tout' he proclaimed in Philosophie du progrés [Philosophy of Progress] (1853); 'Movement is; that is all.' Life could be contained in the principle of motion. But whereas modern concepts of movement typically emphasize forward progress (and, in Proudhon's case, political progressiveness), a twenty-two volumes between 1853 and 1868, to The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge, published in thirteen volumes between 1908 and 1914. The English version by Philip Schaff (1819-1893), titled A Religious Encyclopedia... , based on Herzog's German editions, appeared in three editions between 1882 and 1891. Following publication of the third edition, in four volumes (the first of which is detailed above), the text became commonly known as the Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia. I will refer to it as such throughout.

Arendt slightly misquotes Proudhon, adding an exclamation mark for emphasis, but the sentiment is accurate. Proudhon's Heraclitean anarchism takes all movement, change, transformation, 'progress' (which he opposes to 'tradition') (106), as the foundation of life and politics: 'Tout ce qui existe... est nécessairement en évolution; tout coule, tout change, se modifie, se transforme sans cesse: le mouvement est la condition essen- tielle, je dirais presque la matiére de Vétre et de la pensée. II n'y a rien de fixe, de stable, d’absolu, d’invincible, que la Loi méme du mouvement, c’est a dire, les rapports de poids, de nombre, de mesure, suivant lesquels toute existence apparait et s’effectue’ (90). Movement—manifest as relation (‘rapports’)—is the natural state and only law (30-31, 90); it is the first principle (‘fait primitif’) (27); throughout his work______ These moments of disturbance constituted the ripples, breaks, and surges coming up to haunt—symbolically to disorganize or disorder—a forward-moving present. On a technological plane, the introduction of the electromagnetic telegraph in 1833, compounded with the increasing speed and expanse of train travel and the inauguration of the underground metro system in London in 1863, meant that Europe and its allies were ever more in motion, stimulating the industrial revolution that would lead Karl Marx (1818-1883) to suggest in the Grundrisse (1857) that speed—time—would conquer space.© Marx described a capitalist regime driven to geographic expansion but even hungrier for rapid motion. Circulation, including the circulation of money and capital, defined the new era, in a system of flows connecting people and objects in relationships of power characterized by locomotion, though as I show, potentially unproductive forms of movement were typically branded as suspect. Hecker’s depiction of a dancing disease was timely. As Gilroy, Roach, and Gordon have variously pointed out, the languages of music, theatre, film, and, I add, dance—all quintessentially concerned with movement and time—underpinned the modern era, just as modern science and popular culture sidelined these as by-products, wasteful to the industrial man and woman engaged in an ethic of work, with little room left for play.© Yet social dance boomed at the time the choreomania diagnosis circulated. As dance historian Molly Engelhardt has shown, enthusiasm for rapid and racy ballroom dancing soared just as Victorian morality was seething from the effects of the cholera epidemics of the 1830s and 1840s. Contagion and insalubriousness seemed to threaten public life everywhere, not least among dancing groups. The medical notion of miasma, or polluted air, exacerbated already negative opinions about, and fascination for, groups of men and women rubbing shoulders in the dark and dirty dance halls of London.© Bodies bumping against and wriggling with one another seemed embarrassing and risqué, just as bodies moving chaotically in public space worried observers who were writing themselves, for the most part, right out of these scenes, as their somewhat disdainful hosts and raconteurs. With the emergence of germ theory in the mid-nineteenth century, established by Louis Pasteur (1822-1895) in the 1860s, confirmed by microbiologist Robert Koch (1843-1910) in the decades following, concepts of miasma were revised, and the invisible workings of public space and interpersonal contact and communication became even more mysterious, host now to infinitesimally small creatures circulating directly between people, unknown to their carriers. In this context, crowds of people contaminating one another seemed socially disruptive. Added to this were continued colonial expansion and crisis; the explosive appearance of neurology on the medical scene; unprecedented levels of scientific exchange; renewed interest in antiquity; and the emergence of anthropology, to produce a zone of intensity within which ‘choreomania’ emerged.

LITERARY PROCLIVITIES: EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ANTIQUARIAN LITERATURE
Hecker's writing seized the imagination of his contemporaries not only with its urgent interest in contagiousness and disorderly public movement but also with the literary and dramatic interest it afforded readers of all sorts. A far more comprehensive work on St. Vitus's dance would appear in 1844 by the German physician Ernst Conrad Wicke, numbering nearly six hundred pages to Hecker's mere eighty, complemented by horizontal affiliation. In this way, art, life, and politics are always in medias res, in the middle of things; the radical democracy this entails repudiates all religious and biological fixity or teleology. In this respect, Proudhon’s work foreshadows Deleuze’s anarchic mathematico-aesthetic critique of ontological and political fixity and hierarchy; see esp. Gilles Deleuze, Différence et répétition (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1968).

But Hecker's impassioned, elusive, and allusive prose left connections loose, leaping across eras and drawing historical events in sketch form, leaving his readers to imagine a landscape rife with boisterous outbursts of a dancing plague. The idea Hecker put forward was enticing: scenes of people frothing, falling, raving, jerking their bodies, twisting their faces, screaming, hallucinating, and imagining the end of the world. It was capacious enough to enable and invite new scenes to be added exuberantly to it by writers in his wake.

The objects Hecker had at his disposal to carry out his research were as motley as they were rare: ancient medical treatises, Latin chronicles, case studies culled from medical journals, and the occasional traveler's tale. In compiling his narratives, Hecker presented a compelling case of comparative medical history emphasizing dramatic forms. The anecdotal quality of his writing suggested historical progression mattered little: his scenes jumped between eras, emphasizing the Middle Ages but also drawing from classical precedent and gesturing towards early modern, Enlightenment, and modern occurrences of 'choreomania' in Germany, Italy, France, America, and Abyssinia. Human upheavals illustrated one principle: underlying modernity was a spectacularly disinhibited primeval age. He was rewriting medical science, and putting histories, crises, and epidemics at the heart of this renewed field.

In a preface to the 1888 edition of The Epidemics of the Middle Ages, the professor of English Literature at University College London, Henry Morley (1822-1894), one of the earliest professors of English literature in Britain, stressed Hecker and Babington's family histories in medicine, which he also shared, and their strong penchant for literary and historiographical undertakings. Hecker was the first chaired professor of the history of medicine in Europe, a position he held in Berlin until his death in 1850. He had, in Morley's terms, a 'special genius for this form of history. It was delightful to him—and he made it delightful to others... . He studied disease in relation to the history of man, made his study yield to men outside his own profession an important chapter in the history of civilization', and stimulated scientific interest in epidemic history with his literary and historiographical flair. Morley impressed upon his readers Hecker’s wide contribution to encyclopedias and medical journals, as well as Hecker and Babington’s important roles in the medical profession. Babington had been enlisted as a physician at Guy’s Hospital in London from 1840 to 1855, after serving seven years in India as a midshipman upon graduating from Cambridge University as a physician. Babington also contributed to the study of epidemics, lending his attention to the epidemic of cholera of 1832 and serving in public health administration.

For Hecker, natural disasters catapulted nations into new eras. Historians of medicine had to take plagues centrally into account if they aspired to understand human life: “Were it in any degree within the power of human research to draw up, in a vivid and connected form, an historical sketch of such mighty events [as plagues], after the manner of the historians of wars and battles, and the migrations of nations,” Hecker wrote, “we might then arrive at clear views with respect to the mental development of the human race.” It “would then be demonstrable, that the mind of nations is deeply affected by the destructive conflict of the powers of nature, and that great disasters lead to striking changes in general civilization.”

The German pathologist Rudolf Virchow (1821-1902), influenced by Hecker, argued that epidemics were ‘nodal’ points in the progress of history “[characterizing] periods of political and intellectual revolution.” Disease, especially epidemic disease, suggested ‘major disturbances’ of individual and mass life. Although “19. Ernst Conrad Wicke, Versuch einer Monographie des grossen Veitstanzes und der unwillkiirlichen Muskelbewegung, nebst Bermerkungen iiber den Taranteltanz und die Beriberi (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1844). 20. Henry Morley, ‘Introduction’, in J. F.C. Hecker, The Black Death, and The Dancing Mania, ed. Henry Morley, trans. B. G. Babington (London: Cassell & Company, 1888), 5-8, 6. 21. Morley, ‘Introduction’, 7-8. 22. Hecker, The Black Death, 1. 23. Hecker, The Black Death, 1-2. 24. Rudolf Virchow, Die Einheitsbestrebungen in der wissenschaftlichen Medizin (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1849), 46; cited in George Rosen, Madness in Society: Chapters in the Historical Sociology of Mental Illness (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1968), 195. See also Rudolf Virchow, Disease, Life, and Man: Selected Essays, trans. Lelland J. Rather (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1958). 25. Virchow, Die Einheitsbestrebungen, 46, cited in Rosen, Madness in Society, 195.

Hecker was not the first physician to take interest in epidemic history—Hippocrates (460-370 BCE) wrote influentially about epidemics in Of Airs, Waters, Places, circa 400 BCE—he sought to reinvigorate epidemiology in the present day. Medical history in general had to be restored, Hecker argued, gesturing in his inaugural ‘Address to the Physicians of Germany’ to the rarity of this pursuit in his time. Epidemics, for Hecker, held a vastly underestimated potential for medical research and, by extension, for human history. “Epidemics leave no corporeal traces,” he wrote, yet in them “the whole spirit of humanity powerfully and wonderfully moves.” In an extended metaphor comparing the work of historical epidemiology to intrepid world travel, Hecker described a landscape of “barren deserts” revealing “inexhaustible mines,” in which whole portraits of “organic collective life” lay fallow. Medical history, in Hecker's exalted vision, constituted an unexplored landscape of adventure and exotic discoveries. Epidemic history revealed 'convulsions' of the 'human frame' less concrete, but more revealing, than any religious relic or geological stone. With this metaphor, Hecker sought to excavate nothing less than the ancient histories of affective and corporeal life, what I am describing as the extended sphere of movement and dance history, a choreozone dissolving boundaries between movement, medicine, and social science.

Medical interest in the past was not new, as historian of medicine Nancy Siraisi has argued of antiquarian and historiographic interest among Renaissance doctors. But a surge of writing in the nineteenth century heralded new spheres of scientific debate, provoking Nietzsche, by 1874, to bemoan the 'antiquarian' mode of histori-cization by which writers idolized the past as that which could be 'preserved' and 'revered'. 'History', Nietzsche wrote, had itself become a fever. Antiquarianism was in vogue, not least in medical science, though many scientists argued forcefully that they needed to look forward, not back, if they were to advance in their research. And although many scientists abjured the sort of historiography Hecker championed, popular culture in the nineteenth century was saturated with fashions in antiquarian collecting and display, aided by a rapid increase in colonial spoils and the rise of medical museums and anatomy theatres, after the physician Sir Hans Sloane (1660-1753) opened the British Museum in London with his own artefacts.

Throughout the nineteenth century, new museums of every sort opened their doors to ever greater numbers of middle-class visitors, and fresh efforts in archaeology revealed even more extraordinary histories than earlier generations had imagined. Medicine, Hecker thought, participated centrally in this rush to excavate the past. And the special purview of epidemic history was its reach to what was most intangible of the past: everyday bodies moving—in Hecker's view, excessively, extravagantly, noxiously—in concert.

HISTORY'S RETURNS: CONTINUING EARLIER CHOREOMANIAS BY OTHER MEANS
Hecker's account of the relationship between natural upheavals and ancient histories situated dance manias at the heart of modern medical research. History, medicine, and dance, in this formulation, formed an inalienable trio, a discursive node within which the history of humanity unfolds. But this history was as vexed as were live medical bodies. Medical writers gestured enthusiastically towards the past and the other, just as they recoiled from the same. This dual fascination and revulsion for ungainly, uncontrolled movement made choreomania a dance of captivating and suspect alterity, 'affiliating itself' with a complex of ideas about social aggregation in modern political life. R. J. Hollingdale (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 57-123, esp. 72-77. 32. Nietzsche, ‘On the Uses and Disadvantages’, 60. 33. Samuel J. M. M. Alberti, Morbid Curiosities: Medical Museums in Nineteenth-Century Britain (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011). 32 +* EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE Orient emerges in the nineteenth century as a set of ideas related to imperial practice, but also significantly as a continuation of earlier Orientalisms by other means. The Orient is not new in the nineteenth century; but the particular complex of institutional practices and ideas that emerge at that time shift the terms of its articulation. So, too, with choreomania, histories of thinking about collectivity, excess, and plague were already extant; but the terms of their recombination in Hecker's work suggested a new sort of biopolitical and ecosophical disorder that could be exported (and translated) to cases of unruly collective action overseas. With Hecker, choreomania became a disorder of epidemic proportions, ancient yet recurring in the present day. Cases multiplied, as did the repetition of what increasingly constituted a standard set of case studies, including the late medieval St. John's and St. Vitus's dances first and foremost, the Italian tarantella, the eighteenth-century Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, the Abyssinian tigretier, and more, as I detail in the coming chapters. Emphasizing spontaneous acts of conulsive imitation, Hecker depicted scene after scene in which people copied one another and supposedly tapped into corporeal exercises right out of Grecian antiquity, especially Dionysian ones. Although some cases border what we may understand as aesthetically recognizable dance, most cases were dance-like at best, constituted by an implicit fantasy of Dionysian frenzy. The Jumpers of Cornwall, a utopian religious group founded in 1760, offered Hecker a portrait of ecstatic religiosity characterized by frenetic bodily postures recalling, he thought, ancient bacchanals. Jumpers, Hecker wrote, '[worked] themselves up into a state of religious frenzy, in which they have scarcely any control over their senses'. They employed 'certain unmeaning words' and corporeal exercises, including '[jumping] with strange gestures'. They repeated these 'with all their might, until they are exhausted', collapsing into unconsciousness. 'Women who, like the Maenads, practice these religious exercises', he noted, 'are carried away from the midst of them in a state of syncope [sudden loss of consciousness], whilst the remaining members of the congregations, for miles together, on their way home, terrify those whom they meet by the sight of such demoniacal ravings'.** Frenetic gesture coupled with a theatrical tendency towards imitation made religious enthusiasts into 'dance maniacs' in Hecker's view. Their state of fury was exacerbated, he argued, by imitation, an automatic, animal process provoking docile individuals pathologically—and epidemically—to mimic those who were most excited among them. "There are never more than a few ecstatics', Hecker noted, 'who, by their example, excite the rest to jump, and these are followed by the greatest part of the meeting, so that these assemblages of Jumpers resemble, for hours together, the wildest orgies, rather than congregations met for Christian edification'.* The 'total loss of power over the will' Jumpers evinced produced 'an actual disease of the mind', Hecker added, conceding that its effects varied. The Bacchic ecstasy that swept some Jumpers into a beatific state of rapture dragged others to despair. Jumpers, like Shakers, active in England and the United States from the late eighteenth century, and Quakers, a sectarian religious group active as early as the seventeenth century, believed in the exercise of bodily rigours (specifically music and dance) to attain spiritual states; and in the corporeal manifestation of religious ecstasy in everyday bodily acts. This typically produced quaking and shaking motions—hence their evocative names—but only in the nineteenth century came systematically to be described in epidemiological terms. With Hecker, all motions inspiring imitation among people could be attributed to choreomania, a condition that simultaneously epitomized and served as a paradigmatic example of this quintessentially imitative—and theatrical—pathology. Hecker provided scenes which, when juxtaposed, added up to constituting recognizable scenarios. His genealogical method—collaging accounts alongside one another—invited writers to extend the scope of choreomania with new portrayals of pathological sympathy. Choreomania appeared not only as an epidemic occurrence of chorea, such as the French physicians Louis-Jacques Béguin (1793-1859), and others, had previously suggested in their Dictionnaire des termes de médecine, chirurgie, art vétérinaire, pharmacie, histoire naturelle, botanique, physique, chimie, etc. (Dictionary of medical, surgical, veterinary, pharmaceutical, natural, botanical, physical, chemical, etc., terms) (1823), after the French physician Etienne-Michel Bouteille’s (1732-1816) treatise on chorea, and other chorea treatises from the early 1800s. With Hecker, choreomania became a capacious dance-like epidemic, encompassing spiritual and religious dimensions, liable to excite anyone disposed to fanaticism. Variations on the theme of dance-like epidemic contagion and imitation multiplied, largely inspired by Hecker’s work.

Whereas some writers tried to fold Hecker’s capacious concept of choreomania into existing medical theory, others sought to leave the literary scope of the diagnosis to do the work of scientific illustration. The British physician and soon-to-be president of the Royal College of Physicians, Sir Thomas Watson (1792-1882), described the "extraordinary affections" and exalted gestures of choreomaniacs in his Lectures on the Principles and Practice of Physic, delivered at King’s College London in 1836-1837.

Watson tied choreomania into a history of instrumental music and theatrical dance, suggesting that "when music is performed in [the choreomaniacs'] hearing, the movement becomes an actual dance." For Watson, choreomania explained and enacted classical art, specifically ancient performance and what was coming to be known as world literature.

"When crowds are collected together," Watson wrote, "the dancing mania is apt to spread from person to person by a sort of imitative affection, realizing the fable of Orpheus, and giving origin (it may be presumed) to those romantic legends met in the literature of most ages and countries, of universal, involuntary, and unceasing saltation, at the sound of a magic pipe." At the origin of world literature, for Watson, was an incoherent, involuntary jumping motion, a dancing disease. Dance manias were an ancient disorder, he argued, at the heart of the twin sciences of medicine and art.

The poetic figure of Orpheus in Watson's account illustrated and almost proved this strange disease. But it did not quite institute what Foucault called a nineteenth-century regime of veridiction, or truth-making, rather than truth. Watson was concerned with descriptive processes: like Hecker, reliance on literary and dramatic scenarios illustrated and suggested, rather than verified, medical observation.

Described in nearly metaphoric terms, choreomania emerged in Watson's account as if it were not quite an actual dance but unchoreographed movement that became dance in proximity to music. This seemed strange and hardly believable to Watson, yet ancient legend, he submitted, accounted for such phenomena, enshrining them in world literature. Neither history nor popular lore explained the disease, but ancient myth helped to contextualize what appeared as a medical conundrum and to illustrate its clinical aspects. Whittaker, J. Hocknell, J. Meacham, and Lucy Wright (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1859), 90-93.

The ‘two cultures’: dance between science and art

That literature and science were closely allied in the nineteenth century is now a commonplace in studies of the period, as recent works by Engelhardt, Janice Caldwell, Laura Otis, Anne Stile, Gowan Dawson, Nicholas Dames, Allan Conrad Christensen, Josephine McDonagh, David Amigoni, and others have shown. Otis has pointed out many writers’ training in the scientific laboratory as well as in literary method. Yet the use of theatrical or choreographic language to explain scientific case studies has far less frequently been addressed.

Warwick Anderson points out the American Bureau of Health activities in the 1920s as a ‘distant theater for the rehearsal and performance of white American male virtue’ in the Philippines. In Colonial Pathologies: American Tropical Medicine, Race, and Hygiene in the Philippines (2006), Anderson argues that twentieth-century medical and hygiene development projects sit on a continuum with earlier colonial histories, all of them concerned with asserting white (male) cleanliness against the possibility of contamination afforded travellers by variously ‘differentiated’, germ-ridden, and degenerate natives: Filipinos implicitly threatening to these American medical men’s hardy masculinity on account of their purportedly premodern excremental practices and other forms of biosocial spillover.

The uneven biopolitical and biosocial negotiation of (body) borders between Americans and Filipinos reasserted the Americans’ sportiness and, implicitly, their social, scientific, and biopolitical superiority. In this way, American hygiene workers exercised colonial biopower in a theatre of negotiations in which spill rather than spasm was at stake.

In Hecker’s case, nearly a century earlier, dramatic narratives of contorted bodies spilling into public space did so on account not of body fluids or particles (excrement, germs) but of the choreographic process of contagious gesture and imitative behaviour. Hecker’s writing, initially drawn up for a readership of medical practitioners and (he hoped) a new generation of medical historians, performed an implicit appeal to readers to understand, as if of their own capacity for intuition, the self-evidence of the scenarios depicted. This method did not only draw out literary comparisons, but employed literary flourish and dramatic tableaux to sensationalize scenes of dancing mayhem, grounding them in poetic, rather than administrative or (as in the Filipino case) ‘laboratory’, method and truth. Hecker’s contemporaries, including Darwin, the English biologist Thomas Henry Huxley (1825-1895), and other scientific littérateurs, like Hecker typically adopted literary conventions. Gillian Beer has shown that Darwin used narrative devices in his writings—particularly the "plot"—and Caldwell has argued that pre-Darwinian writers borrowed from the Romantic materialist trope to meld self-expression and individual consciousness with natural philosophy. Dawson has drawn links between Darwin's respectable persona and the complex sexual underworld with which his work was entwined. Roach has argued that acting theories fundamentally drew from physiological understandings of the body and natural philosophy to explain theatrical emotion. But the spectacle of uncontrol depicted in Hecker's work gave it an especially stagy air, as if choreomania emerged on medical history's stage as a freak show, lining medical curiosities up from across eras pell-mell.

Laura Otis, 'Introduction', in Laura Otis, ed., Literature and Science in the Nineteenth Century: An Anthology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), xvii-xxviii. See also Laura Otis, Membranes: Metaphors of Invasion in Nineteenth-Century Literature, Science, and Politics (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999); Anne Stile, Popular Fiction and Brain Science in the Late Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012); Nicholas Dames, The Physiology of the Novel: Reading, Neural Science, and the Form of Victorian Fiction (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007).

Warwick Anderson, Colonial Pathologies: American Tropical Medicine, Race, and Hygiene in the Philippines (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2006), 6. Anderson, Colonial Pathologies, 7. Gillian Beer, Darwin's Plots: Evolutionary Narrative in Darwin, George Eliot and Nineteenth-Century Fiction, 3rd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009). Janice McLarren Caldwell, Literature and Medicine in Nineteenth-Century Britain: From Mary Shelley to George Eliot (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008). Gowan Dawson, Darwin, Literature and Victorian Respectability (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010). Joseph Roach, The Player's Passion: Studies in the Science of Acting (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1993).

The volume of recent works that foreground nineteenth-century links between literature and science reveals continued anxiety among contemporary scholars to show that the division between these worlds was not always so. Indeed, the notion of the 'two cultures' divide articulated by chemist, novelist, and critic C. P. Snow (1905-1980) in 1959 already gestured towards an intellectual world in which the distinctions between arts and sciences were not so strictly drawn. As cultural theorist Stefan Collini has argued in his introduction to the re-edition of Snow's pivotal text, Snow in fact sought to bring science up to the standing literature enjoyed, and even to surpass it, in the name of social and political progress. Technology in Snow's view would bring the poor of the world up to a standard of living possible only through the proper administration of natural resources honed by scientifically trained politicians. Literary intellectuals, 'Luddites', as Snow called them, were too backward, obsessed with history, nostalgic, and moored in the trap-pings of privilege. Although there was no room in Snow's vision for a culturally and intellectually informed scientific literature, his debate, reprised by critics F. R. Leavis (1895-1978), Lionel Trilling (1905-1975), and others, pointed to a trend towards splinterization between science and art informed by a complicated past in which scientific and literary modes of inquiry and expression were not so cut off. And indeed, if by the 1890s the president of an Oxford college could exclaim to a visiting don that ‘we don’t talk to them’, that is, mathematicians, seated on either side of his unsuspecting guest, this was far less true of the fifty or hundred years prior, during which the repercussions of the Encyclopédie of philosopher Denis Diderot (1713-1784) and mathematician Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1717-1783) and other Enlightenment efforts at intellectual synthesis had woven the arts and sciences closer together, rather than further apart.*® In Roach’s terms, motion and emotion were twin terms characterizing human and mechanical life, doubling the theatrical and rhetorical arts and all aspects of philosophical and physiological doctrine. Writing in The Player’s Passion, Roach argues that ideas of organism (or organicism) and vitality saturated Romantic thought, following Enlightenment efforts to mechanize—indeed to mathematize—the ‘passions’, conveniently joined to the body, since René Descartes (1596-1650), in the pineal gland right in the centre of the brain. So, too, notions of spontaneity and automatism took a turn in the nineteenth century with the emergence of theories attributing spontaneous action to the unconscious and what Roach notes as its ‘physiological counterpart’, the subconscious, theories fundamental to Darwin and, later, Freud’s work.*° But with Hecker, spontaneous action—bodily automatism as well as uncontrollable emotion—occur as if genealogically from out of ancient time, as a biological and ecosophical force. In this sense, Hecker’s concept of human vitality exceeds the individual; human bodies serve as conduits to biohistorical and geological operations which are manifest, epidemically, far beyond what Freud would later describe as ‘primal urges’ erupting within the strictures of human civilization.*! Taken in this regard, Hecker’s writing on choreomania straddles a heightened period of disciplinary change, where vitalism signals not so much a concentration of spiritual and physiological forces, or yet a psychological impulse, as an ecosophical meeting of historical and corporal intensities. Choreomanias came to be theorized with Hecker as exercises in reverberation: as a repetition of past forms, just where these broke down into formlessness again.

OBSCURITAS ANTIQUITATIS: ANTIQUARIAN MEDICINE AND ‘HISTORICAL FEELING’

As a choreographic approach to history—and genealogy—this book emphasizes scenes of corporeal undoing, the dislocation and relocation of bodies on an imagined historical stage, and the gesture of their abstraction into medical literature. Hecker in particular captured the attention of readers at a time when the popularization of scientific ideas countermanded specialization in medicine and the arts. Likewise, a whole cast of medical men swimming upstream of the tendency towards purely practical research gravitated towards Hecker’s writing in droves. If there is one institution to whose efforts the spread of Hecker’s concept of the dancing disease may be attributed, it was the Sydenham Society, a powerhouse in disseminating medical literature in the age of empire. 

First conceived in the 1840s in London, when 'antiquarian feeling was widespread and, as [diarist Arthur J.] Munby [1828-1910] put it, "everyone was interested in the history of everything,"' the Sydenham Society served as a clearing house for new ideas, many translated from the ancient or the exotic. The 'historical feeling' Munby describes, evinced throughout London, provided an impetus for the founding of interest-specific societies whose purpose was 'to reprint specialized out-of-print works whose appeal was too limited for a commercial publisher'. The English Historical Society and the Camden Society, both founded in 1838, and the Parker Society, created in 1841 to publish writings by founders of the English Reformed Church, were run by elected committees on behalf of an annual membership.

The Sydenham Society 'followed exactly the same plan; but on transposing that plan to a medical context', Munby remarked, it was forced to face a 'fundamental difficulty': 'for better or for worse, most medical men differ from historians in being concerned chiefly with problems of the immediate present rather than with accounts of the historical past'. This 'conflict of interest' between historical curiosity and clinical use emerged 'without ever being resolved'. It was arguably the chief, though not the sole, cause of the Sydenham Society's dissolution after fourteen years.

Writing nearly half a century later in 'Science and Culture' (1880), Huxley was still lamenting the unfortunate invention of the term 'applied science', whose supposed opposition to 'pure' science was not applicable in the real world; the distinction neglected the real relationship between the two.

The Sydenham Society, founded in 1843, had been designed to expand medical knowledge by looking to the past and the foreign. It declared that its mission was to meet 'certain acknowledged deficiencies in existing means for diffusing medical literature, which are not likely to be supplied by the efforts of individuals'. It would publish books that were (1) rare or expensive, including standard British works whose reprint would contribute to their dissemination; (2) ancient or early modern, requiring a reprint and/or translation; (3) especially voluminous, and which could benefit from publication in digest form, whether British or by foreign authors; (4) translations of Greek and Latin authors, and works in Arabic and other Eastern languages, 'accompanied, when it is thought desirable, by the original text'; (5) translations of 'recent foreign works of merit'; and (6) 'original works of merit, which might prove valuable as books of reference' but might not otherwise be published because of their poor commercial prospects. The Sydenham Society also vowed to disseminate these widely. Hecker's collected essays on medieval epidemiology were the first such 'recent foreign works' to be published, appearing in volume 1 of the Sydenham Society publications in 1844. Babington, who was treasurer of the Society, had 52. On the emergence of publishing societies and the dissemination of scientific information in Britain and elsewhere, see esp. C. C. Booth, 'Medical Communication: The Old and the New. The Development of Medical Journals in Britain', British Medical Journal 285 (1982): 105-108, and David A. Kronick, 'Medical "Publishing Societies" in Eighteenth-Century Britain', Bulletin of the Medical Library Association 82. The following text has been cleaned up and corrected:

Nonetheless, criticism of the Society emerged with force, suggesting that antiquity was still a contested epistemic field in medical practice. Thomas Wakley (1795-1862), editor of the influential medical journal the Lancet, made a number of scathing remarks with respect to the Society’s scope and mission: ‘[antiquarians] wear eyes in their polls, in order to see back- wards; but men of science require those organs forward, that whoever retrogrades they may advance. If there be one class______ The New Sydenham Society was created to address the issues that led to the dissolution of the first Sydenham Society. It focused on translating and publishing contemporary works from other European nations, fostering a scientific internationalism in medical circles during the fin de siécle. Founded shortly after the first Sydenham Society's dissolution, the New Sydenham Society was younger, with one of its co-founders, Dr. Jonathan Hutchinson [1828-1913], being only 29 years old at the time. The New Sydenham Society strove to better respond to its membership's needs, addressing complaints about delayed publication, poorly managed funds, and works with no real value to a practitioner-majority readership.

From 1844 to 1857, the Sydenham Society published 29 titles or 40 volumes, but only 19 were considered of practical interest. The Lancet's accusations of obscuritas antiquitatis were answered with structural reorganization, including an annual meeting held in tandem with the annual meeting of the British Medical Association in a different town each year. This change dissolved complaints about the cramped offices on Frith Street in Soho being too small to accommodate more than half a dozen members—always the same overpaid ones.

Despite these debates and challenges, the two societies effectively changed the face of medical literature and its dissemination in the nineteenth century. In the Sydenham Society's 14 years (1844-1857) and the New Sydenham Society's 53 years (1858-1911), nearly 240 volumes were published, expanding the scope of medical history and medical literature in the English-speaking world considerably.®

Medicine was now ancient and modern; its modernity was constituted by its reach to the past and to the foreign. Similar comparative and historiographical initiatives were undertaken in France, with the emergence of the J.-B. Bailliére publishing house in 1821, dedicated to printing significant works of medical history as well as new medical theory reaching readers locally and internationally. Not only was interest in the past debated; comparativism was also on the rise. With the expansion of colonial travel and new interest in comparative pathology, colonial outposts became new sites for the production of medical knowledge, just as writers repeated, rearticulated, and added to paradigmatic case studies. These writers, 61. Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 3. 62. Dr. Ferguson Branson of Sheffield, in a statement suggesting the founding of a society of medical literature by himself and Drs. Joseph and William Bullar, of Southampton, whose letter was printed in the Lancet, 7 May 1842; cited in Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 1-2. 63. Thomas Wakley, Lancet 2 (1841-1842): 285; cited in Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 2. 64. Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 3-6. 65. Meynell notes that, although the New Sydenham Society's membership rose from 1,949 in 1859 to 2,850 in 1860 and then to 3,000 in 1861, the outbreak of the U.S. Civil War saw membership drop by about a quarter. By 1862, only fourteen hundred The translation and annotation of choreomania created marginal spaces that gave rise to other versions of its geo-choreopolitical stakes. The term 'trans-latio' denotes passage, transfer, and shift, as detailed in Chapter 3. This transformative version of scientific history produces knowledge that is not created 'here' and then exported 'there', but rather shifts and refracts a host of mutually imbricated conditions and imaginaries.

The discursive history of choreomania reveals a genealogical and choreographic process by which concept formation occurs in expansive imaginal spaces, as it plays out in relation to real places and sites. The travelling physician confronted with new scenes maps them onto narratives and images known to him, shifting the discursive realm around and within which he rearticulates them, often as if mere additions to the old.

The history of ideas and institutions, specifically the history of ideas about the dancing disease in this case, performs a series of translatios from one discursive realm, one field, to another. These translatios purport to be merely expanding the scope of scientific study, merely migrating. Choreomania moves radically through such processes, from an antiquarian curiosity to a description of anti-colonial revolt.

Choreomania emerges as an ancient excess of motion- and emotion-hovering on the other side of the emphatically, placidly modern. While Foucault highlighted the disciplinarization of knowledge leading up to the nineteenth century, I argue that disciplinarization could only occur in collusion with a contrary motion: a rhizomatic dispersal, fragmentation, and recombination of epistemic centres.

Although for Foucault modern centres of power were erecting ever stricter police states characterized by institutions of corporeal and public control (the prison, the asylum, the school), medical and anthropological writers were also reading one another, as Taussig enjoins us to do, tactilely, with distraction. They intuited ideas about dance and engaged in non-systematic modes of knowledge production, thumbing through fragments in annals and chronicles, chancing on anecdotes and histories.

Medical and anthropological writers compared and contrasted cases of political upheaval, drew up taxonomies of fitful bodies, and in this regard produced structures of disciplinary power inasmuch as their judgments on erratic, fitful corporeality cast these as aberrant and ill. But their opaque writings were also characterized by almost Borgesian lists of seemingly unrelated events, jumbled descriptions, and hearsay.

The writers I discuss in these pages collected, collaged, interpolated, and imagined choreomanias, glossing one another's observations and archival finds. Returning consistently to Hecker's essay, they repeated, with variations, what he collated in his eccentrically organized and in many respects unfinished text.

The history of choreomania is a history of passages or translatios by which ideas about disorderly collectivity move across disciplines, geographies, and eras. What results is a discursive zone of intensity describing an entangled set of concepts eluding the exactness of definition. There is no definitive concept of the dancing disease, only a web of interrelated case studies. This chapter and the next argue that Hecker's narratives, particularly his vivid description of the St. John's or St. Vitus's dances, become paradigmatic in the sense that Agamben puts forward. The paradigm, Agamben writes, is the heightened example, that to which all further examples of a particular sort refer. But the paradigm, paradoxically, becomes paradigmatic by repetition. It is, Agamben writes, reprising philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn (1922-1996), 'simply an example, a single case that by its repeatability acquires the capacity to model further examples and attitudes.'

Agamben writes: 'the paradigm goes from the particular to the particular.' It does not describe rules or principles; it does not become more 'true' because of its adoption as a model. It only retains its status as such until it is replaced by another often repeated example or trope. In this sense, choreomania is nothing more than, but also as much as, the imbricated set of examples or 'scenes' that make it up.

In the next chapter, a closer look at Hecker's reading of the St. John's and other 'epidemic' dances reveals the fantastical incursion of Grecian bacchanals onto the medieval stage, a fantasy reprised by Nietzsche in his ambivalent discussion of the Middle Ages. Hecker's paradigmatic example then gains a genealogy of its own, linking it to earlier ideas about disorder and dissent characterizing Europe's purportedly darkest age.

Madness after Foucault: Medieval Bacchanals

Eras of greatest material and moral distress seem to be those during which people dance most.... —Philippe de Félice, L'enchantement des danses et la magie du verbe (1957)

FOUCAULT NEVER wrote the history of the 'Orient' that the initial preface to History of Madness [Folie et déraison. Histoire de la folie à l'âge classique] (1961) promised, though his work carved out a rich space of thinking about madness's discursive coming-to-be, the language and institutions that made 'madness' a thing—an object of scrutiny, language, and biopower—whereas it had been only, he argues, undifferentiated, inarticulate stuff. Madness, for Foucault, was, before the advent of self-styled 'reason', an equal player on history's stage, a set of experiences not less than any others, a series of alternative modes of being with or alongside 'truth', before 'truth' became construed and co-opted as that which reason deploys and unreason ('déraison') decries.

This book, and this chapter in particular, seek with Foucault to tell the story of a madness before 'madness' came to be described; but also with Foucault to tell the history of this telling. The one cannot be conceived without the other; so, too, the telling leaves more traces for the historian—or genealogist—rendering the told a far trickier and more elusive beast. What this book also argues, however, is that dance—specifically, dancing manias—complicate the history of 'madness' Foucault outlines, and so too the history of madnesses more generally. This book excavates a series of proliferating narratives about the 'dancing disease', revealing a fantasy about origins, such as Foucault suggests the 'Orient' represents (as in the epigraph to this book). But this fantasy also construes primitive, 'Oriental', history in plural, pre-individuated—and significantly in corporeal, dancing—terms. The choreography of this fantasy tells the story of dance's origins and of dance as origin: that which phantasmatically constitutes the modern rational self's other, prior, beastly self—the self perpetually threatening chaotically to re-emerge as spectacle. This is spectacle as a show of origins that might engulf those watching, though they may attempt to abstract themselves, as moderns, from the rumbling horde.

NARRATIVE ENDS, MYTHIC BEGINNINGS: DANCE HISTORY

The book then is about a fantasy and paradox: dance, it seems, has no origins. But it has a history of narratives about origins. In the European tradition, Susan Leigh Foster reminds us, these narratives tell of dance's emergence from the festivities of the ancient Jews (according to Jesuit chronicler and choreographer Claude Francois Menestrier [1631-1705]); or, in the formulation of the French encyclopédiste Louis de Cahusac (1706-1759), from the primeval womb: body breathing, eyes fluttering, arms opening and closing, feet stepping.

The first of these origin narratives suggests a genealogical ascendance from the ancient Egyptians and the Jews to the Greeks, and from there, we may presume, to Europe and America. The second approach is physiological, describing dance as innate action of the human body, a process as essential as breath. Choreomania narratives draw from both types of fantasy, attributing dancing plagues simultaneously to the practices of ancient revellers and to the automatic mechanisms of the human body. Hovering between culture and nature, primitive practice and bodily impulse, 'choreomania' appeared to its nineteenth-century observers to participate both in history and biology. In this regard, choreomania represents a biohistorical concept, where biohistory denotes, in Foucault's terms, 'the pressures by which the movements of life and the processes of history interfere with one another'. 'Movements of life' in this view are so entangled in one another that 'life' and 'history' become indistinguishable. Biohistory further underpins the history of biopower, which Foucault understands as a morphing set of systems and ideas that govern life forms through institutions of knowledge; these institutions determine concepts of normality and normativity, as well as discursive practices: ways of seeing and saying 'truth'.

This chapter argues that choreomaniacs appear in Hecker's ecosophical account not so much to deviate from but rather intensely to echo their surroundings. They do not represent a history of 'dangerous individuals' such as Foucault has described but appear and recur on history's stage as eccentric protuberances: as strange as but also as natural as a hurricane or a tornado. Hecker wrote his story of medieval dance manias in relation to another, now far better known plague, what he may have first termed the Black Death, in a trio of works titled The Epidemics of the Middle Ages (1859). As I showed in the last chapter, this comprised an essay titled "The Black Death', a second titled "The Sweating Sickness', and a third titled 'The Dancing Mania', as well as, eventually, a fourth short essay titled 'Child-Pilgrimages' (1832). The Dancing Mania: A Medieval Phenomenon

Hecker's "The Dancing Mania" posited mass dancing as a medieval phenomenon with roots in ancient Greece and Rome and echoes throughout the ages. Hecker considered the dancing mania as a "medieval" phenomenon, irrational and superstitious, different from the gentle organic account of dancing offered by de Cahusac. Dance manias, in Hecker's writing, were biohistorical excrescences far removed from enlightened civilization or linear historical progress.

This chapter focuses on Hecker's fantasy and traces his writings, drawing out a history of late medieval European corporeality. The chapter also seeks to reveal the history of dance in Latin chronicles and annals, suggesting semi-structured choreographic formations.

Foucault's perspective on madness and dance manias

Foucault articulates "madness" as intangible and indescribable, the primordial other against which scientific modernity construes its rational, "reasonable" self. "Madness" becomes the set of experiences categorized scientifically, legally, and philosophically in opposition to Enlightenment clarity. In Foucault's work, individual madmen and madwomen appear to lack reason, but they participate in a "mad" condition that strays confidently from a verifiable and generally held "truth." As an example, Foucault offers the Encyclopédie entry for ‘Folie’ (madness), which suggests that when one strays from reason without knowing it, because one has no ideas of one’s own, one is an imbecile; when one strays from reason, knowing it, because one is enslaved to a violent passion, one is weak; but when one strays from reason with confidence, 5. Few studies of medieval dance exist, due to the paucity of sources. Where these do exist, they tend to focus on late medieval courtly practices and music, though some recent studies have emphasized ecstatic rapture and ritual. See e.g. Karen Silen, ‘Elisabeth of Spalbeek: Dancing the Passion’, in Lynn Brooks, ed., Women’s Work: Making Dance in Europe before 1800 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2007), 207-227; Robert Mullally, The Carole: A Study of Medieval Dance (Farnham: Ashgate, 2011); Ann Buckley and Cynthia J. Cyrus, eds., Music, Dance and Society: Medieval and Renaissance Studies in Memory of Ingrid G. Brainard (Kalamazoo, MI: Medieval Institute, 2011); Luisa del Giudice and Nancy van Deusen, Performing Ecstasies: Music, Dance and Ritual in the Mediterranean (Ottawa: Institute of Medieval Music, 2005); John Stevens, Words and Music in the Middle Ages: Song, Narrative, Dance and Drama, 1050-1350 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), esp. 159-198. Margit Sahlin, in Etude sur la carole médiévale: Lorigine du mot et ses rapports avec léglise (Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksells, 1940), offers a detailed etymological analysis of the term carole—widely used to denote joyous popular dancing—and a useful historiographical account of popular dance practices in relation to (often at odds with) the Christian church, including pre-Christian practices associated with St. Vitus and St. John. Frances Eustace with Pamela M. King, in ‘Dances of the Living and the Dead: A Study of Danse Macabre Imagery within the Context of Late-Medieval Dance Culture’, in Sophie Oosterwijk and Stefanie Knéll, eds., Mixed Metaphors: The Danse Macabre in Medieval and Early Modern Europe (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars, 2011) 43-71, esp. 45-46, highlight the challenges of dance (specifically choreographic) history in the Middle Ages. 6. ‘Unreason’ (déraison), lan Hacking points out, is an elusive but pervasive notion in Foucault's work, nearly absent in the English editions of his writing, though fundamental to his original aim. Foucault originally published Folie et déraison. Histoire de 1a folie à Vage classique [Madness and Unreason. History of Insanity in the Classical Age] in 1961, effectively his doctoral thesis, supervised by Georges Canguilhem, and supported by philosopher Jean Hyppolite (1907-1968). A heavily abridged version soon came to be known—and widely celebrated as well as decried—in English as Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason, first published in the United States by Pantheon Books in 1965, and republished in the United Kingdom by Tavistock in 1967. This in parts faulty translation by Richard Howard reprised and slightly enlarged Foucault’s own radical 1964 abridgment, also published by Plon, and which, Hacking points out, not only cut almost half the original nearly seven-hundred-page text but also downplayed the term ‘déraison’, leaving only Histoire de la folie prominently visible on the cover page, with Folie et déraison inset as subtitle. See Michel Fouca______ Histoire de la folie à l'âge classique (Paris: Plon, 1964). Foucault's unabridged original book, republished in a newly prefaced 1972 edition (partially following bitter controversy with Jacques Derrida) as Histoire de la folie à l'âge classique, recently became available in English in a new translation, as History of Madness, ed. Jean Khalfa, trans. Jonathan Murphy and Jean Khalfa (London: Routledge, 2006). The new full English translation recovers both prefaces and ancillary material. Hacking offers a brilliantly detailed analysis of the complicated abridgements and retranslations of this work in English and French, in Ian Hacking, ‘Déraison’, History of the Human Sciences 24.4 (2011): 13-23. See also Hacking’s foreword to History of Madness (2006), ix-xii. For further discussion of this complex history of abridgements and re-editions, see also Arthur Still and Irving Velody, ‘Introduction’, in Still and Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 1-16; and Colin Gordon's pivotal essay ‘Histoire de la folie: An Unknown Book by Michel Foucault’, first published in History of the Human Sciences (1990), republished in Still and Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 19-42. On Foucault’s prolonged dispute with Derrida, leading to the new preface, where Foucault defends his work as constituting a moment in time, an ‘event’ not requiring retrospective apologies or retractions, see also Michel Foucault, ‘My Body, This Paper, This Fire’, in History of Madness (2006), 550-574; Michel Foucault, ‘Reply to Derrida (“Michel Foucault Derrida e no kaino”),’ Paideia 11: Michel Foucault, 1 February 1972, pp. 131-1477, reprinted in History of Madness (2006), 575-590; and Gordon, ‘Histoire de la folie’, 35-37. Except where otherwise indicated, I refer to Foucault’s standard unabridged Histoire de la folie (1972).

7. Foucault writes: "deduces madness." In Foucault, Histoire de la folie, 241. "e Xville siécle pergoit le fou, mais déduit la folie." (The eighteenth century perceives the madman, but Madness after Foucault + 43 firmly persuaded that one is being reasonable, then one is mad.° The mad, in the classical age (widely referred to as the ‘age of reason’), are not individually so, by their own reckoning, Foucault argues; they are mad—significantly, they are perceived to be mad—in relation to a concept of reason that others hold for them. This is different from déraison, according to which individuals might wilfully refute concepts of ‘reason’. Madness in this sense is relational but also objective; it is determined by the purportedly rational observer, who claims, rightly or not, to possess the barometer as to what ‘reason’ constitutes.° As Foucault’s work on discipline further argues, after Canguilhem’s work on normality and normativity, myriad societal structures determine how the objectification of ‘reason’ comes to play out, largely as a complex and nearly imperceptible web of subtly coercive and normalizing measures, institutional and discursive. With choreomania, a slightly different structure of madness comes into play. In the nineteenth-century epidemiological formulation this book foregrounds, choreomania comes to denote a type of madness in which individuals neither believe themselves to be reasonable and rational (contrary to the supposedly truer perceptions of their peers), nor do they merely deviate from accepted behaviors, as ‘dangerous individuals’ who must be cast aside, locked up, or otherwise forcibly cured______ Choreomaniacs, in Hecker's ecosophical account, amplify their era gesturally, by imitating its tremors and quakes. Dance maniacs enter their condition by proximity, which Hecker calls 'imitation-compassion-sympathy' - a cluster of principles denoting multiplication, compounded with relapses over time. Choreomaniacs were contagioned by a surge of historical and ecosophical factors. 'Imitation-compassion-sympathy' unites human beings in what Hecker refers to as 'the general body' and, in his preface to "The Black Death", the 'organism of the world'.

Choreomania was, Hecker argued, an organic event of epic proportions, neither individual nor social but a 'convulsion which in the most extraordinary manner infuriated the human frame'. Choreomaniacs became disorderly by surrendering to a collective impulse, spectacularizing the dissolution of individual subjectivity - a movement originating from out of a doubly primordial place: ancient history and biology, wrapped together in a general ecology unfolding over time.

Choreomanias in nineteenth-century scientific literature constitute a form of madness on account of their scale. While individual choreomaniacs appear strange and deluded, they were notable in the terms of nineteenth-century historical epidemiology due to their capacity to multiply. Choreomanias were not isolated exceptions or deviations but magnifications in intensity as well as scale.

In this respect, the history of choreomania is an ecosophical conception that tells a set of ideas about epidemic madness as that which collectively exaggerates a 'primitive' form of being that is triggered by the crises biohistory brings about. 'Choreomaniacs' were theatrical, representing an ecological crisis by their contorted body postures, and in doing so, they showed their era's imagined primal self to itself. As the author argues in later chapters, this conception sets the stage for Freud's notion of a (typically colonial and childlike) primitive self erupting during times of crisis, symptomatically. Choreomania thus becomes the collective disorder that theatricalizes modernity's sense of crisis.

Specifically, choreomania theatricalizes the human-scale ecological crisis that returns. The author does not just with Foucault write a 'history of bodies' as opposed to a 'history of mentalities'; they also seek to capture the ecological crisis that returns. "Mentalities" themselves are entangled in bodily acts. (44) EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE

intellectual and discursive processes by which abstraction from historical scenes produces new bodies of knowledge and truth—new fictions—which are material and mobile. Knowledge moves—it performs a kinetic act, where 'kinesis' denotes passage, transfer, and repetition. In the terms of Sren Kierkegaard (1813-1855), the Greek concept of 'yivpoi' (kinesis) signals the modern category of 'passage'.10 Kinesis suggests a structure of repetition that implies priority—something happened before repetition could take place—and novelty. With repetition comes difference: the same thing is never, in this Heraclitean formulation, repeated exactly the same way. Choreomanias recur, in medical literature, with a measure of difference. So, too, the discursive formations that fashion them into fictions suggest discursive returns to prior sources and historical conceptualizations: in this chapter, a nineteenth-century return to medieval sources and specifically the imagined 'bacchantic' reality this medievalism purportedly revealed. Choreomanias then pose a particular challenge relative to other types of 'madness' interesting for the history of ideas about dance, inasmuch as they reveal a complex node of fantasies about collective bodily movement and the public performance of disorder and distress. As temporal and spatial excrescences—public theatres of excess—choreomanias represent the choreographic embodiment of crisis. As such, the 'madness' of these events is not constitutional—it does not belong to individual bodies—but conjunctive, circumstantial. Choreomanias are the 'mad' theatricalization of a historical moment in time, a clash of temporalities and cultures. The madness in them is relative, performative: it shows a more global crisis where individuals signalling or signifying difference (as madness) do not. Significantly, as McCarren has argued of nineteenth-century dance, this madness spills out of the collective body politic as dance—in this case, disorganized and pullulating.

Choreomaniacs differ from other types of madmen and madwomen in other respects. They were not representative of the 'Danse des Fous' (the 'Madmen's Dance') Foucault mentions in his brief treatment of medieval folly in the opening chapter of History of Madness; or the figurative round dance Erasmus of Rotterdam (1466-1536) portrays in his playful In Praise of Folly (1509), in which a whole litany of professions parade their petty foibles in turn (none of them literally dancing). Nor were choreomaniacs exactly allied with later depictions of the danse macabre or Dance of Death portrayed in harrowing and occasionally humorous woodcuts by John Lydgate (1370-1451), Guyot (Guy) Marchant (active 1483-c. 1505) and Hans Holbein the Younger (1497-1543), among others, or in a 1424-1425 danse macabre mural in the Parisian cemetery of Les Saints Innocents. These slightly wry but always sobering skel- etal dance-like rounds, like the medieval fools Foucault depicts, represent a particular sort of vice: foolish ignorance, individuals not knowing that their end has come." Highlighting late medieval and early modern literature and portraiture in works by Jéréme (Hieronymous) Bosch (1450-1516), Sebastian Brant (1457-1521), Pieter Bruegel (or Brueghel) the Elder (1525-1569), and others, Foucault shows medieval fools travelling through everyday life in its margins: concretely but also figuratively, they travelled 'liminally', on rafts set adrift at the outskirts of society—not a suggestion that they lived a free and easy existence; but that they Søren Kierkegaard, La répétition, trans. Jacques Privat (Paris: Editions Payot et Rivages, 2003), 60-61.

16. On the nineteenth-century rediscovery of danse macabre prints and engravings, see e.g. Marie-Dominique Leclerc, ‘Réemplois, avatars, redécouverte’, in Marie-Dominique Leclerc, Danielle Quérel, and Alain Robert, Danser avec la mort: Les danses macabres dans les manuscrits et livres imprimés du XVe au XXe siècle (Lyon: Musée de l'imprimerie, 2004), 22. The bibliography on the danse macabre is vast. Early influential historiographies include Valentin Dufour, Recherches sur la Dance Macabre peinte en 1425 au Cimetiére des Innocents [sic] (Paris: Bureaux du Bibliophile Français, 1873), in which the author notes that danse macabre iconography seized the early part of the century's imagination 'passionately' (i). See also Georges Kastner, La Danse des morts: Dissertations et recherches historiques, philosophiques, littéraires et musicales (Paris: Brandus, 1852). Eustache-Hyacinthe Langlois, in Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque sur les danses des morts, 2 vols. (Rouen: Librument, 1851), convincingly argues that danse macabre portraiture represents actual theatrical dance practices playfully executed by living people, an observation rarely remarked on in contemporary scholarship (vol. 1, 116-160); Langlois's iconographic analysis of fifty-four visual representations of the danse macabre appears in Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 2. Gabriel Peignot, in Recherches historiques et littéraires sur les danses des morts et sur l'origine des cartes à jouer (Dijon and Paris: Lagier, 1826), is widely acknowledged to have set the modern literature on danses macabres in motion. Among recent scholars noting choreographic forms, Sophie Oosterwijk suggests that danses macabres typically involved a chain of dancers, but that human life was also typically represented in a circle or semicircle depicting the ages of man, from birth to death. In Sophie Oosterwijk, ‘Dance, Dialogue and Duality in the Medieval Danse Macabre’, in Oosterwijk and Knéll, eds., Mixed Metaphors, 9-42, 29. Madness after Foucault + 45 appear to have been set on a perpetually directionless course.'' Neither are these fools fully cast out, like the Bacchic-type dancers Plato (c. 428-347 BCE) wanted expurgated from his Republic;* they are benignly and perpetually peripheral. Choreomaniacs, in contrast, tear through town. They appear mad on account of their sudden, explosive emergences, their seemingly involuntary—'organic'—outbursts on history's stage. In this regard, choreomaniacs constitute a class of people temporarily united by their folly rather than a general and terminal condition relegating them to a state of perpetual passage. In this sense, too, choreomaniacs were not engaged in the carnivalesque Mikhail Bakhtin (1895-1975) famously described in his work on Francois Rabelais (1494-1553): for Bakhtin, carnival signals the temporary disruption—the upturning—of everyday life, vividly reminding participants of alternative realities, opposed to official cultures.'® Carnivals significantly take place at prescribed moments of the year yet in their chaotic, upside-down quality succeed in infiltrating popular consciousness, stimulating a revolutionary potential. The choreomanias this book describes perform a topsy-tur______ Choreomaniacs, furthermore, present a slightly different cast of symptoms and problems pertaining to madness from hysterics, hypochondriacs, and other types of ‘maniacs’, who by the eighteenth century were generally understood to suffer from excess fluids (including menstrual fluids) or a disorder of the internal spirits.2? Although in many respects, choreomanias displayed characteristics of ‘mania’, including moving too much, and too spontaneously, they did so periodically rather than constitutionally. Hysterics in particular, Foucault remarks, were thought in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries to suffer from excessive, uncontrollable motions, including especially spasms and convulsions, while melancholics were understood to suffer from a deficiency of motion, internally and externally manifest.

In Dance Pathologies, and in ‘The “Symptomatic Act”’ (1995), McCarren points out that madness appears in the (generally female) hysteric's body as an excess of motion, which is then translated into dance—as its quintessential sign. Concomitantly, dancers, she argues, typify madness, in nineteenth-century medicine, by symptomatizing ‘madness detoured’.”” So while dance in the nineteenth century for McCarren epitomized madness, choreomania signals a particularly nineteenth-century fantasy about madness as the collective amplification of excess gesturality: a collective hyperbole. But excessive motion translated into a mania for dance also signaled a complicated type of psychiatric 17. Controversy surrounding the correct translation and interpretation of Foucault’s image of medieval madness, in terms of his employment of the well-rehearsed image of the raft, and his statement that the mad led an ‘easily wandering existence’, is ongoing. Foucault wrote: ‘Les fous alors avaient une existence facilement errante’, which I would render: “The mad then, one might readily presume, led something of a wandering existence’ (Histoire de la folie, 22). He was not implying that their existence was easy, only that they plausibly led a wandering one (standard critiques suggested Foucault too romantically posited that madmen and madwomen in the Middle Ages enjoyed an untroubled life). See esp. Still and Velody, ‘Introduction’, 1-16, 6-7; Gordon, ‘Histoire de la folie’, 32-33; Allan Megill, ‘Foucault, Ambiguity and the Rhetoric of Historiography’, in Still and Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 86-104, 86-92, who emphasizes the purposeful ambiguity Foucault employs not only as a stylistic flourish but as a fundamentally philosophical stance. Dominick LaCapra, in ‘Foucault, History and Madness’, in Still and Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 78-85, points out historian H. C. Erik Midelfort’s well-rehearsed critique of Foucault’s medieval historiography. Midelfort notes that ‘there is only one known instance of a madman’s having been set adrift on a boat, and it is quite possible that the intention was to drown him’. In Midelfort, ‘Madness and Civilization’, 247-266, 254; cited in LaCapra, ‘Foucault, History and Madness’, 79. See also LaCapra, ‘Foucault, History and Madness’, 85n1; H. C. Erik Midelfort, ‘Reading and Believing: On the Reappraisal of Michel Foucault’, in Still and Velody eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 105-109. Midelfort draws on an earlier critique of Foucault's figure of the raft scenario or Narrenschiff in W. B. Maher and B. Maher, ‘The Ship of Fools; Stultifera Navis or Ignis Fatuus?

Choreomaniacs, who did not necessarily individually lack ‘truth’, or stray from it, and who were not always or necessarily ‘unreasoning’, became, it seemed, possessed with one thing: dancing, and the complex of hallucinatory and convulsive agitations that purportedly came with it. Thus the term applied to them: monomaniacs, nineteenth-century psychiatry’s way of describing aberrant obsessions with singular things. But whereas monomaniacs, I suggest further in chapter 4, were disorderly, inasmuch as they emoted and gesticulated too much, in excess conformity with their surroundings, medieval choreomaniacs also complied excessively with past (and foreign) forms of religiosity, clinging to practices becoming outmoded after the Black Death. As such, these dancers further represented excessive, radical resistance to change—and to modernity. So while physicians throughout the classical age and into the nineteenth century understood mania and melancholy to be closely allied, a reflection Freud among others would further a few decades later, and while Hecker underscored the spectacularly convulsive aspect of dance manias, he also significantly sought a far more elusive etiology (or disease origin). ‘Etiology’ (or ‘aetiology’) is the science determining the source of a disease, whether its organic location (head, heart, liver, nerves, etc.) or a disruption of functional processes: in early modern medicine, for instance, an excess or deficiency of ‘humours’ (discussed in the next chapter). Remarkable with choreomania in Hecker’s account was the basis of this hyper-motile, manic ‘epidemic’ not so much in bodily functions as in ancient history. The dancing disease, in Hecker’s biohistorical conceptualization, emerges as if from out of the past, as a disease of archaic surfeit. Choreomaniacs appear where there is a fault line in civilization, a rupture and an opening, out of which they seem to spill. Calling the 1370s ‘dancing mania’ an ‘extraordinary mental disorder’, following on the heels of the worst pandemic in human history, Hecker argued that it exacerbated an already prevailing spirit of superstitiousness made worse by the stresses plague had brought about. Dance manias in this view were organic and historical excrescences signalling the theatricalization______ In this sense, choreomaniacs were not just madmen or madwomen floating by on a nef, or raft. Their disorder was kinetic in another sense. They passed through, leaving spectators aghast in their wake. Reconfiguring the terms put forward by McCarren, madness in choreomania signals excess movement passing through social space as event. What’s more, this is event played out as crisis: specifically, the crisis of modernity, where the past appears to emerge in and nearly to engulf modernity itself. Choreomaniacs thus swarm: they represent a disorder of teeming multitudes tapping into prior states of being, theatricalizing the sudden emergence of a disin- dividuated horde representing, in Hecker’s words, the ‘extravagances’ of the past."

Their 'Bacchantic leaps' and 'wild dance', as they went 'screaming and foaming with fury', presented a spectacle of ancient uncontrol to contemporary eyewitnesses and later readers. As I will sug- gest at the end of this chapter, Nietzsche would in turn alternately celebrate and decry these archaic movements in his rarely noted remarks on St. John’s and St. Vitus’s dance, further link- ing early Christian history with the imagined excesses of a bacchanalian past.

A CONTEXT OF CRISIS: DANCING AMID FLOOD AND BONES
Historians Tison Pugh and Angela Jane Weisl argue in Medievalisms (2013) that every age has uses to which it puts the figure of the 'medieval', from the barbaric and the courtly to the magical and ribald. Hecker portrays the medieval world as a canvas on which to project the most dis- orderly states of civilization not yet privy to Enlightenment rationality. Choreomaniacs, as biohistorical eruptions, were primitive and child- like: spontaneous, unpredictable, and volatile, prey to abrupt, inelegant movements that could with the hindsight of modern science and a gen- eralist's interest in world history be described as aberrant and ill. They were quintessentially bacchantic, uncontrolled, and foreign but para- doxically also unusually responsive to the traumas and crises of their age.

With vivid prose, Hecker described the first assemblages of choreomaniacs appearing in Aix-la~-Chappelle (Aachen) in 1374: 'united by one common delusion', '[exhibiting] to the public both in the streets and in the churches the following strange spectacle', 'they formed circles hand in hand, and appearing to have lost all control over their senses, continued dancing, regardless of the bystanders, for hours together in wild delirium, until at length they fell to the ground in a state of exhaustion. They then com- plained of extreme oppression, and groaned as if in the agonies of death, until they were swathed in cloths bound tightly round their waists, upon which they again recovered, and remained free from complaint until the next attack'. Hecker's hyperbolic language emphasized an irrational dancer caught in an uncontrollable urge to move. The cloths—and the staffs used to tie them— were employed, he surmised, to relieve the pain- ful abdominal distension that 'followed these spasmodic ravings'. The bystanders coming to the choreomaniacs' aid resorted to 'thumping and trampling upon the parts affected' to relieve the dancers' discomfort, while they, 'insensible' to external stimuli, 'were haunted by visions, their fancies conjuring up spirits whose names they shrieked out'. Some saw rivers of blood; others saw the heavens open up 'and the Saviour enthroned with the Virgin Mary'. These hallucinations suggested to Hecker that 'the religious notions of the age were strangely and variously reflected in their imaginations', stimulated by the excitement that widespread death and disaster had provoked in the wake of the Black Death.

The social and historical context for the dances was grim. The Black Death had devastated between half and two-thirds of the population of Europe in the mid-fourteenth century, giving rise to spectacular displays of flagellants and to what Hecker called the 'dancing malady'. Grain prices had surged in the years preceding the Black Death, spurring on waves of peasant revolts in what historian Charles Briggs has described as a 'plague of insurrection' continuing into the sixteenth century, epitomized in the notorious English Peasants' Revolt of 1381, which brought festering tensions to a head.

But upheavals were erupting everywhere. Heightened insurrections between 1355 and 1382 were exacerbated by repeat wars, including the fourteenth- and fifteenth-century Hundred Years War, and pestilence. In this period, millions of people were displaced, without work or food, while populations of entire towns and villages were slashed by more than half. Gilles li Muisis (le Muisis or le Muiset) (1272-1352), an abbot at St. Martin's in the Pyrenees town of Tournay, described the countryside as gutted: 'travellers, merchants, pilgrims, and others who have passed through it declare that they have found cattle wandering without herdsmen in fields, town, and waste lands; that they have seen barns and wine-cellars standing wide open, houses empty, and few people to be found anywhere'.

'In many different lands', li Muisis noted, 'fields are lying uncultivated'. Wolves roamed freely, entering open homes; ravens, kites, vultures, and field mice roamed the countryside. The Black Death had devastated between half and two-thirds of the population of Europe in the mid-fourteenth century, giving rise to spectacular displays of flagellants and to what Hecker called the 'dancing malady'. Grain prices had surged in the years preceding the Black Death, spurring on waves of peasant revolts in what historian Charles Briggs has described as a 'plague of insurrection' continuing into the sixteenth century, epitomized in the notorious English Peasants' Revolt of 1381, which brought festering tensions to a head. Cohn Jr., Cultures of Plague: Medical Thinking at the End of the Renaissance (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 35. Jacques Le Goff cites demographic analyses demonstrating a rise in the population of Europe from nearly 15 million to over 54 million in the 750 years prior to the Black Death (between c. 600 and c. 1348). Further studies showed that the population of Europe reached nearly 73 million in 1300. In Jacques Le Goff, Medieval Civilization, 400-1500, trans. Julia Barrow (London: Folio Society, 2011), 62.

Gilles le Muisit, Chronique et annales de Gilles le Muisit, abbé de Saint-Martin de Tournai (1272-1352) (Paris: Librairie Renouard, 1906), 85-87; cited in George Deaux, The Black Death 1347 (New York: Weybright and Talley, 1969), 110.

Deaux, The Black Death, 110.

48 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE appeared, settling in to live with humans already starved for food and shelter.** Historian David Herlihy (1930-1991) has argued that in some of the more remote towns of England and Italy, up to 70 or 80 percent of the population was wiped out in the last decades of the fourteenth century.*® According to French historian Jules Michelet (1798-1874), in his classic Histoire de France (1833-1841), medieval chronicles related that between five hundred and eight hundred people died daily in Paris and Saint-Denis at the height of the Black Death in 1348.” Ecological upheavals wreaked havoc, curbing centuries of population expansion, as new waves of floods and drought continued to demolish crops and livestock in the plague’s wake.

According to the Chronicle of Liége (1403), floodwaters overtook entire villages in 1373 and 1374. In January 1374, the waters of the Mosel ran so high they reached church altars and filled streets and market squares; villagers had to navigate through the town in rafts. The Kélner Jarbuch reported that on 11 February 1374, the Rhine rose so high that horses drowned in the streets, and this continued until Easter. According to a further chronicle, waters rose so high above the walls of Cologne that boats passed right over them. There, too, inhabitants had to navigate in rafts." This was the context in which the dancing upheaval arose.

It had seemed that the world was coming to an end.” Survivors were ecstatic, and evinced a sense of urgency, gaiety, and occasionally despair. Many abandoned themselves to raucousness encouraged by municipal decree: as during plague times in Rome, when a policy of lectisternium mandated merriment through municipally sponsored feasts, so too in late medieval Europe, from Boccaccio and Machiavelli to Berni and Pepys, plague time was described as an occasion for dissolution.*? Physicians had prescribed flight from plague-ridden towns to curb contamination, and a culture of countryside revelry blossomed. Gender rules shifted, as women who would not have bared their bodies to the opposite sex now, Boccaccio wryly noted, freely sought help for ailments from anyone willing to offer it. Mourning practices fell into disarray, and funerals became occasions for jauntiness rather than lament.“ Every sort of practice was called on to counteract the prevailing spirit of catastrophism. Historian Pierre Champion (1880-1942) in La Galerie des Rois [The Gallery of Kings] (1934) noted that dancing was among a regular cast of popular pastimes during periods of heightened death and disaster: ‘during the plague, the grand’mort raged in Paris in 1348 . . . people dance______ Thus, at least they may giddily forget their sorrows. The Grandes chroniques de France [Great Chronicles of France], compiled between the thirteenth and sixteenth centuries, similarly tells of two monks who, riding through Paris in 1348, witnessed a scene of great merriment purportedly engaged in to ward off death. They saw men and women dancing to the music of drums and bagpipes, and having a great celebration. The monks asked them why they were making so merry, to which they replied: “We have seen our neighbors die and are seeing them die day after day, but since the mortality has in no way entered our town, we are not without hope that our festive mood will not allow it to come here, and this is the reason for why we are dancing.”

Later, the monks discovered that a hailstorm had killed some of the villagers and scared others into flight, suggesting that the dancing had not helped. The chronicle's editor, Jules Viard (1862-1940), posits that the chronicle may have been written by an eyewitness who would have participated in the dancing, revealing some sympathy for the dancers. The German composer and folklorist Franz M. Béhme (1827-1898) further points out in his two-volume history of German dances, Geschichte des Tanzes in Deutschland (1886), that 'plague dances' (Pesttänze) in 1349 might be equated with practices among the so-called Wertheimer, who were said to dance around a forest pine tree until the Black Death left their small town; similarly, in the countryside outside Basel, there was still at the time of his writing in the late 1880s a large field called the 'witch's mat' (Hexenmatte) because, he notes, according to popular belief, the Walpurgis dances were held there. Remainders of 'plague dances' existed elsewhere: every seven years, Bohme recorded, in memory of those surviving the plague, the Metzgersprung (or butchers' leaping) was performed by armed butchers in Munich; the Schafflertanz (or barrel-makers' dance) and Echternach Spring procession (which will be treated further in chapter 6) constituted similar remainders, some dating to later plagues. In their own time, the plague dances were common enough to generate a whole repertoire of popular songs, so that by 1350 in Bern 'more than a thousand armed men' gathered in a dance of their own, mocking the masses of mad people ('GeiBlerfahren') who had passed through town not long before with 'ridiculous dance songs' ('GeiBlerlied') ('travestirenden Tanzliede').

One of the dance songs commonly cited is given in a late fifteenth-century Cologne chronicle as 'Here sent Johan, so so, vrisch ind vro here sent Johan', which may be translated as 'Here is Saint John, so so fresh and happy, here is Saint John!' Some confusion seems to have arisen in regard to this song. The monk Petrus de Herental (c. 1322-1390), to whom I will return, submitted in an extended poem describing the events that the dancers were calling out names of demons: 'Frisch, Friskes'. This may be a misunderstanding of 'vrisch' (suggesting lightness or joy), demonizing the dancers' worship.

There was little to keep survivors from expressing vivacity. Though bouts of plague recurred for a few hundred years after the Black Death reached its peak in 1348-1350, the fourteenth-century plague signalled a shift in social mores. In the last decades of the fourteenth century, a surge of new fashions arose, emphasizing bright colours and pointed shoes: anything to signify jollity, carefreeness and, for many, a survivors' high. According to an early seventeenth-century copy of the fourteenth-century Cologne Limburg Chronicle (1617), 'when the deaths, the processions of flagellants, the pilgrimages to Rome and the slaughter of the Jews were at an end, the world began to live again, and to be joyful, and people put on new clothes'. Taken in this light, the dance 'manias' seem rather benign. According to cartographical analysis by the German physician Hellmuth Liebscher, dancing flocks appearing in 1373-1374 moved roughly from east to west, forking towards the north and south. These dancers first appeared in Swabia, England, and the Netherlands and then spread.

Fashion seems to have been quite a point of contention—revelry and reviling—from at least the middle of the fourteenth century. Hecker notes that possessed dancers, among other 'enemies of fashion', showed fury against the new trend towards 'extravagant . . . love of dress'. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 82n1. The Belgian historian Paul Frédéric (1850-1920) notes that shoemakers were temporarily forbidden to make colourful shoes following the 1370s dances ('De secten', 51).

The Limburg Chronicle, or Festi Limpurgenses, is attributed to Tilemann Ehlen von Wolfhagen (c. 1348-1420), dating from the first decade of the fifteenth century; it chronicles the history of the Rhineland between 1336 and 1398; publication by Johann Friedrich Faust in 1617 was followed by various German editions in the nineteenth century, including by Arthur Wyss for the Monumenta Germaniae historica (1875).

On 50 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE to Hainaut, Flanders, Brabant, the Lower Rhine, Cologne, Utrecht, Tongeren, and Aachen; and then south to Franconia, Metz, and Strasbourg. About a year later, they were in France, and again in Hainault and Holland.*' By 1381, the 'dancing plague' had reached Augsburg, In 1428, a couple of isolated episodes were reported in chronicles and annals: women were seen dancing in Zurich, and a monk was said to have danced himself to death in the cloister of St. Agnes in Schaffhausen.” In Strasbourg, in July 1518, the dancing 'epidemic' re-emerged with force.

Backman has convincingly pointed out that many dancers may have come from Bohemia, proceeding along traditional Hungarian pilgrimage routes, gathering ever-larger numbers of enthusiasts along the way. Pilgrimages typically involved dancing and song, prompted in Backman's view by the heightened excitement rip- tling through towns and villages in the wake of the Black Death and massive demographic upheavals that had displaced millions.** But every sort of petty troublemaker and free spirit seems to have joined in the throngs, as well as a motley crew of religious enthusiasts, anti-clerical revellers, and traditional feast-day celebrants, offering an ever more public appearance of revelry and debauchery to puzzled observers and peers.

FLAGELLNTS, LEPERS AND CHOREOMANIACS Choreomaniacs were among a cast of eccentrics thus marking this period. Slightly more familiar to the contemporary reader, flagellants offered dramatic performances of penance and cele- bration in public space as they moved through vast swathes of Europe, like choreomaniacs often half-clothed, offering bystanders scenes of religiosity that bordered on heathenism and______ 

Cohn Jr. has pointed out, noblewomen cast off their jewels to join in the throngs, suggesting not only the poor were among them.™ Writing over a century earlier, Michelet employed a biohistorical and ecosophical set of images, describing bands of flagellants in ecstatic fury moving through towns as if blown by the wind of divine wrath. Comparing flagellants to a fever, he set them in contrast to the glacial egoism of all those who locked themselves up to feast in egotistical luxury.°° The Flemish historian J. M. B. C. Kervyn de Lettenhove (1817-1891) similarly noted catastrophic pestilence and spectacular displays among flagellants who performed their religious penance by thrusting themselves to the ground in a cross shape and rising up three times to whip themselves, while villagers gawked at the spectacle.** French historian Etienne Delaruelle has described this as a rapresentazione sacra, a theatrical representation designed to show Christ's flagellation to all those gathered to watch.°” In Hecker's account, flagellants carried iron-tipped scourges and beat or whipped themselves until they were bleeding, singing sacred songs and performing dramatized acts of penance in town squares—'welcomed by the ringing of the bells', as 'people flocked from all quarters, to listen to their hymns and to witness their midsummer dances, see Ehlen von Wolfhagen, Die Limburger Chronik, Eingeleitet von Otto H. Brandt. Mit 17 Abbildungen und Anhang (Jena: Eugen Diederichs, 1922), 47-48; Frédéricq, 'De secten', 41. 51. Hellmuth Liebscher, Ein kartographischer Beitrag zur Geschichte der Tanzwut, M. D. diss. (Leipzig University, 1931), 16; cited in Rosen, Madness in Society, 198. 52. See also Backman, Religious Dances, 235-242; Midelfort, A History of Madness, 33; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 90. 53. Backman, Religious Dances, 230-231. See Rosen, Madness in Society, 198-199. John Stevens notes that a collection of songs in Catalan and Latin, in the fourteenth-century Llibre Vermell de Montserrat, suggests in a prefatory note that 'from time to time over a long period pilgrims keeping vigil in the church of the Blessed Virgin of Montserrat have been eager to sing and dance, even in the square by broad daylight. And in that place they should not do any singing unless the songs are decent and devout'. Dancing and singing in town squares, even raucously, seems then to have been a relatively common practice, though frowned upon. In Stevens, Words and Music in the Middle Ages, 182. See also Eustace with King, 'Dances of the Living and the Dead', who further suggest that Perkin Revelour in Chaucer's 'The Cook's Tale', in the Canterbury Tales, cannot resist dancing (II. 4370-4380) (49). 54, Samuel K. Cohn Jr., 'The Black Death and the Burning of Jews', Past & Present 196 (2007): 3-36, 11-12. 55. Michelet, Histoire de France, vol. 4, 220-221. 56. J. M. B. C. Kervyn de Lettenhove, Histoire de Flandre, 1304-1384, 6 vols., vol. 3 (Bruxelles: A. Vandale, 1______ Madness after Foucault's "History of Madness" and the concept of "choreomania" are linked to the performance of processions, which were an integral part of medieval culture. Kathleen Ashley, a cultural historian, suggests that processions were the most widespread and versatile public performance mode until the 17th century, yet they have received little scholarly attention. Processions allowed civic negotiation of official scripts and created a "contact zone," a term coined by Mary Louise Pratt to describe complex, often asymmetrical encounters.

Ashley further argues that processions enabled the dramatic arbitration of difference, but choreomaniacs offered a less harmonious processional drama. They created zones of contact and friction, often disrupting public space and bringing out existing tensions. Choreomaniacs tumbled and tore through public space, theatricalizing difference, described as "demonic," as well as community, rearticulating the terms by which community was construed.

Choreomaniacs, in temporarily joining together revellers and separating out recalcitrant witnesses and hosts, suggested temporary zones of realignment, in which social groups were not just ritually performing difference but actively, disruptively, and often uninvitedly, asserting it. Choreomanias, then, suggest a medieval space of disruption and interference, for which lively foreign dances and songs serve as the choreopolitical sign.

Meanwhile, lepers had already transformed the urban landscape in plague time, which Foucault described as a nascent biopolitics of exclusion. Lepers were cast out of town and, more forcefully, life itself. As Foucault outlined, lepers were ceremonially deposed of their belongings and sent to a peripheral location, tantamount to social death. They were ostracized, made marginal, with no return: lepers had, for all pragmatic purposes, been made before their actual death socially to die.

Foucault describes this process as a great orgiastic fantasy of plague, a time when all laws disappear, and an occasion for the total exercise of biopower. In plague time, urban space was "exhaustively sected," a practice Foucault argues determined further regimes of sequestration and marginalization well into the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries, and continuing to define political practices of marginalization in the 20th century.

Choreomaniacs, described in the 19th century as a brand of medieval "mad," were slightly different. Some sequestered themselves in large encampments outside town, while also at other times conspicuously infiltrating churches and town squares. These celebrants and carousers offered viewers a different sort of contagious spectacle. They contagioned one another and threatened to contagion viewers swept up into their enthusiastic rounds, but they also remained, like the flagellants, theatrical. They came through town and showed themselves effusively as an event. Unlike flagellants, however, dance maniacs offered a portrait of hyperkinetic enthusiasm spurred on by a dubious cast of devils: they were foreign, outsiders, passing through and performing the intrusion of archaic alterity into public space. THE TRIALS OF INTERPRETATION: MODERN MEDIEVAL IMAGINARIES

Readers from at least the seventeenth century offered a number of compelling accounts of these medieval scenes of debauchery and demonism, alternately ascribing them to psychiatric disorders and to organic illness; but also suggesting the dancers were engaging in ancient ritual practices. In his Abrégé chronologique de ‘histoire de France [Abridged Chronology of the History of France] (1696), Francois Eudes de Mézeray (1610-1683) suggested dancers in the Netherlands went around naked, spinning and running, dancing and singing so vehemently they fell to the ground from exhaustion. Calling this a ‘manic passion or frenzy' (‘passion maniaque ou phrénésie’), de Mézeray suggested they would have died from overexertion and bloating if contemporaries had not tightened their stomachs with strips of cloth. Further suggesting that bystanders watching the dancers could catch their frenzy, de Mézeray noted perfunctorily that they were generally believed to be possessed, and exorcised; their dance was also popularly (‘vulgairement’) known as the dance of St. John. De Mézeray suggested this dancing was a sort of psychiatric disease, contemporaneous with other conditions, notably famine and the mal des ardents or St. Anthony's fire (also known as ergotism). But he did not equate the dancing with ergotism, as subsequent authors have done, suggesting instead that the dancers were merely exhausted from their efforts. I tend to agree with this view, but further to argue that bands of dancers traveling through towns and villages in the wake of the Black Death constituted a theatre of suspect alterity, intensifying xenophobic tendencies during this period and a heightened sense of modernity that these more ancient practices threatened to undermine.

Historian Jacques Le Goff (1924-2014), articulating a well-rehearsed stance among historiographers, called the post-plague dances mental illnesses, to be classed alongside epilepsy and ergotism, noting that malnutrition and physical frailty prepared men and women's minds for spectacular hallucinations. Those living at the time were not so quick to dismiss this as disease. Many eyewitnesses saw the dances as strange—often suspect—phenomena barely marginal to regular life; others saw the dancers as devil-worshippers; physicians attributed them to hot blood, but did not otherwise become involved in regimes of castigation or cure. More convincing than accounts of mass madness and poisoning are those suggesting the dances were plausibly village rounds, made more conspicuous during this period of cultural change. As French historian Eustache-Hyacinthe Langlois (1777-1837) pointed out, in his Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque sur les danses des morts (Historical, Philosophical and Pictorial Essay on the Dances of Death) (1851), the late Middle Ages were marked by regular village fêtes, ambulatory events (‘fêtes balladoires’) taking place on, among other occasions, the eve of the feast of St. John. 

John. As he points out, this type of popular celebration was increasingly described in heavily chastising terms as a ‘procession du diable’, a diabolical procession inverting Christian worship, insulting Christ according to every possible detail. The dancers’ crowns of flowers (serta) derided his crown of thorns; their outstretched arms insulted his posture on the cross; the rouge (belletum) on their faces parodied the veiling of his face; and their head movements, accompanied by high-pitched cries, parodied the expiration of the divine redeemer. They performed high leaps in a circular formation, with Satan purportedly at its invisible centre. As Langlois remarks, these villagers did not dance any less on account of such inflammatory accusations—associated, I will suggest further, with witchcraft, paganism, and plausibly Jewish dances, which typically involved high leaps and rounds.® For Langlois, these paroissiens (villagers) were simply engaged in traditional forms of divertissement—the fétes patronales des paroisses (village saints’ day celebrations)—which for centuries had marked the Feast of Fools, of the Innocents, and of the Ass, taking place in cemeteries as well as in regular places of worship. The clergy, Langlois notes, were no less guilty of taking part in what he wryly calls these ‘infames_ saturnales’ (infamous Saturnalia), which he notes at times degenerated into mayhem (and possibly, he implies, sexual mis-chief).%* Accusations against dancing colorfully and spiritedly were designed to quell popular displays of immoral behavior: the later development of the epidemiological, toxic, and 61. De Mézeray writes: ‘Deux grands fléaux, . . . la famine et le mal des ardents, qui, le plus souvent, prenoit en Aisne, tourmentent la France, l'Italie et Angleterre, cette année 1373. Il courut aussi, principalement dans les Pays-Bas, une passion maniaque ou phrénésie, inconnue à tous les siécles précédents. Ceux qui en estoient atteints, la plus part de la lie du peuple, se despouilloient tout nuds, se mettoient une couronne de fleurs sur la teste, et se tenant par les mains alloient dans les rues et dans les églises, dangant, chantant et tournoyant avec tant de roideur, qu’ils tomboient par terre hors d’haleine. Ils s’enfloient si fort par cette agitation, qu’ils eussent crevé sur l'heure, si on n’eust pris le soin de leur serrer le ventre avec de bonnes bandes. Ceux qui les regardoient trop attentivement estoient bien souvent pris du mesme mal. On crut qu'il y avoit de lopération du diable, et que les exorcismes les soulageoient. Le vulgaire le nomma la Danse de Saint-Jean’. Francois Eudes de Mézeray, Abrégé chronologique de Thistoire de France, vol. 3, pt. 2 (Amsterdam: Abraham Wolfgang, Prés de la Bourne, 1688), 92; cited in Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 179-180. See also Frédéricq, ‘De secten’, 49-58. 62. Le Goff, Medieval Civilisation, 249-250. 63. Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 171-172. 64. Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 172______ So while I have found no further evidence that choreomaniacs specifically danced leftwards (or stepped with the left foot), it was well-established at the time that a clockwise dance beginning with the left foot led straight to hell. Jewish dances, such as the hora, typically perform a circular motion towards the right, beginning with the left foot—leading me to posit that ‘choreomanias’ may in some cases have constituted Jewish dances. To passing observers anxious to stamp out all signs of suspect alterity and excess archaicity, the mixture of Jewish—plausibly Bohemian—and pre-Christian traditions rendered all figures of boisterous, high-leaping rounds pestilential.

For Langlois, the involution of Christianity in these carnivalesque displays were typical ‘gothic’ (high medieval) expressions, not shameful, and indeed quite ‘normal’, if the borderline between normality and abnormality is the mark of madness. Reprising Gabriel Peignot’s (1767-1849) pioneering research on danse macabre iconography, Langlois remarks that convulsive movements deriving from plague may further have given rise to strange disorderly postures. As in regular expressions of chorea, in which individuals involuntarily perform dance-like movements, typical dances and celebrations may have become mixed in with plague-borne convulsive postures, resulting in the danse macabre iconography familiar at the time, and in which Death dances with Life.

Death and plague had become objects of fascination in the early nineteenth century, intensifying retrospective glances on a time when plague, life, and death were already performing gruesome rounds. Langlois suggested he first encountered a strange convulsive dance of death while riding by a ‘horrible spectacle’ of ‘violently agitated’ people offering a barely living ‘portrait of death’. In these accounts, convulsive dancing and death occur in the margins—under the cover of night, in footnotes, whispered as an aside.

Langlois, like Hecker, saw in these figures of corpse-like rounds in the countryside at night a reflection of his own age, choleric and plague-ridden, catapulting him into earlier centuries to seek an explanation for this theatre on the ancient scene of biohistory. But the challenges of writing such a history of inarticulacy and obscurity were great; as art historian and composer Jean-Georges Kastner (1810-1867) pointed out in Les Danses des Morts: Dissertations et Recherches historiques, philosophiques, littéraires et musicales [Dances of Death: Historical, Philosophical, Literary and Musical Dissertations and Findings] (1852), ancient chronicles juxtaposed to contemporary events hardly enlightened the reader and observer.

In Alsace, Kastner remarked, a sort of St. Vitus’s dance still reputedly existed at the time of his writing—hazily remembered by village elders. The movements of the body were so violent, so exaggerated, he wrote, that the dancers struck the ground with their knees and elbows. The ‘analogy’ between convulsive dances and diabolical rounds, Kastner suggested, produced the appearance of a connection between current events and myth. This apparent connection could be attributed, he argued, to the fact that individuals suffering from real nervous affections or psychiatric disorders causing them to perform extravagant movements were typically likened to demoniacally possessed or bewitched persons. This false attribution was not aided by 66. Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 165. See also Eustache-Hyacinthe Langlois, ‘Lettre de M. C. Leber a M. E.-H. Langlois sur lorigine de la danse macabre ou danse des morts’, Paris, 25 July 1833, in Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 1-80, 12-13; Peignot, Recherches historiques et littéraires, xxviii-xxx. Peignot further tentatively highlights the relationship of the Danse des Morts (Dance of Death) to the 1347 plague epidemic and reports of dances in 1373; he suggests the first depiction of a Danse des Morts dates from the following decade, in 1383, but does not take the chronological conjecture further (xxviii). He also suggests a distinction between the generic term ‘Danse des Morts’ (Dance of Death) and the late medieval iconographic tradition of the danse macabre, which he posits followed the dramatic depiction of a ‘Danse des Morts’ in the Parisian Cimetiére des Innocents (1424) (xxxii), though these categories overlap significantly. Interestingly, Kastner suggests the exact opposite—though highly correlated—causality, suggesting joy becomes illness and dance becomes death for those struck with the ‘chorysantisme’ of St. John and St. Vitus; with the malediction of the heavens, dances transform into convulsions, as dancers turn away from God and towards the devil: ‘danser, c'est mourir!’ (‘to dance is to die!’). In Kastner, La Danse des morts, 14.

67. Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 165n1. 54 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE the fact that the individuals themselves often believed that they had participated in satanic rites. Significantly for the history of ideas about disorderly movement and the choreopolitics of crowd control this book outlines, orderly dan- cing meant an orderly society; conversely, dis- orderly dancing—conceived as round dances plausibly beginning with the left foot, involving involuntary, jagged angularity—suggested that religion, state, and society were in disarray. In this view, choreomaniacs’ boisterous appear- ances suggested broader biohistorical disrup- tions, intensifying fourteenth-century opinion that the world was coming to an end.

OF SAINT’S DAY CABALS AND FEASTS: MEDIEVAL SCENES OF ‘READING’

Contemporary accounts suggest the dancers offered strange sights to bystanders; but also that they were at the helm of a popular move- ment wrapping many up into an exultant dance. Some accounts suggest they amplified traditional St. John’s Day practices going out of favour with the church; others imply that the dancers were strange, incomprehensible foreigners intruding into public space, but no less galvanizing on that account; others still suggested that the dancers were demonic and pestilential. In general, the dances and dance-like celebrations wrapped into the nineteenth-century choreomania repertoire seem to have constituted a motley cast of the- atrical events, marginal and heretical in some cases but no less popular and certainly far from mad. Singing, feasting, and dancing were sub- ject, in the fourteenth century, to as much praise as blame. Dancing in particular was popularly viewed as having caused the plague, by its asso- ciation with licentiousness and sinfulness that had brought on God’s wrath. But dancing, as I noted, was also frequently indulged in to ward off further malignity and keep revellers’ minds off the general atmosphere of bleakness and des- olation. Dances in Metz seem to have provoked amusement, a welcome break in everyday life and not a particularly disorderly or diseased one______ Yet according to the Metz Chronicle, a sad occurrence was described in Metz in 1374, when 1500 people from various professions engaged in continuous dancing for nine or ten days, depicted as a helpless fate. The chronicler portrayed the dancers as victims, troubled by their strange sorrow. The narrative suggested a vibrant town, with the dancing engaging people from all age ranges and classes, prompting them to set aside their everyday responsibilities for a while. The Metz chronicle implied the dancing was primarily local, but other chronicles mentioned the dancers' strange speech and demeanour, such as their high leaps, crowns of flowers, and other unusual accoutrements. They were seen as outsiders, gathering some to their ranks and having others watch.

Petrus de Herental, in his life of Pope Gregory XI, noted a "mira secta" or a strange, admirable, or noteworthy coterie of men and women appearing in Aachen from all over Germany in 1375, proceeding to Belgium and France. They were believed to be possessed by demons, wearing wreaths in their hair, dressed in only a towel and stave. They held each other's hands, leaped into the air, and shouted incomprehensible names throughout markets and church precincts, seemingly oblivious to the ogling of bystanders. Herental provided an anonymous poem circulating at the time, suggesting the dancers begged wherever they went and were granted some charity.

The poem, which Hecker 68. Kastner, La Danse des morts, 62-63. 69. Eustace with King, 'Dances of the Living and the Dead', 43-71, 48. So, too, in the sixteenth century, dance and choreographic practices highlighted the scripted, notated—and specifically geometric—aspects of movement, signaling to practitioners and audiences that bodies operated in space according to patterned, and thus legible, theorizable procedures. See Mark Franko, Dance as Text: Ideologies of the Baroque Body, rev. ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), esp. 15-30. Franko points out that 'frenetic or uncontrolled movement' in early seventeenth-century ballet also suggested unrequited love and a highly feminized state of madness (99). Similarly, popular festivity described by Bakhtin as carnivalesque occurred according to 'non-geometric', often complex, and potentially dissonant formations (64). 70. Cited in Backman, Religious Dances, 211. 71. The term 'secta' designates a group in Latin, but also suggests a path, method, or principle. These dancers were viewed as constituting a tightly knit coterie, sharing a way of life and quite literally a trajectory. Madness after Foucault + 55 reproduces in an appendix to 'The Dancing Mania', suggests the dancers enjoyed a relatively nomadic existence but were seized en route by clerics eager to exorcise their putative demons, compounding an already strange sight with the spectacle of religious exorcism. The dancers Herental's poet describes loathed the colour red and screamed, 'hating' the priests and cavorting throughout the night. But they were soon cured by the church, in a dramatic resolution that purged this modest urban crisis of its interlopers. The choreomaniacs were entertaining and outlandish, but also incidental: they represented a digression from and distraction in the fabric of everyday life, even as they spectacularized a state of crisis. From a benign, festive eruption of dancing to a contorted expression of apparently genuine pain, the dancing ‘plague’ provoked not only awe, wonder, and bemusement, but also reprobation. The dancers sorely irritated some: they had become a familiar sight, a spectacular excrescence but a grating one. The fourteenth-century chronicler Jean d’Outremeuse (Jean des Preis) (1338-1400) complained in La Geste de Liege that ‘the Devil in hell was their master’. They called out loudly to St. John the Baptist, clapping their hands, leaping, striking the ground with their feet (‘trippoit’), cloth tied tightly around their stomachs with a staff, provoking all who heard them to ‘[tremble] with fear’. ‘In the churches they behaved in their usual manner, as also in towns and places round Liege and in the diocese generally. Some of them returned to Liege, shouting and bawling and making such a din that it seemed the world was coming to an end’. Like rats, ‘the country was full of them’. Des Preis added that ‘pregnant women and others were so distressed that they died and their bodies were carried away’. The ‘attacks’ were so great that ‘in their homes and in secret people could not help dancing. All this I saw indeed’, he wrote, underscoring his privileged eyewitness status, ‘and much more also’.

Thankfully, he concluded, they had been driven out of town. According to the Chronicle of Liége (1402), dancers in Liége jumping high before church altars terrified all those who viewed them. The stigma and metaphor of plague that color des Preis’s narrative transpires through other accounts, anticipating the epidemiological language that would come to dominate accounts of the dancers in the next centuries. As travelers—and notably, often, as foreigners—dance maniacs provoked apprehension, bringing an unwanted din to what were already difficult times. Des Preis’s contemporary, the fourteenth-century chronicler Johannes de Beke (Jan Beke or Beka) described in his Dutch chronicle a ‘strange plague’ spreading from Bohemia along the Rhine and reaching Maastricht, as men and women clad in wreaths went dancing through villages, passing in and out of churches until they fell to the ground, exhausted. They were eventually divested of their evil spirits through exorcism. Another chronicler called this a ‘daemoniaca’. On the relative normality of public nudity in the Middle Ages, see also Norbert Elias, The Civilizing Process: Sociogenetic and Psychogenetic Investigations, ed. E. Dunning, J. Goudsblom, and S. Mennell, trans. E. Jephcott (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000), 138-139.

Jean d'Outremeuse played, according to Stanislas Bormans, a somewhat legendary role in the history of Liége. His chronicle is double: on the one hand the Myeur des histors serves as a prose compilation of the history of the world; on the other hand La Geste de Liege is tens of thousands of verses (many lost) offering a poetic rendition of the history of the bishops of Tongres and Liége. 

Exorcism was practiced to stun the dancers into submission. Radulphus de Rivo (d. 1403), a deacon in Tongeren in the Belgian province of Limburg, claimed in his history of the bishops of Liége that an anti-clerical dancing 'sect' (or society) had set out to murder canons, prelates, and vicars but had been stopped in its tracks when the dancers were brought before priests to be cured. He recounted a few episodes of curing by exorcism, including one at the Church of St. Mary in the convent of St. Lambert: after hearing the first words of the Gospel of St. John, the dancers were freed of the demons that tormented them and restored to a sane state of mind ('Demonum liberati sobriz menti resti- tuti fuerunt'). And while much excitement in the wake of the Black Death had complicated the clergy’s status in popular opinion—the clergy themselves were widely singled out for failing to save themselves or their constituencies from death and disaster in the plague years (thus discrediting their privileged status in the eyes of God), and many were thought to have caused the plague on account of their loose morals and ‘whoring’ (‘Presbyteris concubinarijis’), the choreomaniacs’ status in popular opinion was no less ambivalent. In De Rivo’s account, contemporaries attributed their wild dancing to crude ignorance of religion (‘cras- sam ignorantiam’), countermanded, thankfully, he thought, by a new regime of divine grace that would quell the mayhem and allow the dancing chaos to be subdued. Calling the choreomaniacs a ‘devilish sect’ (‘sectze Diabolicz’), De Rivo suggested that many contemporaries attributed this strange dancing to the priests’ immorality. ‘The priests themselves were scapegoated. But while some priests were lax, the dancers at least were zealous. St. John the Baptist came widely to be referred to as their patron saint: dancers calling out to him were apparently relieved of their abdominal pains. It is not implausible that dancers, coming from further east into western Europe, practiced dancing associated with rituals mapped onto the figure of St. John. Saints in early Christianity served doubly to foster new and assimilate older practices; they performed focal points in the translation—what I call the ‘translatio—between pre-Christian calendrical festivities and the increasingly tentacular Christian regime.

So whereas many witnesses attributed the dancers’ frenzy to demonism, suggesting these anti-clerical revellers were being punished with pain for their sins, the dancing ‘sect’, taking St. John at its helm, staged a choreozone in the crossfire between prior forms of religious worship and the Christian church. Dancing boisterously represented an eruption of ancient forms of ritual worship not yet fully harnessed to more modern structures of public display whereby bodies, as vessels of the soul, had to be ordered and subdued.

FESTIVAL ECONOMIES: THEATRICALITY AT THE OUTSKIRTS

Some bands of dancers, tired of being chased away from the villages they passed through, sought the privacy of peripheral sites, where they set up makeshift tents, building huts with leaves and branches from nearby forests. A grassroots market culture thrived as they were followed by crowds of enthusiasts, swelling their ranks into the thousands like a veritable pop festival.

According to the Cronica quorundam Romanorum regum ac imperatorum [Chronicle of Early Roman Kings and Emperors], composed in the fourteenth century, a blossoming economy emerged to support the dancing ‘company’, gathered as if to fulfil a ‘sacred vow’. As for the Metz chronicler, this chronicler’s terms were reproachful: he called the dancers’ fate ‘sad’ and ‘pestilential’ (‘pestilens et miseranda societas’).** Before seeking refuge in campsites, the dancers had ‘wandered about on saints’ days and holy days’, the chronicler notes, ‘when there were large gatherings in public places, particularly in churches when Mass was being celebrated. They would be smitten by the Devil with an attack of frenzy, so that the very service was disordered’. The ‘strange restlessness’ that they had evinced had ‘made an unseemly show for the people, for they left their homes and dwellings, their friends and parents and strolled about the streets and the markets, joining together in groups. They put wreaths and bands on their heads like crowns, and then held hands and danced mightily, like choreomaniacs, throwing their feet in the air. With arms outstretched they clapped their hands above and behind their heads’.** Another account suggests the dancers congregated on the steps in front of churches, at times troubling the church ceremonies, or dancing unbidden in church and town squares.* As the Cronica quorundam Romanorum regum ac imperatorum suggests, ‘when they had wea- ried themselves with leaping and dancing and such like exercises, they suddenly rushed wildly from place to place, screaming fearfully, raging like beasts over the land, and complaining of the most terrible internal pains’.®’ But in spite of these pains—provoked, plausibly, by famine A Chronicle of Early Roman Kings and Emperors (‘Cronica quorundam Romanorum regum ac imperatorum’), cited in Backman, Religious Dances, 207. Backman, who slightly misrenders the title as Chronica quorundam regum et imperatorum Romanorum, is working with a fifteenth-century copy of the manuscript held at the library of Hamburg (Hist. 31b, Pap. Fol.), remarkable for the length and wealth of detail provided, as well as its apparent contemporaneity with the events. This is the second part of two manuscripts (the first is known as Chronica aliquorum summorum pontificum), read together since an authoritative fifteenth-century German edition as Die KéIner Weltchronik, now available in reprint in Monumenta Germaniae historica, scriptores rerum Germanicarum, new ser., vol. 15, Die Kélner Weltchronik 1273/88-1376, ed. Rolf Sprandel (Munich: Monumenta Germaniae Historica, 1991). The passage on the choreomaniacs appears 116-118. The phrase ‘pestilens et miseranda societas’ appears on page 118.

In Backman, Religious Dances, 206; Frédéricq, ‘De secten’, 49. See Sprandel, Die Kélner Weltchronik, 116-117. Although Backman writes ‘like choreomaniacs’, the Latin is ‘ad instar chorsancium’, an odd construction which appears to be either a manuscript corruption of choreancium—from the Latin choreare or chorizare, meaning to dance or to dance a round, deriving from the Greek root ‘chor-’, also meaning chorus or dance; or, more plausibly, a neologism on the chronicler's part (not unusual at the time) or the chronicler's record of jargon circulating in the day. If the latter, this suggests that the dancers were novel enough to warrant their own vocabulary; more interestingly, this vocabulary did not persist in the literature of the period, also suggesting the events were seen as quite extraordinary, something nearly all chroniclers noted. I am grateful to Daniel Hadas for clarification with regard to the Latin anomaly. For more on the hazy etymological roots of ‘choreomania’, see also Kélina Gotman, ‘Chorea Minor, Chorea Major, Choreomania: Entangled Medical and Colonial Histories’, in Johannes Birringer and Josephine Fenger, eds., Tanz und WahnSinn/Dance and ChoreoMania (Leipzig: Henschel Verlag, 2011), 83-97.


The dancing was in this chronicler’s terms an occasion for simulating other dancers’ passio, a term denoting passion, affect, and event; it was also, when simulated, benign madness and, significantly, theatre. Dancers did not only purportedly feign dramatic contortions for monetary gain; they also seemed, in the eyes of some, to be spreading a dissolute and parasitical lifestyle. Besides showing histrionic displays of uncertain sincerity, they reputedly engaged in rampant sexuality. The Cronica commentator adds that some joined the dancers’ company for the sake of loose living with the women and young girls who shamelessly wandered about in remote places under the cover of night.

One hundred unmarried women, in one account, became pregnant as a result of these events. One may wonder whether they did so willfully—or whether ‘behind the scenes’ of this dancing history lies, as Jody Enders suggests of medieval theatre in this period, an unwritten history of rape.

The archives reveal glimpses of revelry, cast through the eyes of literate chroniclers who likely, we may presume, aligned themselves with the institutions of the Christian church. Reading against the grain of their narratives, we can only imagine scenes of mayhem noteworthy enough to have made it into the year’s account. ‘Normal’ in this respect, the festivities were also viewed with a chastising glance from scribes sitting, sometimes bitterly, in the sidelines, irked at the image of libertinism the dances—and general climate of upheaval—appeared to represent. Magnified through the lens of nineteenth-century historiographers reading these chroniclers’ lines retrospectively, the dancers come to represent the The Limburg Chronicle interestingly notes that women and servant girls who became pregnant by keeping shady company bound their bodies tightly so that they might appear thinner, suggesting another reading of the cloth bindings (‘Und wann daf sie tanzeten, so banden und knebelten sie sich um den Leib hart zu, dap sie desto geringer waren’). Von Wolfhagen, Die Limburger Chronik, 47. 93. On the spectrality of rape in medieval chronicles and annals, see Jody Enders, ‘The Spectacle of the Scaffolding: Rape and the Violent Foundations of Medieval Theatre Studies’, Theatre Journal 56.2 (2004): 163-181.

Madness after Foucault + 59 public appearance of an orgiastic antiquity on the scene of late medieval ‘modernity’, as medieval writers attempt to write themselves away from the archaic excesses of their own age. The dancers are thus doubly contrapuntal: in their time, they appear foreign and inexplicable; but in the nineteenth century, they contain the strangeness of another era amplified by the orgi- astic archaicity the Middle Ages had come impli- citly to represent. It is not implausible some dancers may have simulated pains in order to be granted the char- ity normally afforded beggars and other mendi- cants, employing the excuse of the feast day and charitable structures of social and religious tol- erance to rush around in a state of celebratory exultation. After a day’s dancing and cavort- ing, they may have shown admittedly strange and comical contortions to justify the public exercise. Some may also have genuinely expe- rienced painful abdominal distension from the mixture of feasting and fasting, and heightened rapid breathing, we may surmise were involved. So while medieval physicians attributed the dances to passionate temperaments, and priests attempted to exorcise participants of their demons, to nineteenth-century observers, the appearance of possession made the dancers sus- pect as ‘mad’ people spreading not just the real- ity but also the pretence—the theatre—of this dancing madness epidemically.™ To these later readers, the dancers swept others up into their heathen rites, stalling history’s progress with their disorderly scenes. Choreomaniacs repre- sented the fantasy of an eruption of ancient life onto the scene of modernity to jolt and to thwart it. This fantasy, indebted to antiquarian research but also to the nineteenth-century imagination of a bacchanalian Middle Ages, posited choreo- maniacs as ‘mad’ inasmuch as they represented the amplifications, the distortions—and in this regard, as I argue further in chapter 4—the ges- tural exaggerations of an earlier time.*® POPULAR DANCING VERSUS THE CHURCH: CONTESTED GROUNDS Religion played no small part. Dance maniacs signalled at once the antiquity of pre-Christian practices and their (heretical) exaggeration. Yet in this regard, choreomaniacs only amplified the religious movements—and movement—of their age. The tradition of dancing boisterously on feast days, for charity or a sacred cure, was old, providing a regular occasion for entertain- ment. Yet the part dance played in church wor- ship was declining in the centuries preceding the late fourteenth-century dance outburst noted by chroniclers across Europe. Dancing in churches, long a standard practice in early medi- eval Christianity, as well as in early Jewish and Roman traditions, had been formally outlawed at the Council of Wurzburg in 1298. A string of anti-dance laws dotted this period, prompting 94.

French historian Jean-Michel-Constant Leber (1780-1859) highlights the dancers’ appearance of madness (‘comme s'ils eussent été fous’), and the priests’ exorcism ‘as if they [the dancers] had been possessed by demons’, though Leber also notes contemporary physicians attributed the d______ Les danseurs de Saint-Weit datent de l'année 1374. On vit avec étonnement, dans plusieurs pays allemands, sur les bords du Rhin et de la Moselle, des gens qui dansaient comme s’ils eussent été fous, pendant la moitié du jour, et deux a deux. Ils tombaient ensuite par terre; on leur marchait sur le corps, et on les regardait alors comme guéris. Ils couraient d’une ville à l'autre et s’asseyaient devant les églises. Le nombre de ces danseurs s’accrut tellement, qu’on en a vu à Cologne jusqu’à cent cinquante. Les médecins attribuaient ces danses à un tempérament fougueux, d’où résultait des indécences et des abus réels; mais les prétres les exorcisaient comme s’ils eussent été possédés du diable.

Langlois, ‘Lettre de M. C. Leber à M. E.-H. Langlois’, 15n1. 95. Bohme est également indicatif en ce regard. Calling the medieval ‘dance mania’ (‘Tanzwut’) a mass commotion, he described men and women ‘appearing in bacchantic exuberance’ (‘bacchantischer Ausgelassenheit’), twirling and jumping wildly, and contorting their bodies shamelessly in front of their spectators; this was an outbreak of ‘demonic movement’ (‘Ausbruch der damonischen Bewegung’) which trumped both medical and priestly attempts at intervention (“Tanzwut im Mittelalter’, 40). Bohme also interestingly calls the whole string of dances running through the late fourteenth to early fifteenth centuries a ‘Spuk’, a nearly untranslatable term approximately rendered ‘spook’ or ‘haunting’ (or more generally a horrible episode), further suggesting the dancers were possessed, disturbingly, by a spirit from the past or otherworld (‘Tanzwut im Mittelalter’, 41).

96. Backman provides an exhaustive account of religious dances in the early Christian church, although as noted previously he claims rather outlandishly that these dances were all attributable to ergotism. On the Council of Wiirzburg, see Backman, Religious Dances, 9. Stevens notes church denunciations against dance and song occurred frequently between 589 (when the first Council denunciations were noted) and the seventeenth century; as Sahlin points out, the apocryphal Acts of St John, which antedates the year 150 ck, includes mention of a ring dance performed by Christ’s disciples around him, as instructed by him (Sahlin, Etude sur la carole médiévale, 137-139; Stevens, Words and Music in the Middle Ages, 179). See also L. Gougaud, ‘La danse dans les églises'’, Revue d'Histoire Ecclésiastique 15 (1914): 5-22, 229-245, who suggests that some dancers (notably in Echternach, a case I discuss in chapter 6) must have been so possessed by piety that their extravagant gestures should be understood as genuine expressions of 60 = EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE dance enthusiasts increasingly to resort to dan- cing in private or to relegate dancing to popular fétes ever further removed from the regular exercise of religious worship. So while early medieval chronicles were littered with episodes of church dancing, suggesting that terpsichor- ean outbursts had long formed a central part of everyday life, by the fourteenth century, dan- cing had increasingly come to be associated with bawdy, insalubrious activities steeped in sexual mischief. Choreomaniacs in particular seemed to participate equally in regimes of religion and pleasure, misdemeanour and the everyday: they claimed allegiance to a saint (St. John), under- scoring their religious affiliation, but danced in excess, boisterously. As such, their expression of religious enthusiasm seemed suspect to observ- ers,______ Choreomaniacs constituted an archaic hold-over, a public eruption and interruption, and a sign of resistance to change. The midsummer St. John’s Day fires had long served as an occasion for play: this was a time to engage in the Nodfyr, a pre-Christian practice of leaping through or over smoke or fire to be protected from ill health for the following year, one the church had tried anxiously to stamp out or at best to recuperate into the Christian fold.®” The earliest ‘choreomanias’ suggested a battle of wills between recalcitrant celebrants and the doyens of the church. An ‘oft-repeated tradition’®* from the eleventh century suggests dancing was at the heart of battles for power. Eighteen men and women reputedly disrupted a Christmas service taking place in a church in Kolbig (or Kélbigk) near Bernburg by ‘dancing and brawling in the churchyard’. The priest, Ruprecht, inflicted a curse on them in retaliation, according to which they would have to continue dancing without respite for a year. When the curse was lifted at the intercession of a couple of well-disposed bishops, the dancers, now knee-deep in the earth and nearly starved to death, reputedly fell into a deep sleep for three days. Four died, and the rest complained of tremors in the limbs for the rest of their lives. Alternative accounts suggest they wandered through the countryside and were subjected to continuing tremors.°® This story, Hecker noted, was ‘related with astonishment and horror such (245); Sahlin, in Etude sur la carole médiévale, 137-142, further argues that the church, wary of rivals, doubly combatted and sought to assimilate dance practices and rites associated with pre-Christian worship (139, 143-186).

97. See Pierre Riché, ‘Danses profanes et religieuses dans le haut Moyen Age’, in Robert Mandrou, ed., Histoire sociale, sensi-bilités collectives et mentalités: Mélanges Robert Mandrou (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1985), 159-167, 160; Ruth Harris, Lourdes: Body and Spirit in the Secular Age (New York: Viking, 1999), 102-103; Sahlin, Etude sur la carole médiévale, 164. Sahlin, after Bohme, further suggests that dances invoking St. Vitus derived from those performed in honour of the Slavic sun god, Swantewit (Etude sur la carole médiévale, 164n2), though Bohme is at pains to point out that the Slavic name Swante-wit (designating the sun. god) has nothing to do with St. Vitus’s dances. See Bohme, Geschichte des Tanzes in Deutschland, 162. Maurice Vloberg, in Les fétes de France: Coutumes religieuses et populaires (Grenoble: B. Arthaud, 1936), 149-164, notes that epileptics so often called to St. John the Baptist for help that their disease came to be known as the mal de Saint-Jean (160). On the pre-Christian elements of increasingly Christianized village fétes and the ambivalent role dance in particular played in these, see also Eugéne Cortet, Essai sur les fétes religieuses et les traditions populaires qui s'y rattachent (Paris: Ernest Thorin, 1867), 211-231; and A. Fournier, ‘Vieilles coutumes, usages et traditions populaires des Vosges provenant des cultes antiques et particuliérement de celui du soleil’, Bulletin de la Société philomatique vosgienne 16 (1890-1891): 137-205, 148-153.

German by E. E. Metzner, 1972', Speculum: A Journal of Medieval Studies 50.3 (1975): 522-525. Gregor Rohmann, 'The Invention of the Dancing Mania: Frankish Christianity, Platonic Cosmology and Bodily Expressions in Sacred Space', Medieval History Journal 12 (2009): 13-45, argues that the dancing in the Kolbik (or Kélbigk) legend can be traced to early medieval Platonic cosmology, which proscribed dancing in sacred spaces. See also Riché, 'Danses profanes et religieuses dans le haut Moyen Age', 162-163. Stevens, in Words and Music in the Middle Ages, suggests the Kélbigk dancers were engaged in a round dance, specifically a carole (which Stevens describes as a courtly and a popular dance-song, which may or may not always have been danced in the round) (161, 164-166); see also Gougaud, 'La danse dans les églises', 229-230. Eustace and King note that the story re-emerges as a Middle English exemplum describing the 'hoppyng' dancers of 'Colbek' in Robert Mannyng's Handlyng of Sinne ('Dances of the Living and the Dead', 52-53). Langlois describes the same story, noting it took place outside the church of Saint-Magnus, in Saxony (also the location of Kélbigk), further suggesting this may have served as a model for later danses macabres (Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 181, 183). Kastner dates this event around 1025, in Magdeburg, describing the eighteen men and fifteen women as 'larvae or ghosts insensitive to the needs of man' ('comme des larves ou des fantémes insensibles aux besoins matériels de l'homme'); they wore out neither their shoes nor their clothes, nor did they suffer from hunger or from the elements (La Danse des morts, 64, 64-65n5). The seventeenth-century historian Johann Christoff Beckmann (1641-1717) called this episode somewhat unusually a 'melancholischer Zufall' (melancholic occurrence or accident) and 'so zu nennende Tanz-Tollheit' (so-called dance madness), somewhat softening the language of rage and fury suggested by the slightly more truculent "Tanzwut". Johann Christoff Beckmann, Grundliche Fiirstellung etlicher in Hn. D. Madness after Foucault + 61 throughout the middle ages' so that when any 'exciting cause' for a similar type of 'delirious raving' and 'wild rage for dancing' occurred, the legend was harkened back to as precedent and warning. According to musicologist John Stevens (1921-2002), these rebellious dancers may, however, simply have been engaged in a carole, a typically festive round dance; depictions, including the seventeenth-century woodcut by Johann Ludwig Gottfried (1584-1633), suggest moral reprobation but nothing like the frenzy Hecker suggests (fig. 2.1). Still, the legend—with its didactic message—implied that the dancers were insubordinate; they danced outside the church, not yet surrendering to the routines of a relatively more placid church service. The story intimated not only popular conflict regarding the right mode of worship but a lesson about sites and types of choreographies that should be engaged in. Choreographies across scenes of so-called choreomania varied, as did their interpretations; while leaping was a sign of indecorousness, round dances such as this one held an equally ambivalent place in the annals of the dancing disease. So, too, pilgrimages represented an occasion for rowdy display. So just as Hecker noted the coincidence of some choreomanias with the height of midsummer, particularly______ Pilgrimages in particular constituted a contested ground. For Hecker, one of the earliest dance ‘manias’, after Kélbigk, took place in 1237 in Erfurt, when over one hundred children reportedly danced and leaped all the way to Arnstadt, then fell to the ground, giddy with exhaustion. Child pilgrimages such as this one provoked a fantasy in their own right, immortalized in the story of the Pied Piper, reprised in nineteenth-century literature by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832) and the Brothers Grimm (Jacob Grimm, 1785-1863, and Wilhelm Grimm, 1786-1859), among others. Pilgrimages, normally associated with orderly procession, became fantasized as sites of uncontrol; movement, travel and displacement, including migration; and obsessiveness bordering on collective 'mania'.

A further so-called dancing mania took place on 17 June 1278 on the Mosel Bridge in Utrecht, involving two hundred participants (homines chorizantes) who reputedly danced so hard the bridge fell, causing many to meet their watery deaths. Hecker attributed this to 'fanaticism', pointing out that according to legend, the dancers were punished for their cavorting when a priest passed by carrying a host. But the episode occurred, significantly, on 17 June, in the lead-up to St. John's Day, when men and women would have been engaged in tripudiae, a well-established religious practice historian Pierre Riché suggests involved dancing while carrying relics en route to a sacred site to fête the saint and, surreptitiously, out of habit, the summer solstice.

Stevens further suggests tripudiae often involved some license, including, according to a report from a nunnery near Rouen in 1261, 'immoderate foolery and scurrilous songs'. Further reports suggest the clergy frequently sought to contain and limit such behaviors, as they did in the case of the dancing mania in Erfurt in 1237. This was done by imposing strict rules and regulations on the pilgrimages, which were otherwise occasions for license and uncontrol. On medieval processions more generally, see especially Ashley and Hiisken, eds., Moving Subjects. On the occasions of the feasts of St. John, of St. Stephen, and of the Innocents, these processions took place. Stevens, Words and Music in the Middle Ages, 180. Additionally, see Sahlin, Etude sur la carole médiévale, 152-153.

In the seventeenth century, dancers of Kélbigk were depicted in a woodcut by Johann Ludwig Gottfried, found in Historische Chronica, oder Beschreibung der fiirnemsten Geschichten, so sich von Anfang der Welt bifS auff das Jahr Christi 1619 (also known as Gottfried’s History of the World) (Frankfurt am Main: Merian, 1674), S. 505.

Choreomaniacs' disorder was performed in passing and constituted a disorder of migration. They were noteworthy because they acted disruptively in concert, and their disruption could spread. Their disorder resided in its potentially infinite intensification. Choreomaniacs seem to have been relatively marginal enthusiasts, keeping up with ancient practices contested in post-plague years. They circulated between western and central Europe, enacting what Clifford has called a "travelling culture," at once contingent on its surroundings and translatinal. For Clifford, pilgrimages typically perform a movement between travel (which is punctual) and nomadism (which constitutes an ongoing state), eccentrically reconstituting dwellings and encounters. Pilgrims move in the margins and peripheries of sites, describing zones of political inheritance or settlement. As such, pilgrims transport and translate experiences from one site to another, provoking new zones of intensity—travelling ones—along the way.

Stevens, Words and Music in the Middle Ages, 180. By at least the fifteenth century, leaping would become formalized as a sign of undignified dancing, contrary to the increasingly refined and courtly basse-danse, in which steps are executed so close to the ground as to give the dancer the appearance of gliding. Eustace with King, ‘Dances of the Living and the Dead’, 56.

Clifford, Routes, 39. Choreomaniacs were disjoiners, separating themselves out from the villages through which they passed yet provoking audience participation, dividing viewers and scribes between those who greeted and those who pitied their fates. In doing so, they carved out an arena for themselves just past the edge of town in a temporarily constituted, shared social space that was parasitic yet sovereign. As visitors, passers-through, forces of ‘passage’ (or kinesis) they drew bemused audiences in and left new audiences and narratives behind, marking the rural and urban spaces that they inhabited before going off to the next dancing site. These were religious eccentrics hanging onto an outmoded and increasingly outlawed way of celebrating life and staving off ill health: gathering and dancing. Choreomaniacs were in this sense quintessentially ‘abnormal’, in Foucault’s sense: marginal, subject to scientific scrutiny. Like the medieval mad Foucault describes, they were in their own time by and large tolerated, albeit with some reluctance. But somewhat unlike the cases of madness Foucault describes from the annals of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century medicine, choreomania was never directly diagnosed; there were no ‘choreomaniacs’ actively sequestered (though some dancers in the sixteenth century were subjected to panels of medical experts and temporarily removed for relatively benign dancing cures [chapter 3]). Retrospective diagnosis performed by medical historians instead saw dance maniacs primarily as curiosities to collect and compare, relatively far removed from the castigating force of medico-penal law.

Individually, choreomaniacs not engaged in dancing bled into everyday life. However, individuals performing tremors and tics likened to the jagged spirit of uncontrol attributed to medieval dance manias were subject to scientific scrutiny, just as crowd movements and rowdy public behavior were increasingly subject to municipal control. Taken from this perspective, ‘choreomania’ signals a zone of intensity in the modern imagination of the Middle Ages, whereby disorderly motions come to be collated and combined, suggesting a troublesome other surging from uncertain places, moving—loitering, grimacing—to no particular end.

Madness and Reason in a Dark Age
Foucault’s most substantial contribution to the history of ideas (and bodies) is arguably his implicit but overarching observation that ‘madness’ becomes the dark hole out of which articulation occurs. From his commentary on the medieval and early modern substitution of death for madness as a prime object of anxiety to his observation that the link between madness and nothingness (‘néant’) would continue to be so profound as fundamentally to define experiences of madness in the ‘classical’ age, and his reading of Victorian sexuality as that which comes to be spoken about and, as such, fashioned, Foucault speaks about that which is spoken—significantly, that which is spoken as if on top of a great void. In the initial preface to History of Madness, Foucault wrote that within madness lies an ‘inaccessible primitive purity’ (‘inaccessible pureté primitive’). Although Hacking argues that Foucault’s later revisions attempted to disentangle his work from this rather vague and obscure phrase, the notion of madness as an indefinable idea underlying contemporary biopolitics continued to inform Foucault’s work. Madness, like sexuality, is one of the intellectual forms—what I am calling a discursive node or zone of intensity—that in being spoken about reveals whole provinces of silence. As Foucault argued, ‘I have not tried to write the history of [psychiatric] language, but rather the archaeology of that silence’. Madness emerges in Foucault’s writing as a zone of intensity through which ‘enlightened’ modernity would construe its inarticulate self and, by extension, a cast of inarticulate others. But as Hacking points out, Foucault’s aim in uncovering this silence—a complex of experiences Foucault elsewhere refers to with a mixture of terms implicating night, darkness, and obscurity, but also dazzlement and light—suggests ‘how a certain absence of discourse became possible’.11 This ‘absence’ is the ineffable other subtending the deployment of scientific and social scientific discourse by which something opposite to ‘reason’ can be imagined—what I am further describing as gesturally abstracted. Madness, then, is paradoxically both the fiction and the truth about which things are said: it signals at once a real reality (an alternative way of being not aligned to ‘reason’) and a fabrication, a set of discourses shaping how this reality comes to be played out. Choreomania instantiates this coming-to-be of modern thought, still in the nineteenth century entangled in the question of silence, cast as gesticulating unintelligibility. Beyond eighteenth-century reason—the era that boasted ‘light’ (‘le siécle des lumiéres’, denoting understanding)—nineteenth-century antiquarian epidemiology suggested a regime in which madness and reason coexisted, Bacchic echoes reverberating in the present day, liable to contagion anyone. ‘Choreomania’ thus represents the relatively unsystematic articulation of an imagined aggregated inarticulacy: the chaos of flailing limbs away from unreason and torque. Through readings and misreadings of ancient sources—producing whole series of persuasive fictions—choreomania became an abstraction, written in scenes of pullulating bodies out of joint with, and uncannily attuned to, their times—and purportedly also reflecting aspects of their readers’ own. If, as Kate Elswit points out, reprising Franko, the task of ‘reading’ historical sources is also to trace contemporary resonances with them, prior sources reading sources prior to themselves similarly extract their own regimes of signification, which we can, today, attempt to trace.4 This does not merely mean that we are only ever writing a history of the present; 110. Foucault, Histoire de la folie, 32. 111. See Hacking, ‘Déraison’, 16. ‘The italics are Hacking’s own. Foucault's original preface is reproduced in Michel Foucault, Dits et écrits 1954-1988, ed. Daniel Defert and Francois Ewald with Jacques Lagrange, 2 vols., vol. 1 (Paris: Gallimard, 2001), 187-195. Foucault in fact writes: ‘A défaut de cette inaccessible pureté primitive’, meaning given that this primitive purity is of course inaccessible, the history of madness that can be written is that of a perpetual set of decisions and exchanges separating reason from unreason, pointing towards an ‘obscure common root’ (‘obscure commune racine’) before the historical moment—the series of movements—by which the language of reason came to be separated out from the murmur of shadowy insects (‘murmure d’insectes sombres’) (192). 112, Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason, trans. Richard Howard (London: Tavistock, 1967), 111-112; cited in Hacking, ‘Déraison’, 20. 113. See Hacking, ‘Déraison’, 17-20. 114. Franko writes that historiographical analysis seeks ‘also to develop [models of the historical period under scrutiny] in the direction of relevant terms for contemporary analysis’. Mark Franko, ‘Dance and the Political: States of Exception’, in Madness after Foucault + 65 but that this presentness is also constituted of fantasies about the past which were themselves—with slight variations—previously held. In tracing the relationship between past forms of historicity—past historical imaginings—we can attempt to draw out a contrapuntal, choreographic "choreohistory." In the final section of this chapter, I turn to Nietzsche's concept of the bacchanalian Middle Ages as constituting alternately a sane and sick form of premodernity. Profoundly informing Foucault's work on madness and genealogy, particularly the complicated and often ironic notion of "Ursprung" ("origin") that Nietzsche employs to describe the ungraspable source of Christian morality on an ever-disappearing horizon of antiquity, Nietzsche's work articulates a perpetual passage between present and past.

As a genealogist, Nietzsche discovers that there is no essential thing underlying present realities but an imbricated set of prior movements, constituting a contradictory and irremediably disparate whole. There is not even a whole, but what Foucault, reading Nietzsche, calls a "theater of procedures," in which events come to appear. Significantly, Foucault remarks, these events are always and inevitably bodied; for Nietzsche, the past may be considered "historically and physiologically." More significantly, Nietzsche fore-grounds the task of genealogy as to be faithful to the movement of life rather than to a detached, critical search for fixed truths.

In this way, the genealogist may survey Europe's decadence once again in theatrical terms, what Foucault describes as an "immense spectacle"; but contemporary history is not just theatrical, full of painted scenes and scenery. The nineteenth century emerges with Nietzsche as an era boasting a "spontaneous historical bent," a predilection for the eruptions and inconsistencies, the surprises and irregularities, of reasonably "unreasonable" times past, which it imagines itself at its best to echo.

In particular, as Dominick LaCapra is at pains to note, Foucault, borrowing implicitly from Nietzsche, located the prehistory of the prolonged discursive rupture between "reason" and "unreason" not only somewhere in the Middle Ages, but more profoundly in pre-Socratic Greece. LaCapra suggests Foucault in fact rewrote Nietzsche's The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music (1872) in his History of Madness. Like Nietzsche, Foucault rearticulated the Dionysian spirit—more specifically what Nietzsche posited as an Apollonian (rational, contained) and Dionysian (ecstatic, disinhibited) duality—as a mad spirit previously enjoying an intimate and relatively uncomplicated relationship with so-called rational forms of life.

But as LaCapra further notes, the on-one-level facile linear history this story seems to trace, according to which the past was freer and more accepting, belies a far greater complexity both Nietzsche and Foucault actually underscored: one in which regimes of reason and unreason have coexisted, according to varying power relations. The murky space of negotiation by which one becomes written in the other was what Foucault set out to highlight. In this regard, redoing Nietzsche's exuberant philosophical excavation of a broadly Dionysian life, Foucault sets a series of contradictory and convoluted twists and turns in so-called history's side describing the "fits and starts," the "fainting spells," that a complex world of madnesses represents. The contradictions in Foucault's work, like those in Nietzsche's, only highlight the always moving, "event"-like quality of genealogical research, the writing that seeks also to be vital and, in this sense, choreographic. Nietzsche's Ambivalence: A New History of Enthusiasm

Nietzsche's depiction of the St. John's and St. Vitus's dances, indebted to Hecker, suggests modernity caught in its own complicated relation to an orgiastic past. In The Birth of Tragedy, as in his earlier, posthumously published The Dionysiac World View (1870), Nietzsche depicted dancing hordes epitomizing a "blissful ecstasy which arises from the inner-most ground of man, indeed of nature itself." Nietzsche saw in these hordes an ecstatic dis-solution of the self that accompanied the "break-down of the principium individuationis [principle of individuation]", offering "a glimpse of the essence of the Dionysiac."

Comparable to a state of "intoxication," these forces—arising "among all human beings and peoples who are close to the origin of things" (he writes literally "von dem alle urspriinglichen Menschen und Vélker")—erupted like "the approach of spring when the whole of nature is pervaded by lust for life" and "awakens" a "Dionysiac power." These deep-seated "stirrings," "as they grow in intensity, cause subjectivity to vanish to the point of complete self-forgetting!"

Close to the origin of all things and to nature, these dancing hordes, for Nietzsche, moreover drew from the same wells as the Bacchic dances of antiquity, uniting Europe with the Near East: "in the German Middle Ages, too, ever-growing throngs roamed from place to place, impelled by the same Dionysiac power, singing and dancing as they went; in these St John's and St Vitus's dancers we recognize the Bacchic choruses of the Greeks, with their prehistory in Asia Minor, extending to Babylon and the orgiastic Saracea."

The medieval and ancient dances to which Nietzsche referred served as a philosophical image with which to describe the ecstatic dissolution of the self in a rapturous Oriental bliss. This was an ecstasy Nietzsche deemed healthy of body and mind, although the dances were considered, he insisted, "popular diseases" by his contemporaries. Nietzsche bemoaned this verdict, arguing that it only belied their own resentment and ill health: "there are those who, whether from lack of experience or from dullness of spirit, turn away in scorn or pity from such phenomena, regarding them as "popular diseases" while believing in their own good health; of course, these poor creatures have not the slightest inkling of how spectral and deathly pale their "health" seems when the glowing life of Dionysiac enthusiasts storms past them."

In Thus Spoke Zarathustra, written over a decade later between 1883 and 1885, Nietzsche depicted a further medieval dance event: the wandering Zarathustra falls upon a chorus of celebrants indulging in the Festival of the Ass (or Feast of Fools), a medieval tradition Nietzsche had read about in an eighteenth-century account, which described the mock solemnity these thirteenth-century iconoclasts were performing in a féte whose carnivalesque overtones were generally believed to stem from the Dionysian revelries of ancient Greece. Although historian Max Harris has convincingly shown that the Feast of Fools was not as rebellious or ribald as is commonly held but was in fact tightly incorporated into church liturgy, the myth of these medieval merrymakers resonated with Nietzsche's anti-puritanical stance. Yet by the late 1880s, Nietzsche found everything wrong with the dances. They—and their medicalization—now epitomized all that was amiss with the world: the medical profession and the masses spurred into contortions by an ascetic culture all signaled a world gone awry. Nietzsche described the medieval St. John's and St. Vitus's dances no longer as expressions of joy but as "terrible epileptic epidemics" that weakened and "emasculated" men. The dancers' convulsions mimicked those he himself witnessed and experienced in psychiatric hospitals, where individuals were forced to suffer humiliating treatments that "shattered [the] nervous system," revealing "terrible paralyses" and exacerbating profoundly depressive states.

At the cusp of his own well-known breakdown in December 1888, on the heels of a decade of poor health that had forced him to resign from his position at the University of Basel in 1879, and ushering in a further decade of institutionalization marked by debilitating paralyses, depressions, delusions, and ecstasies, Nietzsche was well-placed to poke an iron scourge into the medical establishment's side. The prevailing culture of asceticism was to blame, he argued, for medieval as for modern Europe's troubles, as it forced individuals into grotesque expressions of physical and emotional pain as ugly as their Greek and Saracen antecedents had been actually wonderful and joyous. In On the Genealogy of Morality (1887), Nietzsche had only spite for the "masses" as well as the priestly medicine-mongering he saw driving the St. John's and St. Vitus's dances.

Yet overall, Nietzsche was excited at the prospect of the medieval dances signalling an orgiastic resurgence that could liberate men and women from the same pernicious asceticism and herd mentality he considered so destructive in his own time. Rearticulating Arthur Schopenhauer's (1788-1860) Eastern-inspired concept of the principium individuationis—according to which we falsely experience ourselves as individuated until the Veil of Maya falls from our eyes and we perceive other beings' suffering as our own, realizing that we are united in a common humanity—Nietzsche saw the dances as instrumental for attaining an extra-individual state. But for Nietzsche, this extra-individual state was not ascetic. "Describing the blissful ecstasy of the Apollonian spirit (the spirit of the individual self) dissolving, in the dance, into a rapturous Dionysianism, Nietzsche saw collective ecstasy overtaking Schopenhauer's ascetic ideal. For Nietzsche, we had to lose the pettiness and small-mindedness of the individual self, just as Schopenhauer suggested, but also to replace it with the ecstatic joy of a life force erupting in elated dreams and inebriation. We had to choose a bacchanalian overcoming of individualism, rather than what Schopenhauer saw as a more disembodied, yogic, and abstracted conception of human mutuality.

Schopenhauer had put forward an ascetic ideal that resulted in the abandonment of the will to live and of all bodily satisfaction; but in Nietzsche's terms, it was through the Dionysian principle, by which we find oblivion in extreme and jubilant corporality, that we surpass small-mindedness and a false ego.

Euripides (480-406 BCE), Nietzsche thought, had killed tragedy by turning to what he termed a Socratic, over-intellectualizing dramatic mode and away from the impulsiveness of the ancient ecstasies that characterized the earlier Attic tragedians, Aeschylus (c. 523-c. 456 BCE) and Sophocles (c. 497-c. 406 BCE) in particular. Although himself indebted to Euripides's Bacchae in The Birth of Tragedy, as he described Dionysian revelries at one with nature much as Euripides described them in the parodos (or opening choral segment) of his late play, Nietzsche found the true tragic spirit to constitute an ecstatic overcoming of rational life.10

The St. John's and St. Vitus's dances were at once symbolic of a fantasy of the dissolution of the individuated self—and corresponding return to an idyllic Dionysianism—and proof of the tortured results of ascetic ideals championed by a European civilization caught in the throes of a self-destructive Christianity. Although both perspectives claimed disinhibited dancing and movement as good and corporeal repression as bad, Nietzsche saw in the frantic gesticulations of the St. John's Day dancers a particularly contemporary sign of misery and despair.

It is highly likely that he had encountered Hecker's work, given the wide currency of Hecker's writing in the decades preceding Nietzsche's career, and its recuperation by scientific celebrities such as Charcot, whose writings Nietzsche had encountered.11 But Nietzsche was also tapping into widespread uneasiness about collective exuberance and the movements of crowds current at the time of his writing. His own apprehensions about the St. John's Day dances—which in his view were not just primitive and good but modern and ugly too—suggest that in these poorly understood figures of singing, writhing, and wreathed dancing throngs, a host of legends and symbols could be read casting them as wonderfully disinhibited and free but, just as easily, disturbed.

Nietzsche's interest in ancient Greece was not new. A century of German writing on antiquity had preceded his iconoclastic account, but he set new terms for the interpretation of Greek culture highlighting the admittedly ambivalent exaltation of Bacchanalian joy. The German art historian and archaeologist Johann Joachim Wincklemann (1717-1768) had set the grounds for an exaltation of Greek temperance in his influential essay 'Reflections on the Imitation of Greek Works in Painting and Sculpture' (1755),127. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morality, 112.128. See Albert Henrichs, 'The Last of the Detractors: Friedrich Nietzsche's Condemnation of Euripides', Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies 27."______ 

4 (1986): 369-397. 129. On Nietzsche's familiarity with Charcot’s work at the Salpétriere, see Gregory Moore, Nietzsche, Biology and Metaphor (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 144-145. 68 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE reprised in various celebrations of Greek mod- eration and harmony by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729-1781), Johann Gottfried von Herder (1744-1803), Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767-1835), Friedrich Schlegel (1772-1829), Christoph Martin Wieland (1733-1813), and Goethe, among others."*° Further debates about the Greek character emerged in the wake o: Friedrich Hélderlin’s (1770-1843) suggestion that the Apollonian spirit served as a Grecian counterpoint to what he called the Junonian spirit of sobriety and _self-restraint.'' But Nietzsche's version of the Dionysian underscored ecstasy and enthusiasm, excess, rapture, and a life force so great it spilled into the world beyond the individual, constituting what he would eventually term the ‘will to life’ or ‘will to power’, a ‘superabundance’ of vitality and ‘overflowing of energy pregnant with future’ manifesting as the ‘eternal joy of becoming’ and the ‘eternal joy o: creation’ given to the woman in the agonies of labour, and to all those who trounced pain.” For Nietzsche, this healthy biopower wel- comed and overcame the pessimism and self-destructiveness of the small man, whose experience of pleasure was undercut by his own perpetual sense of defeat. As I have been sug- gesting, Foucault borrowed from Nietzsche’s work a vacillating style and effusive mode o: inquiry that also sought philosophically to draw out the affect driving bodily being. The emphasis both writers placed on life forms—and illness— suggested not just a desire to recuperate looser, lighter ways projected at times fervently into the past, but more urgently to think in embodied ways about what it means to be embodied, to move, to pass between states of consciousness and experience—to trespass. Nietzsche's figure for this was ‘dance’, fantasized as a space of pure being away from the heaviness of everyday life. For Foucault, ‘madness’, like unreason, served as the perpetually murmuring zone within which alternative truths are imagined. I suggest the intensity with which modern figures of medieval Dionysianism appear in the nineteenth century also points towards another Dionysianism in the age of torque: a fantasy of disorderly gestural excess, the phantasmatic counterpart to the ever more efficient rhythms of the industrial age. The challenges of the convulsive body, and of the convulsive body politic, a concept I will return to at greater length in chapter 5, thus come more fully into view: as Mark D. Jordan points out in Convulsing Bodies: Religion and Resistance in Foucault (2015), convulsive bodies are also those that resist the strictures of power.’ They squirm and twist in ungainly ways, troubling the suave- ness of torque; their very being appears anaes- thetic and uncontainable. It seeks to relieve pain and to pervert exhortations to beauty, as well as to still, quiet, or controlled motion. These warped and unruly bodies suggest a zone of contestation between pre- and early Christian forms of religiosity and the orderly state repre- sented by the rising institutions of the Christian church. Choreoman______ As the next chapter argues, chorea posed particular problems to the early modern medical theorist: apparently similar to epilepsy and other falling and trembling movements, chorea baffled all those steeped in centuries of theology, supernaturalism, and demonism. But Paracelsus's iconoclastic approach, emphasizing direct observation and fieldwork, shook the medical establishment in his day, laying the groundwork for a legacy of treatises on chorea still dubiously linking all sorts of trembling and falling movements with medieval and early modern religious and popular fêtes. Significantly, with Paracelsus, the conflation of choreic and choreomaniacal movements catalyzed a surge of writing on purpose-less, meaningless motion. Choreomania became a disorder of gestural aimlessness: no longer the medieval fools' ship's passage but meaningless gesture reproducing itself apparently without origin or cause.

Describing Gilles de la Tourette's (1857-1904) writing on spasms, tics, and jerks in Etude sur une affection nerveuse caractérisée par de lincoordination accompagnée décholalie et de coprolalie [Study on a Nervous Condition Characterized by Lack of Motor Coordination Accompanied by Echolalia and Coprolalia] (1885), later known as Tourette's syndrome, a condition since then understood to be closely allied to—often indistinguishable from—chorea, Agamben highlights a 'catastrophic' 'proliferation' of gestures. Writing in 'Notes on Gesture' (1992), Agamben highlights de la Tourette's 'description of an amazing proliferation of tics, spasmodic jerks, and mannerisms—a proliferation that cannot be defined in any way other than as a generalized catastrophe of the sphere of gestures. Patients can neither start nor complete the simplest of gestures. If they are able to start a movement', he adds, 'this is interrupted and broken up by shocks lacking any coordination and by tremors that give the impression that the whole musculature is engaged in a dance (chorea) that is completely independent of any ambulatory end'. The 'catastrophe' Agamben highlights is purposeless gesture, gesture without end; gesture that is going nowhere, that cannot complete itself. Significantly, this catastrophe looks like dance—in his terms, chorea: a particular sort of spasmodic, tic-like dance ( 'cho- rea') that has no destination. Choreomania, a broad category of dyskinetic gestures and movement disorders allied, in medical literature, to Tourette's syndrome and chorea, appears shocking to observers because it seems to lack precision, control, and purpose. It erupts, seemingly epidemically, onto the scene of modernity as a series of purposeless fits: attacks of the uncontrolled body in a rationalized public space in which bodies are meant to be doing something, going somewhere. In Agamben’s formulation, non-catastrophic (non-choreic) bodies complete their gestures; they do not leave them half-finished, interrupted, or broken off. Chorea, in contrast, stutters, stumbles, collapses, and falls. It is a gesture that does not move towards a goal or complete a circuit. This chapter argues that within the associated spaces of chorea, Tourette's syndrome, epilepsy, rheumatism, and an increasing constellation of narratives— after the medieval dances described in the last chapter, an outbreak of dancing in Strasbourg in 1518, and a whole host of Italian cases of tarantism (a condition medically associated with melancholy, and the dance of the tarantella)— 'choreomania' became so capacious as to encompass nearly any seemingly purposeless motion.

The translation from a humoral to an ecosophical and eventually a neurophysiological terrain of diagnosis, however, does not suggest a linear progression towards greater scientific understanding, proof, or verification but physicians' continued bafflement as to what the erratic gestures of the 'dancing disease' meant or how they should be categorized; and these same physicians' increasing recourse to cultural history for explanation. Imagined genealogies took the place of taxonomy. Yet in this double move, at once to observe and to compare with past (and increasingly, later chapters show, foreign) cases, the conflation of gestural disorder in the present and social upheaval in the past further entangled chorea (chorea minor), as an individual neuromotor disorder involving spasms and tics, and choreomania, the morphing complex of desires and fantasies according to which all spontaneous and irregular movement is 'mad'.

TRANSLATIO: ECOSOPHIES AND VITAL SPIRITS

This chapter then hinges on early modern formulations of the dancing disease, mapped decisively onto the figure of St. Vitus, and their lasting imprint in nineteenth-century medical treatises. With the renegade physician Paracelsus, an ambivalent nexus of concepts comes into play in the early modern period: 'St. Vitus's dance', at once medical, historical, ecosophical, and physiological (as opposed to demonic), denoting since Paracelsus a type of falling sickness and simultaneously a type of insanity, begins to signal a complex and, as I show by the end of this chapter, lasting interpenetration of falling, spasming, and jerking forms.

Paracelsus, in the early sixteenth century, ventured an anti-establishmentarian view: what he called chorea merely echoed nature's ripples, tremors, and falls. Thus wresting otherwise unexplained gestures from a history of religious and scientific writings on witchcraft—a trope that, for centuries, had seemingly accounted for unwanted intrusions into everyday life—Paracelsus claimed that the natural world was the sole cause of trembling movements. Witchcraft, this chapter argues, was thus the prime discursive space within (and against) which the medical language of chorea would arise, though abrupt and unstructured gestures would remain marked with the spectre of a dark and unknown force.

Significantly, Paracelsus performed a political move in designing to make choreic gestures appear meaningless; to make them appear to go nowhere, to be caused by nothing exogenous, and as such to become 'merely' medical (rather than demonic). In replacing the invisible world of spirits by what he contended was a verifiable world of natural correspondences and vital locomotion, Paracelsus described chorea corresponding to the gestures of a natural world saturated with a whole range of smooth but also sudden and uncontrolled movements; I have elsewhere called this mixture alterkinetic. Concerned with directly observable reality, Paracelsus submitted that chorea, epilepsy, and other involuntary movements offered formal evidence of diseases far removed from the invisible forces (and institutional politics) of armchair academicism. But he still needed to account for bodily movements somehow. ‘Vital spirits’, or spiritus vitae (also occasionally translated as ‘spirit of life’), Paracelsus posited, were neutral forces that moved through (and moved) all matter. They constituted an underlying principle of locomotion that did away with exogenous means and ends—particularly, with the supernatural, witchy interference his academic peers expounded upon. Presaging Bergson's theories of vitalism by a few hundred years, and what Bergson would call the élan vital or vital thrust (also denoting a life force without origin or end), Paracelsus thrived on a method of experimental discovery, seeing chorea in everyday life; and seeing, as Bergson would, processes of nearly continuous transformation. Paracelsus's vitalist philosophy catapulted chorea, and what he was the first systematically to describe as St. Vitus's dance, onto the modern medical scene. Brushing away the cobwebs of theologically and academically entrenched theories attributing epilepsy, chorea, and other forms of dyskinetic gestures to demonism and witchcraft, Paracelsus instituted a shift, almost a bifurcation, in the emerging choreomania story, constituting what I refer to as a translatio, a transfer or passage from one regime of knowledge and power to another. The author borrowed the medieval concept of translatio to describe passages between aesthetic and disciplinary configurations; in Medieval Latin, translatio was employed alternately to signify translatio imperii (denoting transfer of power or rule, generally from East to West, as from Athens to Rome and Rome to Paris) and translatio studii (denoting transfer of culture, study, or knowledge, for example between fields). 'Translatio' in this sense describes a passage or shift—literally, kinesis, movement, route—between political and intellectual modalities that the narrower concept of 'translation' does not quite capture. So whereas the notion of translatio is generally acknowledged in literature on medieval and early modern history, and more recently in comparative literature, it is absent from dance and performance studies, in spite of these fields' marked investments in discourses of disciplinary power and institutional history, and in the politics and practices of movement. The author used this term throughout the book to describe the passage and transformation of the choreomania concept across nations and modes of knowledge, from Germany and other parts of Europe to the far reaches of the colonial empires, and from medical history and colonial medicine to anthropology. But the translatio is never total or exact; there is never a complete consummation (or, in Roach's terms, surrogation) of one field of knowledge by another, nor is there ever a conclusive passage from one to another shore. Rather, the perpetual sea-voyaging Gilroy describes of the Black Atlantic imprints the story of choreomania with an equally ambivalent (and multivalent) set of trajectories: voyages and returns. So whereas the previous chapter (chapter 2) and this chapter emphasize a translatio from boisterous village dance spurred on by foreign pilgrims and local merrymakers to organic events suggesting individual disorders of the nervous system, choreic tremblings continued to represent a cacophony of movements that remained to their observers illegible, incoherent, and, as the author showed by the end of this chapter, obdurate in their failure to conform to new medical forms. ‘SABBATH, SABBATH’: PARACELSUS, CHRISTIANITY, AND THE WITCH

While St. John reigned as patron saint of the medieval dance manias I described in the previous chapter, St. Vitus emerges in the early modern period to represent the jerky gestural vocabulary and odd mixture of comic movement and theatricality that came to define the dancing disease. Vitus (c. 284-305) was an early Christian zealot, whose unlikely story gained prominence in the wake of the Black Death and ensuing dancing upheavals, as late fourteenth- and early fifteenth-century European folklore.

In a slight twist on the formulation I suggest above, literary critic Ernst Robert Curtius influentially described translatio studii specifically as the transfer of learning from Athens to Rome and Rome to France, and translatio imperii as the transfer of power from one empire to another, often provoked by poor stewardship. Arguably, the transfer of learning and power also often go hand in hand. See Ernst Robert Curtius, European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages, trans. Willard R. Trask (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991), 29, 384. In Elise Bartosik-Vélez’s terms, ‘translatio’ describes the ‘transfer of empire, according to which occidental empire and Western civilization itself was believed to have moved progressively from east to west, first from Asia to Greece and then to Rome (and sometimes to Germany)’. Elise Bartosik-Vélez, ‘Translatio Imperii: Virgil and Peter Martyr's Columbus’, Comparative Literature Studies 46.4 (2009): 559-588, 560. On the concept of translatio in a discourse of power, sovereignty, and legitimacy, given practices of translation and grammar in nineteenth-century Colombia, see Rosé Maria Rodriguez-Garcia, ‘The Regime of Translation in Miguel Antonio Caro’s Colombia’, diacritics 34.3 (2004): 143-175. For David A. Boruchoff, the early modern recuperation of the translatio figure is linked to George Hakewill’s seventeenth-century notion of circular progresse, or that which passes ‘from place to place, and from nation to nation’. David A. Boruchoff, ‘New Spain, New England, and the New Jerusalem: ‘The “Translation” of Empire, Faith and Learning (Translatio Imperii, Fidei ac Scientiae) in the Colonial Missionary Project’, Early American Literature 43.1 (2008): 5-34, 18. On translatio, see also Le Goff, Medieval Civilisation; Douglas Robinson, Translation and Empire: Postcolonial Theories Explained (London: Routledge, 2014), 50-55; and Emily Apter, The Translation Zone: A New Comparative Literature (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006). See also Kélina Gotman, ‘Translatio’, Performance Research 21.5 (2016): 17-20.

In a slight twist on the formulation I suggest above, literary critic Ernst Robert Curtius influentially described translatio studii specifically as the transfer of learning from Athens to Rome and Rome to France, and translatio imperii as the transfer of power from one empire to another, often provoked by poor stewardship. Arguably, the transfer of learning and power also often go hand in hand. See Ernst Robert Curtius, European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages, trans. Willard R. Trask (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991), 29, 384. In Elise Bartosik-Vélez’s terms, ‘translatio’ describes the ‘transfer of empire, according to which occidental empire and Western civilization itself was believed to have moved progressively from east to west, first from Asia to Greece and then to Rome (and sometimes to Germany)’______ Vitus became, by extension, the patron saint not only of epileptics but also of dancers, actors, and comedians, as well as lightning and rabid dog bites—simultaneously representing comical contortions, jagged angularity, sudden movements, virulence, and theatrical deceit. This translatio, from St. John to St. Vitus, emerged in a late medieval context in which unruly dances were increasingly integrated into civic discourse, in collusion with clerical authority. Intermingled with clerical and civic debate, medical discourse gained ground, and the transition from St. John to St. Vitus solidified: although both saints continued to be employed almost interchangeably in reference to collective bouts of unruly dancing, the St. Vitus myth linking collective dances to nervous complaints emerged in the early modern period in full force. A range of medical and religious hypotheses had emerged between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries to account for the dancers’ contortions—half dance and half leaping, grimacing performances of real agony.

Late medieval physicians steeped in the classical theory of humours—according to which disease comes from an imbalance in one of the four bodily elements, either blood, yellow bile, black bile, or phlegm—typically thought the dancers suffered from hot blood. The Cronica quorundam Romanorum regum ac imperatorum suggested that many contemporaries considered the dances a ‘mania’ arising from ‘natural causes’, ‘for the sufferers seemed to be crazed, uttering confused sounds, with strange movements of their bodies, as if mad’. Young women were most prone to this sort of dancing, the Cronica noted, although young and old, women and men, were equally liable to catching the disease. Other writers thought this was the work of demons, a hypothesis that remained strong through the early modern religious wars and the Reformation.

The notorious Malleus maleficarum [Hammer of Witches] (1487), written by the inquisitors Heinrich Kramer (1430-1505) (also known as Henricus Institoris) and Jacob Sprenger (c. 1436-1495), appeared at a time when witchcraft trials were all the rage in parts of Germany and the continent, peaking in the period between about 1450 and 1700. The sixteenth-century De la démonomanie des sorciers [Of the Demon-Mania of Witches], by French writer Jean Bodin (d. 1596), published in French in 1580 and almost simultaneously translated into German, Italian, and Latin, was one of the most widely disseminated works on demonism, appearing in over twenty-three editions. It offered one of the most systematic treatments of the witches’ nightly sabbaths, articulating fears that had run rampant in the European imagination since at least the Middle Ages. But Bodin’s analysis now also comprised references to madness and the civic treatment of dancing manias, linked in his view to witchcraft, inasmuch as both could be cured with the exercise of slow, heavy movement. He claimed: ‘there is no [witches’] assembly carried on where they do not dance, inasmuch as it is their custom to dance at every gathering, but the dances are not like the ones we ordinarily see, rather they are truly wild and unruly, as if they were possessed by some demon’.

According to Pearl's introduction, the 'witchcraft crisis reached its peak in Western Europe between 1550 and 1650', and 'during this century, witches were actively prosecuted in the law courts and could be punished with death' (14). Translatio + 73 not dance', adding that these dances made men frenzied and women abort.® He argued that 'all raving and frenzied [furieux, & forcenez] people perform such dancing and violent leaping' but could be cured with the enforcement of calm, heavy rhythmic movements [posément, & en cadence pesante], such as those imposed on 'the mad [insensez] people in Germany struck with the illness [maladie] known as St. Vitus and St. Modestus'.° More intriguingly, Bodin notes that dances were engaged in on feast days, as danc- ers raised their hands in the air, shouting 'sab- bath, sabbath', to show their joy (‘allégresse’), a practice he compared to ancient Hebrew dances and oblations at the Temple, including those performed by David, who danced and played his harp as a sign of joy.'° Bodin was quick to add that ancient prophetic dances, unlike these demonic ones, engaged the body in movement that had 'nothing offensive' (‘rien d’insolent’), praising heaven and God rather than the Devil." This would, however, suggest that the 'dancing manias' were in some cases plausibly Jewish dances, reinterpreted as witchcraft and subse- quently disease.” In all cases, the concept of the demonic was radically polysemic, referring as much to the uncontrolled as to the obscure. It also, significantly, described a fear of shape-shifting; these dancers, whose contorted bodies distorted them beyond recognition, had in that respect 'demonic' sympathies. Yet their status perplexed many: were they devil-worshipping and demonic outright? Were they suffering from naturally explainable pains? While some charity was granted the danc- ers in previous centuries, as Herental's account, described in the previous chapter, suggests, no sustained medical discussion had yet emerged, and no real medical theories were propounded besides recourse to the humoral notion that they suffered from hot blood. Plenty of med- ical debate had emerged surrounding the Black Death, arguing that it was caused by astrological conjunctions, mixed with bad air that exac- erbated a form of contagium, as Siraisi, Cohn, Vivian Nutton, and others have shown.!® But the dances were 'plague-like' in image only. Now, one firebrand physician keen to understand the roots of these agitated gestures argued against prevailing theories of the day according to which the dancers suffered from demonic influence, substituting what he saw as politically motivated religious prejudice with hard fact based on empirical research. Paracelsus wrote his treatise Diseases That Deprive Man of His Reason, Such as St. Vitus' Dance, Falling Sickness, Melancholy, and Insanity, and Their Correct Treatment in the 1520s, nearly a century and a half after the medieval dancing mania's zenith in 1374-1375, when new waves of religious reform and______ He discovered that he could observe people suffering from tics. Bodin, De la démonomanie des sorciers, 87-89. See also Bodin, On the Demon-Mania of Witches, 9, 120.

Bodin, De la démonomanie des sorciers, 88-89. See also Bodin, On the Demon-Mania of Witches, 120-121. Unsurprisingly, Scott and Pearl reprise the usual conflation between neuromotor disorder and popular dance to explain St. Vitus's dance as a 'special form of rheumatic fever (Sydenham's chorea) which caused involuntary twitching or writhing movements' in their English edition, adding that the 'term is also commonly applied to a range of neurological disorders'. Bodin, On the Demon-Mania of Witches, 121n70.

Bodin remarks on the ancient Hebrew term haga (22n), meaning simultaneously festival or celebration and dance ('feste, & danse'). Bodin, De la démonomanie des sorciers, 88.

Bodin, De la démonomanie des sorciers, 88.

I have found only scanty evidence of this hypothesis, but Bodin's remark suggests more work may yield important insight on the connection between Jewish dances and what was coming to be known as the dancing disease. Either way, it seems highly unlikely that the dancing mania would be an exclusively Jewish phenomenon, only that certain Jewish dances would be wrapped up into the dancing mania lore.

These theories have long been well documented. See Nancy G. Siraisi, Medieval and Renaissance Medicine: An Introduction to Knowledge and Practice (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 128-129; Vivian Nutton, "The Seeds of Disease: An Explanation of Contagion and Infection from the Greeks to the Renaissance', Medical History 27 (1983): 1-34.

Paracelsus, "The Diseases That Deprive Man of His Reason, Such As St. Vitus' Dance, Falling Sickness, Melancholy, and Insanity, and Their Correct Treatment', trans. Gregory Zilboorg, in Paracelsus, Four Treatises of Theophrastus von Hohenheim called Paracelsus, ed. Henry E. Sigerist (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996), 127-212. See also Paracelsus, Paracelsus (Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim, 1493-1541): Essential Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Andrew Weeks (Leiden: Brill, 2008), 778-793, on St. Vitus's dance; Walter Pagel, Paracelsus: An Introduction to Philosophical Medicine in the Era of the Renaissance, 2nd rev. ed. (Basel: Karger, 1982), 55-56; Andrew Weeks, Paracelsus: Speculative Theory and the Crisis of the Early Reformation (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1997); Allen G. Debus, The Chemical Philosophy: Paracelsian Science and Medicine in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries, 2 vols. (Mineola, NY: Dover, 2002). See also Genevieve Aubert, 'Charcot Revisited: The Case of Bruegel's Chorea', Archives of Neurology 62 (2005): 155-161, 155; L. J. Donaldson, J. Cavanagh, and J. Rankin, 'The Dancing Plague: A Public Health Conundrum', Public Health 111 (1997): 201-204, 201. John's Day fire, further establishing his own reputation as an iconoclast and garnering him a cast of devotees and enemies alike. Paracelsus's new approach did away with the complacent theorization popular among prominent humanists, including Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564), Otto Brunfels (1488-1534), Leonhart Fuchs (1501-1566), Konrad Gessner (1516-1565), and Georgius Agricola (1494-1555); and with the religious superstition rampant in what he saw as a corrupt clerical establishment. 'We must not forget to explain the origin of the diseases which deprive man of reason', he wrote, 'as we know from experience that they develop out of man's disposition. The present-day clergy of Europe attribute such diseases to ghostly beings and threefold spirits; we are not inclined to believe them.' Instead, he argued, 'nature is the sole origin of diseases'. By positing a type of sympathy between parts of the individual and the whole, underscoring analogical relationships across swathes of the natural world, he was overturning the humoral approach to medicine according to which disorders were caused by constitutional imbalances exacerbated by demonic influence. The church and the academic establishment were swept away in one stroke. Paracelsus's natural philosophy complemented his political convictions. As a radical reformer living at a pivotal time in the history of the Christian church, when Lutheran and Protestant reforms were on the rise, Paracelsus operated alongside a small coterie of religious nonconformists whose attitudes garnered them sympathy from townspeople and peasants agitating against the Catholic authorities, who were in turn clamping down on rabble-rousers of all stripes. Although his spiritualist and mystical leanings and Kabbalistic activities caused him to be accused of heresy and black magic by some of his humanist peers, Paracelsus maintained an active and successful medical practice, boasting patients across the lower and upper classes. His theories were bewilderingly complex, and decidedly cartographic, emphasizing relationships between microcosm and macrocosm and the rhizomatic journeys disease could take. As he described it, disease located in the roots of a tree at one point spread to the animal or human's liver or heart at another, and passed from that to the limbs, echoing environmental modulations and climatic changes. The substance of the disease was the same; only its locus and intensity shifted. Even St. Vitus's dance was caused by atmospheric disturbances, which disturbed the dancer's 'vital spirits'; the clergy had simply used these tremors to preach against demonic possession and instill fear in the people. Comparing what he called St. Vitus's dance to epilepsy, he argued that dancers were moved by 'imagination' and 'sympathy' as they imitated images (or 'mental impressions') and sounds that affected them, as a child might be affected when seeing an object and imagining something else—a ghost, a boogeyman—as a result. This phantasm, he thought, provoked the movement of the imagination and so, too, the movements of the limbs, not by the work of any outside agent but by virtue of the patient's mind alone. This was not a figurative imitation but ecosophical and kinetic: the 'imitation' operated at the level of a tremor, a shake. Paracelsus used the terms chorea (from the Latin, 'dance') and palsy (from the Old English 'palsy', meaning 'paralysis') to describe the condition. If nature can instruct irrational animals, can it not much more men? Cited in Deaux, The Black Death, 212. On Paracelsus's dishevelled ways and general notoriety, see also Charles Webster, Paracelsus: Medicine, Magic and Mission at the End of Time (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008); Pagel, Paracelsus; and Weeks, Paracelsus.

Just as the occultist and demonologist Johann Weyer (1515-1588) would argue in De praestigiis dae-monum [On the Deceits of Demons] (1563) that witchcraft only amounted to readily observable hallucinatory melancholy caused by organic dys-function rather than demonic intervention," Paracelsus's rationalist attention to corporeal motion found cause and consequence for dan-cing and twitching alike in the mundane move-ments of the natural world. This was the first theory significantly to attend to the purportedly demonic provenance of the dancers' motions, finding echoes for these motions in the observable natural world.

Paracelsus argued that disturbances of the vital fluids or spiritus vitae mirrored disturbances in nature, which had actually provoked the danc-ing; this was an ecosophical conception, positing that human bodies and their environments work inseparably. It was also an aesthetic conception, as metaphor and metonymy enabled him to draw links between individual and ecologi-cal realms, and between parts of the body and the whole: Just as the earthquake takes place in one part but shakes everything within its reach', he wrote, so too a disease located in the head 'afflicts all that it touches'. The same was true of the liver, whose 'brewing' vapours 'creep into the spiritus vitae' and 'reached the head and the whole body like a wind blowing along the roads'. The motions of the heart similarly affected the whole body, like an earthquake that shakes the world but 'is unable to cause poisoning unless the upper parts be broken by the shaking and trembling'. As Paracelsus put it, 'just like an earthquake is wrecking a house, this breaking-up ... is not due to the poison of the spiritus vitae but to its motion'.* The repetition of 'just as', 'just like' and 'the same as' suggested parallels between phenomena in the natural world and more specifically correspondences between them defined by principles of locomotion." Similarly, correspondences between earthquake, head, liver, heart, intestines, abdomen; herb; house; and, above all, root, suggested relations between human, animal, plant, and mineral worlds, connected to one another through fundamental laws of similarity. The principle ensuring their connection was the ubiquitous spiritus vitae running through all of nature, affecting humans, animals, and plants in analogous ways. Paracelsus's rhizomatic theories conceptualized all parts of the natural world as moving through one another, connected by contiguity and resonance. This early kinaesthetic conceptualization of the dancing disease privileged movement. As a vitalist philosophy, Paracelsus's vision integrated observations across spiritual and material planes, combining empiricism and pragmatism, progressive politics and medical analysis, privileging a conception of the body that was open, porous, and polysemic. Still radical to the contemporary ear, Paracelsus's early formulation of choreomania presents an affiliational view of human, animal, and plant species that draws out intensities of motion and affect, as well as resonances, hiccups and breaks, and their dramatic effects.

Paracelsus argued that shaking—and the characteristic tremor of the limbs found in St. Vitus's dance—was often latent and 'sometimes . . . appears after a shock', But the shock was not the cause of the disease; the disease was 'merely inflamed by the shock, which causes the spiritus vitae to swell and boil'. Joy could also cause shaking, by affecting the spiritus vitae that have an 'inclination' towards it." Thus, 'trembling, falling, foaming, and spasms of the limbs are caused because the living spirits [spiritus vitae] of the patients are ill, and therefore the patients too are suffering'."

This unified theory—which he employed to explain epilepsy, the 'falling sickness', as well as St. Vitus's dance—accounted for patent similarities between paroxysms, including epileptic and epileptiform seizures and other sudden involuntary falls (including ones provoked by dancing). Paradoxically, the paroxysmal gestures of choreics and epileptics rendered them more like dance understood in a contemporary aesthetic sense: as movement without signing, abstract rhythm foregrounding structure and form but not necessarily 'ends'. As a sort of purposeless movement, dance in this sense calls forth objects and spaces but is shorn of the sort of ostensive signification of drama. In Agamben's terms, gesture 'communicates communicability' but does not communicate a particular object or thing. Gesture is the pure 'mediality' of language: for Agamben, gesture gestures." It gestures its ability to signify, to mean, point to, stand in for. As a metonymic conception, this sense of gesture differs from gesture conceived as nonteleological movement: movement that does not require an end. For Paracelsus, the gestures of choreics' limbs, torsos, and faces have no symbolic signification. Yet aesthetically they are linked, inasmuch as they formally resemble one another: Paracelsus's theory of choreic movement thus links chorea to earthquakes and other natural cataclysms by virtue of their formal and rhythmic similarities: in all cases, bodies tremble, quake, and quiver. With Paracelsus, the interrelation of ecological movements across the natural world represents a different sort of catastrophe than what Agamben would note of chorea: not the catastrophe of purposeless gesture but the catastrophic emergence of gestural upheaval, rhythmic resonance, and a brand of mutual imitation without beginning or end. For Paracelsus, the tremor of the limbs equals the tremor of a tree and of the earth; these are equivalent movements in the eruption of vital forces onto the world stage. As medical historian Walter Pagel (1898-1983) has pointed out, however, Paracelsus was not entirely immune from belief in supernaturalism or witchcraft himself, and some of his psychiatric theories suggested burning as a means to keep patients from becoming instruments of the devil;* but by and large, Paracelsus's philosophical medicine, rent through with arcane deliberations, sought to go beyond what he saw as the sclerotic academicism of his day. As literary critic and historian Andrew Weeks has further suggested, ambiguity played a pivotal role in Paracelsus's thinking and style: wordplay, rhetorical riddles, paradox, and complex allusions deliberately reconfigured the fields he was seeking to redefine." Paracelsus's later writings, from around 1530, rearticulated St. Vitus's dance as an 'invisible disease', which he nonetheless observed in the first instance in a woman who, he argues, affected illness and danced herself to exhaustion purportedly to annoy her husband; he linked this to what he saw as questionable Anabaptist practices that abused faith for the sake of 'imagined ceremony'." In this sense, the discourse on St. Vitus's dance served as a thinly veiled criticism of superstition once more. Although Paracelsus himself only barely escaped the threats of imprisonment and death suffered by some of his radical compatriots,* his vitalist conceptions paved the way for a new era of medical debate, shifting the discourse on the dancing disease: no longer primarily demonic, foreign, or strange, it had natural and human causes and, as such, should be wrested from clerical control. This conception set the grounds for a new legacy of writings linking St. John's and St. Vitus's dance as popular practices to epilepsy, religious heresy, dissent, and thinly veiled feminine revolt now cast as disease.

THE STRASSBOURG MANIA: MUNICIPAL STAKES
Paracelsus's visionary contributions to natural science initially remained marginal. But throughout the sixteenth century, practical solutions to the so-called dancing disease multiplied as municipal authorities keen to keep disorderly expressions of kinetic enthusiasm in check increasingly siphoned troublemakers off to the church. Tensions had come to a head in Strasbourg in 1518, in a second outbreak of the dancing 'plague' smaller in scope to the large-scale, travelling dance mania of the 1370s described in chapter 2 but more complexly theorized and documented by its contemporaries. In this case, the city's methods for dealing with the outbreak were at first pragmatic: dancers were encouraged—even mandated—to dance themselves to exhaustion in prescribed areas. Exorcism was practiced as a last resort, and standard medical opinion called on to legitimize it: the church, city, and medical establishment worked in concert to assuage, even to contain, though never fully to punish, the dancing. Meanwhile, medical discussions attempting to account for the events proliferated.

The Strasbourg Chronicle described the dancing in terms of its potential fatality: 'A remarkable disease spread / At this time among the people. /...many in their madness / Began to dance, / Which they did day and night / And without interruption / Until they fell down unconscious. / Many died in consequence'. Another Strasbourg chronicle reported that hundreds of men and women began 'To dance and hop... / In the public market, in alleys and streets / Day and night; and many of them ate nothing / Until at last the sickness left them. / This affliction was called St Vitus' dance'.

Legend had it that the dancing was triggered by one woman; within four days, she was joined in dancing by thirty-four men and women, and soon enough two hundred people were dancing. Within four weeks, more than four hundred people of all ages were dancing in the streets and in the private homes of Strasbourg.

With increasing recourse to St. Vitus as patron saint of these dances, theories concerning the dancing frenzies gained a new lease of life, and casual bystander observations of the St. John's dances of the previous centuries gave way to anew era of medical and municipal debate. Exorcism was used to great effect: on the chief magistrate's orders, dancers were taken in wagons to the nearby chapel of St. Vitus by Zabern, in Alsace. They reportedly continued to dance along the way; then fell to their knees before the image of St. Vitus and promptly recovered their senses.

The proximity of the St. Vitus chapel to the Strasbourg 'mania' may have inspired the shift towards St. Vitus as patron saint, gradually occluding the earlier village kermesses and fétes celebrated in the name of St. John (though these continued for many centuries independently to take place). The sixteenth-century architect Daniel Specklin (1536-1589) noted in his Strasbourg chronicle that platforms for dancing were set up in the horse and grain markets, and two guild-halls were reserved for the dancers. These were provided with hired guards specially brought in to contain the dancing and keep dancers from harming themselves, as well as moderating the influence they might have on others.

According to another eyewitness and chronicler, Hieronymous Gebwiler (1473-1545), the hired guards 'danced day and night with those poor people, but toward evening they tied them all onto wagons and took them to St. Vitus of Hohenstein. And after their pilgrimage there was finished and they were danced all out, they took them home again'.

This was a disorder that persisted for several years, with no known cure or treatment. The dancing epidemic remained a mystery, and the city's efforts to contain it were at best only partially successful. The role of St. Vitus as patron saint of the dances seemed to provide a degree of relief, but the exact cause and solution to the dancing mania remained elusive. 33. In Backman, Religious Dances, 237.

Béhme notes that a century later, in 1615, a servant girl in Basel was ‘overtaken by such a horrifying dance mania (Tanzwut), she danced herself sick for over a month and danced the soles of her feet off. She slept and ate 78 « EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE of excessive movement; but as in the medieval rounds described in chapter 2, its prescribed cure came in the form of movement as well: like purportedly cured like. Dancing, mandated by the municipal authorities, would expunge itself. Too exhausted to resist, dancers were suscepti- ble to the emotional charge of the saint’s inter- cession and—in the case of some—found satiety for a while. For Gebwiler, the event offered a lesson from God that one should practice moderation in all things, including dancing. Dancing should never be lewd or shameful, he wrote; and one should never dance with ‘inappropriate persons’ such as monks or nuns, or ‘in the wrong places’ such as in cloisters or nunneries. Otherwise, God would punish them as he had the Egyptians, ‘and for our obstinacy He will let us sink in a Red Sea of sins’. Some dancers appear to have actually died in the process of dancing, as reported, among others, by Specklin.*° Those who went to church were greeted with a special mass and given small crosses and red shoes,*° an observation echoed for the year 1517 in the Strasbourg chronicle of public official Jean Wencker (1590-1659).** Music seems to have played no small part in the affair: Specklin noted that besides hired guards, a cast of musicians was brought in to accompany the dancers with flutes and drum. But although music was initially prescribed by the city to help assuage______ The 'only exception' noted was 'that if honorable persons wish to dance at weddings or celebrations of first Mass in their houses, they may do so using stringed instruments, but they are on their conscience not to use tambourines or drums'. Festive clothing and jewelry were also banned, and 'loose persons' were cast out of the city until the excitement subsided." Whereas the Franciscan friar Johannes Pauli's (1450-1520) Strasbourg sermons sug- gest that the dancing may have derived from the ballo in Christo—what historian Arlene Epp Pearsall has described as an ecstatic religious exercise performed by worshippers known as chorisanten or dansatores, loosely related to the flagellants, and pronounced heretical a cen- tury earlier**"—the dancing seems also to have become a fashion flaunting excess. Women and men of all ages mixed, cavorting on Sundays and other feast days, disrupting the pious exercise of religious worship. As noted, many dancers may have come from the labouring classes, but records suggest the wealthy indulged liberally as well.

Johann Schenck von Grafenberg (1530-1598), a physician in Freiburg im Breisgau, noted that well-to-do dancers hired help on their own account to guide these communal fétes: little, but kept dancing in one spot, until she was completely devoid of energy. She was eventually brought to a hospital and 'cured'. But while she was dancing, municipal authorities 'assigned two strong men to the dancer, dressed in red, with white feathers on their hats and one after the other they had to dance with the dance maniac [Tanzwithigen]'. In this case, concerted attempts at wearing her out failed; the hospital cure is more perplexing, suggesting she either suffered a neuromotor disease that looked like dance which they were somehow able to treat or, more likely, that the hospital setting itself sobered her. The detail of the red dress and white feathers is also unusual, indicative of official dress.

Wencker, 'La chronique strasbourgeoise de Jean Wencker', 148. These are the same red shoes that reappear in Hans Christian Anderson's (1805-1875) fairy tale of The Red Shoes (1845), in which a young girl is so possessed by her dancing shoes that she cannot stop dancing, until eventually her feet are cut off, and her shoes go off dancing on their own into the distance. Further nineteenth-century accounts of women dancing themselves to death with red shoes appear in the Brothers Grimm's Snow White (1812), in which the jealous stepmother is compelled to wear red-hot iron dancing shoes and dance until she dies. So, too, Giselle is compelled by the spirit-world Wilis to dance herself to death. These nineteenth-century tales of obsession, vengeance, and despair emphasized the involuntary aspects of the dance, overlooking the collective, civic aspects of the dances in the sixteenth century. Dancing shoes, particularly red ones, merit a study of their own. For a useful overview of the symbolic power of red shoes over the centuries, see e.g. Hilary Davidson, 'Sex and Sin: The Magic of Red Shoes', in Peter McNeil and Giorgio Riello, eds. , Shoes: A History from Sandals to Sneakers (London: Bloomsbury, 2006), 272-289. 42. Midelfort, A History of Madness, 35-36. See also Specklin, Les collectanées de Daniel Specklin, 239. 43, Pearsall, Johannes Pauli and the Strasbourg Dancers’, 209. Translatio + 79 ‘those who were looking after [the dancers] used to carry around benches and high chairs with which they would ring them in if they still lived when the dancing was over. In this way their madness was assuaged.“* Does this comment belie a hint of irony? Were the dancers actually risking their lives? Many may have been intoxicated or behaved as if they were, showing little reserve, letting loose for a while. Those who could afford such fétes may have died from the efforts in rare cases; as in any extreme physical activity, excess can prompt unintentionally grave results. But the dancers appeared to be all the more morally suspect on this account, even if Schenck’s portrayal suggests only gentle chastisement. He was bemused by the phenomenon, describing St. Vitus’s dance in his Observationes medicae de capite humano [Medical Observations] (1584) as an ‘enthusiasm’ or ‘amazing kind of madness [insania] that has corrupted many of [our] ancestors especially in Germany’.** It was interesting, extraordinary, and novel in its incarnation but old in its genealogy: this was, for Schenck, the same phenomenon that had beset dancers in the 1370s. It was a recurring disease in Germany and yet, as far as he was concerned, still a surprising and enigmatic one. According to municipal accounts, physicians were brought in to testify before the guild-led Council of Twenty-One in Strasbourg in the summer of 1518. As Erik Midelfort has remarked, physicians still typically agreed that the dancing was ‘a natural sickness that came from hot blood’,*® a diagnosis offered among other physicians by Wencker in his Strasbourg chronicle.” But a new body of theories emphasizing individual insanity was also emerging, giving the dancers a stamp of frenetic but, once again, medically justified lack of control. Melancholy, it was thought, prompted delusions, to which the dancers were especially prey. Felix Platter (Platerus) (1536-1614), a physician at the University of Basel, described the dancing frenzy as a kind of insanity, noting in his Observations (1614) that one woman had reportedly danced compulsively for a month; and others, falling in exhaustion to the ground, realized, when recovering, he surmised, that they had succumbed to folly.“ In 1625, Gregor Horst (Horstius) (1578-c. 1635), a professor of medicine in Giessen and the city physician of Ulm, ventured a rare early neuromotor diagnosis: for him, saltatio sancti viti (St. Vitus’s dance) was a physical disorder provoked by organic dysfunction. Convulsive movements, tense pains in the limbs, growing fatigue, and heavy-headedness causing confusion provoked the afflicted person to dance.*® But his theory gained little ground as far more popular theories of melancholy and insanity proliferated in the hundred years following the Strasbourg outburst. Philippus Camerarius (1537-1624) retrospectively attributed the fourteenth-century dance mania to the disorder of melancholy, noting: ‘if [the dancing mania] is to be classed as an illness, the only category into which it seems to me to fit is a delirium of melancholia, which has of course quite a wide range. In such cases the mind is entirely disordered’.°° The Oxford polymath Robert Burton (1577-1640), writing in 1628, argued in his widely influential The______ Vitus's dance was attributable to a subtype of madness – a fury stronger than, though allied to, melancholy, also involving a disordered state of mind. This madness was similar to ecstasy, he argued, and was characterized by a variety of behaviors and beliefs, including enthusiasm, revelations, and visions, as well as obsessions with, or a belief in, possession by devils and sibylline prophecy. It also suggested symptoms characteristic of the 44.

'Those who were rich kept paid attendants to see that they did not hurt themselves or others, and to act as leaders who would guide the crazy band'; cited in Backman, Religious Dances, 214. See Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 97. 45, See Johannes Schenck von Grafenberg, 'Praefatio ad lectorem' in Observationes medicae de capite humano: hoc est, exempla capitis morborum, causarum, signorum, eventuum, curationum, ut singularia, sic abdita et monstrosa. Ex claris. medicorum, veterum simul & recentriorum scriptis (Basel: Ex Officina Frobeniana, 1584), n.p. Also in Midelfort, A History of Madness, 170. 46. Midelfort, A History of Madness, 34. 47. 'In mehreren Sitzungen wurde von Veitstanzern gesprochen: die Aerzte erklarden es fir eine natirliche krankheit, die von hitzigem gebliit herkomme'. In Jean Wencker, ed., 'Annales de Sébastien Brant: Suite et fin' in L. Dacheux, Fragments des anciennes chroniques d'alsace, 4 vols., vol. 3 (Strasbourg: Imprimerie Strasbourgeoise, 1901), 243-470, 252. 48. In Robert Burton, The Anatomy of Melancholy, ed. Floyd Dell and Paul Jordan-Smith (New York: Tudor, 1927), 124, and Backman, Religious Dances, 215. On Platter, see also Midelfort, A History of Madness, 174-179. Beckmann describes another case reported by Platter, according to which a young prelate began having countless convulsions, after which he fell into a steady insan- ity; his body moved 'as if in a dance' (Beckmann, Griindliche Fiirstellung, 467). 49. Martin, 'Geschichte der Tanzkrankheit in Deutschland', 122-123; cited in Midelfort, A History of Madness, 39-40. 50. Cited in Backman, Religious Dances, 214. On theories of melancholy (and mania) in early academic psychiatry see also Midelfort, A History of Madness, 141-157. 80 = EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE consumption of noxious herbs and spider bites, although he insisted that the dancing should not be reduced to a poisonous etiology; more was at play than toxicity. The most common manifestations of this type of mad fury, Burton thought, were lycanthropia (belief that one has turned into a wolf), hydrophobia, and Chorea Sti Viti. The latter, he remarked, had been discussed in prior medical literature by Paracelsus, who 'bragged' about the number of persons he cured of it, and by Schenck von Grafenberg. The Arabs, Burton added, gesturing towards a comparative medical nosography, called it a type of palsy.** As the term 'chorea' came increasingly in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries to be disengaged from the clerical stronghold and integrated into medical debate, discussions of the affliction shifted: from an emphasis on demons, followed by anosography describing earthquakes, plagues, famines, paroxysms, and the 'vital spirits' in______ The popular and semi-religious dancing ‘plague’ was conjoined with a wide range of physiological symptoms, making boisterous dance and sudden movements a common kinetic event, now a neurological disease as vague as it was seemingly widespread. BACCHEGGIAVA: POISONOUS WINDS AND FERTILE MINDS

Choreomania's translation into the realm of neurological and physiological theory endured. The idea that choreomania was provoked by a combination of organic factors and cultural habit, and was thus curable by the same, prevailed throughout much of the seventeenth century. Theories of tarantism (the medical disorder and cultural practices associated with the tarantella), which I discuss further in chapter 7, amalgamated popular dancing, music, and falls, along with various other symptoms, including hallucination, melancholy, insanity, and poison.

Medical approaches to tarantism in the seventeenth century typically argued that poisonous spider bites provoking spasmodic motions, lethargy, dancing, and melancholic fits of despair were cured through music and dancing. The dancing, as in Strasbourg, was at once a symptom of disease and its cure. Although medical views in Italy differed as to the causes and forms of the tarantula disease (tarantism) and the specific operations of its accompanying music and dances (tarantellas), a proliferation of theories in the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth centuries set popular dance practices into the pages of medical lore.

From De venenis [Of Venom] (Venice, 1492) by Santes de Ardoynis (dates unknown) to Cornucopiae latinae linguae [Cornucopia of the Latin Language] (Basle, 1536) by Niccolé Perotti (1429-1480), Genialum dierum [Genial Days] (Paris, 1539) by Alexander ab Alexandro (1461-1523), Commentarii secundo aucti, in libros sex pedacii dioscoridis [Second, Expanded Commentary, in Six Books] (Venice, 1560) by Petrus Andreas Mattioli (1501-1577), De venenis et morbis venenosis tractatus locupletissimi [Of the Treatment of Venom and Poisonous Substances] (Venice, 1584) by Hieronymus Mercurialis (1530-1606), and Centum historiae [A Hundred Historical Observations and Medical Cases] (Venice, 1621) by Epifanio Ferdinando (1569-1638), authors proffered toxic etiologies, according to which the dancing stemmed directly from the physiological effects of the spider's venom on a person's humours and vital or animal spirits; and psychic etiologies, citing lonely people's abuse of the so-called tarantula dances to dance and wear bright colours, feigning that they had been bitten.

Most authors offered a combined approach, by which the spider's venom created a disturbance in the person's animal spirits, which were also cured by music and dancing. By inciting people to dance and thus to sweat, the music helped dispel noxious substances through glands activated by vigorous motion in the summer heat.°*? Ferdinando called this vigorous dancing baccheggiava, after the Bacchic frenzy from which he thought it derived. 

Alternative popular accounts, highlighted by dance historian Karen Liidtke, suggest Satan was at the origin of the tarantellas, prompting witchy women to catch tarantulas and set them off to bite unsuspecting hosts. The Renaissance polymath Athanasius Kircher (1602-1680), in Magnes, sive, De Arte Magnetica [On the Art of Magnetic Phenomena] (1643), like Paracelsus, underscored the importance of music’s ability to echo natural processes in the person’s body. For Kircher, music aroused the afflicted persons to dance by creating a motion in the air, compelling them—by the pleasurable sensation this produced—to replicate the movement of the music through their bodies. Eventually, the movement and dancing caused the victim to sweat the venom right out and be restored to health. Kircher argued, in line with Paracelsus’s theory of natural correspondences, that this process was achieved through a series of magnetic effects: stringed instruments moved the air, which was in turn moved. The air then penetrated the body through the faculties of reason and emotion, which were stirred in turn; they then stirred the vital spirits, compelling the person to dance. Dancing was thus neither a purely emotional nor a natural, animal, or even physiological function but the result of complex operations involving magnetic correspondences between music, air, mind, and vital spirits. The heat produced in the body led to the opening of the ‘air holes’ (or pores) through which poisonous winds and humours were exhaled. Dancing thus corresponded at once to the disorder and its cure; movements in spiders, in the air, and in musical instruments echoed one another. The world, in this view, was an ecological machine composed of parts, each of which, when disturbed, affected another.

Dance was naturally cause and consequence of other ecological phenomena; studies of science and dancing, poison and music, were completely enmeshed. For the professor of medicine and anatomy at the University of Rome, Giorgio Baglivi (1668-1707), writing in his widely influential medical textbook De praxi medica [Of Medical Practice] (1699), the medical history of tarantism was part of the general history of poisons, connected to the history of music and dance.° He put forward a unified, ‘mechanical doctrine of music, poison and dancing’,° arguing that these were intimately related, and comparable to other animal sources of psychomotor disease such as those produced by rabid dog bites, which also caused an ‘exaltation of the humors’ and agitation.° But tarantism had a particularly close relation to music, which stimulated dancing, purging patients of the venom infiltrating their ‘animal spirits’ because of the tarantula’s own tendency to dance to music by wiggling its furry legs.° Baglivi recommended dancing to relieve patients of tarantula bites, citing numerous case histories to prove this practice. He also noted the way this practice gave rise to cultural traditions, enshrining the dancing in local lore and in the yearly festive calendar. Because of the mimetic relationship between humans and animals, the tarantula’s poison, Baglivi argued, continued to act well after the first bite, perpetuating the affected person’s need for dancing. Once attacked by a tarantula, in other words, one was infected more or less for life: symptoms re-emerged every year at harvest time, when the summer heat was most intense, aggravating the poisonous winds. 

This occasion sioned what Baglivi described as ‘a long series 53. See e.g. Ernesto de Martino, La terra del rimorso: Contributo a una storia religiosa del Sud (Milan: Il Saggiatore, 1961), 140, English translation in Ernesto de Martino, The Land of Remorse: A Study of Southern Italian Tarantism, ed. and trans. Dorothy Louise Zinn (London: Free Association Books, 2005), 97n; Jerri Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse: A Study of Tarantism and Pizzica in Salento (Bern: Peter Lang, 2010), 134. 54. Karen Liidtke, Dances with Spiders: Crisis, Celebrity and Celebration in Southern Italy (Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2009), 55-56. ‘The literature on tarantism is vast. Especially pertinent here, the medieval origins of tarantism in the cult of St. Paul—adopted as protector saint of all those bitten by spiders—reaching back to ancient Greek (typically Dionysian) cults, is widely referenced in standard histories. See e.g. Ludtke, Dances with Spiders, 55-64, and de Martino, La terra del rimorso, 228-241. 55. In Giorgio Baglivi, The practice of physick, reduc‘ to the ancient way of observations containing a just parallel between the wisdom and experience of the ancients, and the hypothesis's of modern physicians . . . Together with several new and curious dissertations; particu- larly of the tarantula and the nature of its poison: of the use and abuse of blistering plasters: of epidemical apoplexies, &c. . .., 2nd ed. (London: D. Midwinter, B. Lintot, G. Strahan, J. Round, W. Taylor, J. Osborn and J. Clark, 1723), 334. 56. Baglivi, The practice of physick, 313. 57. Baglivi, The practice of physick, 315. 58. Baglivi, The practice of physick, 348-349. 59. Baglivi, The practice of physick, 349-350. 82 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE of evils, which would be very annoying to the patients, if they did not take due care of their health by dancing and balls’.®° He cited the case of one woman who was stung by a tarantula and suffered the typical symptoms of tarantism— lethargy, listlessness—‘but by dancing according to the Custom of the Country, turn’d them off, and was very well that Year. But every Year after, about the wonted Revival of the Poison, her Toes were seiz’d with a most violent Pain... . The lady being oblig’d to dance, after the Exercise was over, found her self presently cur’d of the foremention’d Symptoms of her Toes and whole Body’.* The poison’s effects recalled the symptoms of melancholy, what Baglivi called the ‘green sickness’, and other diseases, echoing Burton’s attribution of St. Vitus’s dance to melancholy. ‘Many of these persons are never well but among graves, and in solitary places’, Baglivi wrote; ‘and they'll lay themselves along on a bier, as if they were really dead; they’ll throw themselves into a pit, as if they were in despair. Maids and women, otherwise chaste enough, without any regard to modesty, fall a sighing, howling, and into very indecent______ When the patients started to dance—one 'fairly danced himself off the stage'—the diagnosis was revised. From then on, only music and dance would be employed to cure them. Women's tendency to engage in the tarantella, particularly when they were suffering from heartbreak or otherwise lacking in the 'Benefit of free Converse with Men', should not, however, Baglivi added, lead one to believe that all cases of tarantism were feigned. Nevertheless, some were. 'Here it must not be conceal'd' he wrote, 'that tho' in our Country there is really such a Thing as the Poison of the Tarantula, and Persons infected with it; yet Women, that make up a great Part of that Number, very frequently counterfeit it under the Mask of its usual Symptoms'. They did this when they were suffering from loneliness and seeking respite from the mundanity, trials, and tribulations of daily life: 'whether they be under the Power of Love, or have lost their Fortunes, or meet with any of those Evils that are peculiar to Women, they never leave poring upon the mournful Object, till they run into Despair, or downright Melancholy, or at least are upon the Borders of it. And then they are also under a Disadvantage of living a solitary Sort of Life, like that of Nuns'. Because, moreover, these women were young and excitable, liable to bouts of 'mopishness', they were particularly well disposed to seek this form of dancing, Baglivi thought, since it was normally reserved only for those stung by the tarantula. 'The Climate is sultry, their Constitution is of the same Nature, their Food hot and very nourishing, and their Life early', Baglivi wrote. 'Partly from the former, and partly from the latter of these Causes, 'tis no rare thing with them to turn mopish and melancholy: No wonder then, if they be mightily delighted with Variety of Musick and Dancing; whence they feign themselves to be stung by the Tarantula, on purpose to enjoy the agreeable Diversion of Musick, which is only allow'd to such Persons; and then the Sham passes the better, for that the Pretext is accompany'd with a real Paleness of Face, Sadness, Difficulty of Breathing, Sorrow of Heart, a depraved Imagination, and the other Symptoms of the pretended, rather than true Poison of the Tarantula'. This conjunction of factors, predisposing women to fake poisoning in order to be able to dance and enjoy the 'musical Entertainment' which was 'so very agreeable' to them, granted the merrymaking rites a local name, "II' Carnevaletto delle Donne" (The Women's Little Carnival). Shamming was at the heart of medical and popular imaginations of the tarantella. "EVERYTHING IS EXTRAORDINARY IN THIS DISEASE" Chorea and tarantism increasingly came to be understood in the ensuing centuries as cultural practices masking an underlying physiological condition suggesting the duplicity of theatre. 

Chorea and tarantism were worrisome due to their spontaneity and, paradoxically, the way this spontaneity seemed, in the eyes of their observers, to be shammed. This section turns to the translation from early modern medical theories of chorea (and tarantism) in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries to the growing amalgamation of physiological and cultural histories in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century medicine, describing the associated spaces within which chorea and choreomania became discursively allied.

So, whereas Italian theories of tarantism offer a somewhat parallel history (and genealogy) of the ‘dancing disease’ (and a somewhat separate correlative or institutional space), nineteenth-century narratives in northern Europe did not fail to make the link between these ‘dancing’ forms. I will return to the Orientalist appropriation of southern Italian dance histories in chapter 7.

Paracelsus’s observations ultimately set the discourse on St. Vitus’s dance squarely in line with a growing body of literature on organic disorders of the nervous system. Now a reference not only to the medieval dancing mania, ‘chorea’ came to refer to every sort of spasm as well. In 1686, Thomas Sydenham (1624-1689), known as the ‘English Hippocrates’, reprised Paracelsus’s Chorea Sancti Viti to designate two things: first, chorea minor, which Sydenham used to describe a neurological affection now also often referred to as Sydenham’s chorea (or simply chorea). This described an involuntary, spasmodic motion of the limbs, typically among young children. The condition, for Sydenham, had to be distinguished from chorea major, the historical event—the mass dances—popularly also known as St. Vitus’s dance.

Yet the similarity of the terms chorea minor and chorea major—and the shorthand for both, ‘chorea’, typically shortened from Chorea Sancti Viti (St. Vitus’s dance)—prompted continued comparisons between the ‘major’ and ‘minor’ forms, as well as persistent medical attempts to link these historically as well as biologically. Sustained medical interest in all types of chorea waned in the eighteenth century, appearing in only a few accounts reliant, for the most part, on historical lore.

John Harris (c. 1666-1719), a scientist and theologian endeavouring to make scientific advances at the Royal Society public, put forward a definition of Chorea Sancti Viti in his Lexicon technicum, or an universal English dictionary of arts and sciences (1704-1710) that largely overlooked Sydenham’s still relatively rare clinical usage of the St. Vitus term but recuperated earlier eyewitness accounts. Borrowing from the early seventeenth-century physician Gregor Horst, discussed earlier, Harris described Chorea Sancti Viti as a nebulous mental disorder compounded by a general ‘restlessness’ of the limbs. Chorea Sancti Viti, Harris wrote, was ‘a sort of Madness, . . . wherein the Person affected . . . ran hither and thither dancing to the last gasp if they were not forcibly hindred’. Horst, Harris reported, spoke with some Women, who paying a yearly Visit to the Chapel of Saint Vitus, to implore his assistance in their own or their families’ afflictions. In this view, the hysteric person (the tarantulee) can perform her hysteria in public, ‘coming out’ with her inner misfortunes and, although not curing these, expressing them socially. See e.g. Gilbert Rouget, Music and Trance: A Theory of the Relations between Music and Possession, trans. and rev. Brunhilde Biebuyck in collaboration with the author (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985), 164-165; de Martino, La terra del rimorso; Fabrizio Manco, ‘Bodied Experiences of Madness: A Tarantato’s Perception’, in Birringer and Fenger, eds., Tanz und WahnSinn/Dance and ChoreoMania, 264-283. Manco adopts an ethnographic and auto-ethnographic approach following Rouget and de Martino, calling his analysis a ‘shamanistic interpretation’ emphasizing anthropomorphic transformation (274), and tarantism a ‘living archive’, ‘transgressive’ and transformative, ‘between madness and grace, between mortification and bliss’: tarantati in his view are not so much possessed and healed as ‘dis-possessed’ (281-282). For a broad but useful overview of music therapy in the Mediterranean and elsewhere, see e.g. Peregrine Horden, ed., Music as Medicine: The History of Music Therapy since Antiquity (Aldershot, Hants: Ashgate, 2000).

Vitus, ... near the City Ulme in Swedeland, have been taken with such a violent fit of dancing Night and Day, together with a sort of Frantickness in the Mind, that they fall together like so many People in Extasies; and are sensible of little or nothing for a Year together till next May, about which time they perceive themselves so tor- mented with a Restlessness in their Limbs, that they are forced to repair to the same place again about the Feast of Saint Vitus to dance. St. Vitus’s dance in Harris’s view was a psychiatric disorder compounded by physical symptoms wrapped up into popular lore. It was curious but benefited from the direct observation of earlier authors. So, too, the French physician François Boissier Sauvages de la Croix (1706-1767), in Nosologie méthodique [Methodical Nosology] (1772), offered a then relatively rare account of St. John’s Day dancers suffering from what he described as ‘epidemic madness’, as they ran through streets, wreathed, singing and leaping to the point of exhaustion.

But in the early nineteenth century, a surge of new writings on chorea appeared, as emerging interest in nervous diseases brought a new currency to the term chorea, and so, too, to its curious prehistory. From An essay on chorea Sancti Viti, the 1805 thesis of Felix Robertson (1781-1865) at the College of Physicians and Surgeons at the University of Pennsylvania, to Etienne-Michel Bouteille’s Traité de la chorée, ou, Danse de St. Guy [Treatise on Chorea, or, Dance of St. Vitus] (1810), Henri Bouvier’s (1799-1877) De la chorée ou danse de Saint-Guy [On Chorea or the Dance of St. Vitus] (1859), and On Chorea and Choreiform Affections (1894) by the Canadian physician Sir William Osler (1849-1919), drawn from his observations at the Infirmary for Diseases of the Nervous System in Philadelphia, chorea was emerging as a disease of choice for medical study. In France alone, over fifty medical treatises on chorea appeared between 1810 and 1889, further confusing disorders of muscular locomotion with popular dance histories. Yet, as Osler wrote, chorea was still poorly understood and hardly constituted a recognizable category of______ 

Details varied in the descriptions offered by medical writers, he wrote: ‘there have been scores of specific designations, indicating the quality of the movement, the locality involved, &c’. But chorea continued to baffle. ‘In the gradual growth of our knowledge of spasmodic affections this confusion has per- haps been inevitable’, Osler argued. But ‘even to-day it is not possible to make a satisfactory etiological classification, and the best we can do is to separate certain well-defined clinical forms, to which we may attempt to limit the use of the term chorea.’

Osler noted that confusion arose from Sydenham’s unfortunate terminological choice, which centuries of usage had perpetuated and magnified. Although for Osler the ‘epidemic disorder of motion’ that Paracelsus had first described as Chorea Sancti Viti had a ‘sort of prescriptive right to the name’, Sydenham had muddled the issue by applying this same set of names—chorea and St. Vitus’s dance—to ‘an affection of a totally different nature ...so that to these two forms, known respectively as chorea major and chorea minor, and each as St. Vitus’s Dance, the name will doubtless cling’.”

As Osler bemoaned, attached to St. Vitus’s dance ‘comes a long series of motor disorders in which the term has been freely used—the habit spasms and the various forms of tic so often con- founded with chorea minor, the so-called symp- tomatic choreas, the chronic, the hereditary, the congenital, and the spastic forms, and the 68.

John Harris, ‘Chorea Sancti Viti’, in Lexicon technicum: or, an universal English dictionary of arts and sciences: explaining not only the terms of art, but the arts themselves, 2 vols., vol. 1 (London: D. Brown, et al., 1704), n.p. Emphasis mine. See Gregor Horst (1578-1636), Observationum medicinalium singularium, 4 vols. (Ulm: Typis Saurianis, 1628).

Frangois Boissier Sauvages de la Croix, Nosologie méthodique, ou distribution des maladies en classes, en genres, et en espéces, suivant Tesprit de Sydenham, & la méthode des botanistes . .., 10 vols., vol. 2 (Lyon: Chez Jean-Marie Bruyset, Imprimeur-Libraire, 1772), 735.

For Bouteille, ‘tout est extraordinaire dans cette Maladie; son nom est ridicule, ses symptémes singuliers, son caractère uni- voque, sa cause inconnue, son traitement problématique. De graves auteurs ont douté de son existence; d'autres l’ont cru simulée, quelques-uns lont réputée surnaturelle ou magique; le célébre [William] Cullen semble incliner a penser que limagination y joue un grand réle, et [Joseph] Lieutaud pour ne lavoir jamais observée, s'est permis de la nier’. He adds that the seventeenth-century phy- sicians Platter, Hortius, and Sennert are the first really to have accounted for it. In Etienne-Michel Bouteille, ‘Préface’, in Traité de la chorée, ou, Danse de St. Guy (Paris: Vincard, 1810), n.p.


Osler, On Chorea, 1. Translatio + 85 pre- and post-hemiple______ But chorea major was the St. Vitus's dance of the past, known from chronicles dating back hundreds of years. In it, Osler noted, 'psychical impressions, emotional disturbances, and imitation play the most important role'. A third kind of chorea, Osler remarked, included 'choreiform affections' and 'pseudo-choreas', referring to 'various forms of habit spasm or tic'. These were minor movement disorders, generally, like hysteroepilepsy, which I will describe further in chapter 6, only partly involuntary. Finally, 'symptomatic' or 'secondary' choreas constituted 'chronic disorders of motion, which depend upon degenerative and irritative lesions of the motor cortex or path'. These included pre- and post-hemiplegic disorders of movement (disorders preceding or following paralysis of one side of the body), 'the so-called spastic choreas' and 'many of the cases of congenital and chronic chorea'. These were complex disorders, accompanying and often provoked by other degenerative conditions. 'One malady alone in this group may be separated as an independent affection', he added, 'the chronic progressive form, so-called Huntington's chorea'. But Huntington's chorea, too, continued in popular terminology to be called 'St. Vitus's dance' or 'that disorder' well into the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; and it continued to be stigmatized. As historian Alice Wexler has shown, sufferers have until recently continued to be hidden away by their families for fear of ostracism. As with many neurodegenerative and psychiatric conditions, the unfamiliarity of the sufferer's irregular gestures and apparent lack of control provoked mistrust. And while physicians generally agreed that this was neither the work of the devil nor of the vital spirits, bodily agitation worried all those still unsure just what this was. Definitions and classifications proliferated. In some cases, chorea remained a mostly psychiatric disorder, taking on different hues variously emphasizing the relationship between mind and matter, action and the imagination. In Des névroses (1864), the French-educated Russian psychiatrist Alexandre Axenfeld (1825-1876) argued that chorea tended to be complicated by manic delirium. He was referring to Sydenham's chorea, what he called the 'real chorea' (chorée légitime or chorée vulgaire, also petite danse de Saint Guy, danse, cadence, etc.), though manic delirium also appeared in chorea major (choreomania) (alternatively the dansomanie or danse de Saint-Guy, Saint-Whyt, or Saint-Modeste). For others, chorea was primarily mechanical. The Scottish physician William Aitken (1825-1892) listed 'St. Vitus's dance - chorea' in his widely read medical handbook, The Science and Practice of Medicine (1857), among half a dozen 'cephalic diseases, characterized by exalted, perverted, or suspended functional activity'. These included hysteria, catalepsy, epilepsy, cerebral dropsy (hydrocephalus), sunstroke, and insanity. But Aitken also referred St. Vitus's dance to its historical precedent, as if it boasted roots in the dancing mania that had swept through medieval Europe and now occurred in only rare and isolated cases. 'The history of this disease is a sad picture of superstition', he wrote. 'As late as the close of the fifteenth century it does not appear to have been studied by physicians, but was supposed to depend on supernatural causes or "demoniacal possession." In Germany it was said for two centuries to have been epidemic, and the patients, probably many of them maniacs, were wont to join in frantic dances'. Aitken's account underscored the psychosomatic quality of the events, arguing that masses and hymns may have 'cured' the dancers 'simply by the influence of the intense moral impression'. The 'effects' of the religious 'performances' were on their own sufficient to quiet the dancers for a while.


EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE 

Aitken's story of historical precedent bolstered the increasingly popular idea that the medieval dancing manias were but poorly understood epi- sodes of neurological disease. The German comparative pathologist August Hirsh (1817-1894) offered one of the most succinct accounts of this discursive genealogy, while perpetuating the rapprochement between neuropathological and psychiatric diagnosis. In his article 'Chorea', in the third volume of his Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology (1883-1886), he notes in a chapter titled 'Neuroses' the tortuous paths the name 'St. Vitus' has taken: The name of St. Vitus' dance (Chorea Sancti Viti) was originally given to a hys- terical psychopathy which appeared in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries in some parts of western Germany in the form of the dancing mania (Tanzwuth, choreomania); it is still commemorated in the grotesque 'procession of the jumping saints' which is held every Whitsuntide at Echternach (Luxemburg). The same word (chorea) was subsequently used by Sydenham to desig- nate the spasmodic malady which is now universally known under that name; and from that time a distinction began to be made between a 'chorea Germanorum' (the 'greater' St. Vitus' dance, or choreomania) and a 'chorea Anglorum' (the 'lesser' St. Vitus' dance, or neurosis of the central organs characterised by incoherent action of the muscles). Great as are the merits of Sydenham's classical description of this disease, . . . still his choice of a name for the malady he described has had a confus- ing effect on the views of his successors.®* Physicians such as Hirsh were well aware that St. Vitus's dance was not at once the medieval processions and the jerks and tics described by Sydenham. Yet, as he and Osler, among oth- ers, complained, the continued conflation of these irregular gestures tied them together in an increasingly thorny complex, what I am call- ing choreomania, an entangled set of discourses linking irregular gesture and unruly popular féte. Awareness of the faulty conflation between phe- nomena did not lessen the concept's pull in the popular and medical imaginations; on the con- trary, throughout the nineteenth century, the continued imbrication of tics, spasms, falling, frothing, music and dance, boisterous eruptions, heightened emotion, theatricality, and fétes fur- ther gelled______ Spasms did not just denote unbidden motion, but a zone of indiscernibility and indetermination; spasms provoked observation but resisted closure. Osler, like many of his contemporaries, wrote almost exclusively about chorea minor, casting aside any serious study of chorea major, its reputedly epidemic, collective form, as the interest of chorea major in relation to chorea minor was, Osler thought, historiographical at best and impossible to grasp in retrospect. But the problematic relation between the two types of event continued to plague medical discourse. Andrew Davidson lamented the unhelpful analogy between chorea minor and chorea major in his 1867 article on choreomania in Madagascar, arguing that ‘this disease, which we shall name Choreomania, was . . . originally called chorea, or Saint Vitus's dance; but these terms are now inseparably, though inaptly, applied to another and perfectly distinct nervous affection. From this change in name, along with the dis- appearance of the original chorea from Europe, 81. Hirsch, Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology, vol. 3, 531. 82. Although confusion between Sydenham's chorea, rheumatic fever, and the so-called epidemic chorea of the Middle Ages has subsided, scholars and medical practitioners who continue to bemoan (and discuss) this confusion include, among others, A. C. Eftychiadis and T. S. N. Chen, ‘Historical Note: Saint Vitus and His Dance’, Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 70 (2001): 14; and, previously, David Chas. Schechter, ‘St. Vitus' Dance and Rheumatic Disease’, New York State Journal of Medicine 75 (1975): 1091-1102. Schechter wrote: ‘the connotation of St. Vitus with rheumatic disease by both the laity and medical profession is so commonplace that its incongruity is hardly noticed’. He goes on to discuss ‘the origins of that bizarre and ill-begotten epo- nymic relationship’, citing Hecker extensively (1091). Translatio + 87 considerable confusion has arisen’.** Davidson cited as an example of this terminological confusion Study of Medicine (1822), by physician John Mason Good (1764-1827), adding that ‘some authors have classed with choreomania many anomalous forms of nervous manifestation, some of which are evidently the result of organic disease of the nervous centres’.** The real chorea, Davidson said, was—except in furthest Africa (as he claimed to observe [chapter 8]) and other non-European locations—extinct. Ergotism was also often highlighted as a possible cause: a form of rye poisoning, ergotism can provoke severe hallucinations and convulsions, as well as a gangrenous blackening of the limbs. Yet virtually none of the dances described as choreomanias involved such severe degenerative symptoms. Only one case, the one discussed in chapter 2 involving a small group of men and women dancing in a churchyard in c. 1021 in Kélbigk, may plausibly have involved some ergotism. As reported by the German physician Daniel Sennert (1572-1637), one of the dancers' arms purportedly fell off when another one tried to pull on it.® This could have been caused by ergotism, given the severe decomposition of the limbs that occurs when ergot poisoning is advanced. But to suggest that ergotism alone successfully spurred on dozens, hundreds, or occasionally even thousands of people to shake their bodies in all or even most so-called dancing manias seems misguided at best. If occasional dancers suffered from ergotism or epilepsy, and others danced alongside them, these were not causes but accidents; at most, catalysts. Yet the ergot hypothesis remains strong, and since about the sixteenth century, dancing manias of every sort have been attributed to ergot poisoning. Occasional studies, after Paracelsus, have also compared dancing manias to epilepsy, which, however, like chorea, does not occur epidemically.*

Rheumatic fever, which Sydenham discussed but had not considered a form of chorea, was eventually also associated with choreiform affections, in the wake of the work of English physician Richard Bright (1789-1858) on chorea and rheumatism, Reports of Medical Cases (1831), adding one more elusive condition to the already extensive chorea family. Bright claimed that ‘the instances of the combination and alteration of rheumatism and chorea are very numerous’ and suggested that the ‘irritation’ that caused both was communicated to the spine via the pericardium (the sac enclosing the heart) when it was inflamed.® This organic lesion accounted for chorea and rheumatism’s similarity and apparent interchangeability: one condition not infrequently morphed into the other, and vice versa. Bright also thought that the cerebrospinal mass might be involved in this transmutation but that that was less likely.®° As Bouteille wrote in Traité de la Chorée, ou Danse de Saint Guy [Treatise on Chorea, or St. Vitus’s dance] (1810), chorea baffled: ‘everything is extraordinary in this disease’, he grumbled. ‘Its name is ridiculous, its symptoms odd, its cause unknown, its treatment problematic’.”

Persistent terminological confusion plagued physicians trying to understand, much less treat, this disease. As the American professor of cardiovascular and thoracic surgery David Charles Schechter wrote in ‘St. Vitus’ Dance and Rheumatic Disease’ (1975), ‘although it did not take long to find out that Sydenham’s selection of the St. Vitus cognomen was inappropriate to the clinical state which he had described, countless publications continued to bear that title’. The usage of ‘St. Vitus’ was condoned partly out of deference to Sydenham, partly from force of habit, but chiefly because the terminology sank deeper and deeper into a morass of synonyms, including, most notably, ‘the dance’, ‘chorea’, ‘saltus’, ‘saltatio’>, and ‘morbus of St. Vitus’, also referred to as St. Guy in France and St. John or St. Modestus elsewhere. ‘In their sincere desire to abandon the names of saints, as Paracelsus had tried to do’, Schechter wrote, ‘diverse authors instead muddied the waters even more by interjecting the terms tanzsucht, morbus sacer, morbus gesticularius, morbus men- taphora, morbus germanorum, orchestromania, ballismus, tanzplatz, epilepsia saltatoria, epilepsia procursiva, epilepsia mira, jactatio epileptica, gesticulatio spastica, synclonus chorea, synclonus saltans, convulsiones rhythmicae, tripudatio spastica, and so forth’,”' a testament to the power of Sydenham’s use of the chorea trope—which played not the sole but arguably a significant role in the birth and miscegenation of the extended chorea family. In Sir Thomas Watson’s terms, chorea was composed of a motley array of variations. Each offered ‘points of resemblance, like . . . the different members of a large family, in which the individuals have the same general cast of features, and yet preserve each his particular identity’. This genealogical metaphor enabled not a few further comparisons, extending the scope of chorea further still in a translatio from collective to individual disorder and back; and from a demonic and psychiatric as well as neurological plane to an epidemiological one. The dancing disease in this sense comes into the nineteenth century from late medieval and early modern histories of medical iconoclasm at the edges of academic practice, revealing an archive in motion, an archival repertoire passing through discursive fields, reconstituting itself and them along the way. ‘Chorea’ came to denote not just a conflation of individual and ecological tremors and tics but the opacity of movement, gesture eluding resolution. Chorea became the disorder of volatility par excellence: a disorder whose definition, emerging between observation and hearsay, defied the closure of representation. Chorea, if anything, gestured only obscurity. In the next chapter, convulsions take on a theatricality all their own, with the so-called Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard in the 1730s, passing between their preferred gravesite in the suburbs of Paris and the theatrical stage, where they are mocked for their exaggerated and at times patently feigned religious enthusiasm doubling as popular revolt. With the Convulsionaries and other enthusiasts, monomania also appears on the scene of psychiatric history, describing a highly theatrical, heightened enthusiasm, including one for national dance forms. The next chapter thus suggests a translatio between religious theatre and modern psychiatry, as medical authors map convulsive expressions of high affect onto the emergent disorders of nation. From the comic dramatizations of buffoonish anti-establishmentarians to vaudeville representations of exaggerated zeal, choreomania arises as a disorder of excess enthusiasm reaching beyond its subjects' bodies into politically contested public space. Schechter, 'St. Vitus' Dance', 1098-1099. Watson, Lectures on the principles and practice of physic, 645. Translatio + 89 The Convulsionaries Antics on the French Revolutionary Stage The mark or signature of possession . . . will have a fundamental importance in Western medical and religious history: [it is] the convulsion. —Foucault, Abnormal: Lectures at the Collége de France 1974-1975 (2003) CONVULSIONS APPEAR on the scene of modern science as quintessentially illegible signs yet, as such, paradoxically, also as prime markers of science's capacity to 'read' and to decipher. In Foucault's analysis, convulsions represent an 'immense spider-notion' spanning seventeenth- and eighteenth-century religion and mysticism, medicine and psychiatry, reason and unreason, and modern disciplinary reforms. But convulsions also typically succeeded in generating a few laughs; there was no better place, this chapter argues, to poke fun at these uncertain markers of religious and scientific 'truth' than at the theatre. Histrionic performances of convulsionary activity in Parisian cemeteries and on the vaudeville stage prefigure the popular dances of the Parisian cabarets, all signs of a popular culture thriving on the dramatic potential of comic contortions and public display. For themselves and for their audiences, convulsionary carousers produced outrageous scenes of spontaneous ferment, 'acting out' a politics of volatility and contagious enthusiasm indicating the potential for political change. At stake, then, in this chapter, is the show of gestural excess in the public sphere, as it comes to be mapped onto political moments of contestation. These scenes constitute choreographies of protest in the sense Foster describes—self-organizing bodies acting (and acting out) in public space, at times with the aim of achieving distinct political ends. But these scenes also reveal shows of exaggeration and gestural surplus that fall just short of the direct mobilization of collective energy Foster imagines. The gestural theatre expressed in the following scenes is indirect, often ambiguous, and indubitably zany in its exaggeration; these are bodies that perform too much, hyperbolically, and so remain unconvincing. They are not smoothly persuasive—torque-like—but buffoonish, amateurish, and distorted. As Jana Braziel and Kathleen LeBesco argue in their introduction to a special issue of Women & Performance (2005), Bakhtin, Georges Bataille (1897-1962), and others have theorized excess as a politically subversive force of cultural resistance; but excess is also, they argue, characteristic of particularly female and queer subjectivities. The 'too muchness' of the feminine (and queer) conceit reveals a marginal status that keeps women and queers both to the side of and always protruding into public space. Choreomania, in this respect a feminine and queer sort of excess, performs exuberant intrusion, 'too muchness' in the public sphere: not quite the calendrical upheaval of Bakhtinian carnival but everyday instances of gestural and affective extension, zones of intensity in which enthusiasts throw out their limbs at discomfiting angles and overperform their passions at the risk of falling into public ridicule. Rousseau's Letter to d'Alembert on Geneva's Theatres

In the midst of Rousseau's Letter to d'Alembert on Geneva's Theatres, the philosopher paints a vivid portrait of a simple village dance, which he contrasts with the morally devastating effects of Geneva's theatres. This scene, described as a casual reminiscence, features soldiers and officers dancing around a local fountain, accompanied by fifes and drums. The dance is a serpentine motion, and the participants hold hands.

As the dance unfolds, the wives and children of the dancers join in, creating a joyful and spontaneous atmosphere. Rousseau's father, observing the event from his window, embraces his son and declares, "Jean-Jacques, love your country. See these good Genevese; they are all friends; they are all brothers; joy and concord rule among them." He adds that Jean-Jacques will one day encounter other peoples in other places where such camaraderie does not exist.

Rousseau reflects on this expression of joy, which he sees as spontaneous and governed by the "sentiments of Nature." He believes that the only pure joy is public, and it warms his heart and fills his eyes with the sights, sounds, and emotions of the spectacle. Jana Evans Braziel and Kathleen LeBesco, ‘Performing Excess’, Women & Performance: A Journal of Feminist Theory 15.2 (2005): 9-13, 9. 3. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Lettre à d'Alembert sur son article Genéve, ed. Micheal Launay (Paris: Garnier-Flammarion, 1967), 248-249n1. The Convulsionaries +» 91 The concept of ‘sublime enthusiasm’ of Immanuel Kant (1724-1804), Rousseau’s contemporary, sounds a greater note of caution. Kant described ‘sublime enthusiasm’ as an extreme form of the sublime, not a public but a highly private experience. Whereas the ‘sublime’ for Kant denotes the affective and philosophical experience of pleasure in one’s own individual mastery over nature, ‘sublime enthusiasm’ suggests the heightened exaggeration of this experience. In the scenario Kant depicts, sublime enthusiasm comes to be epitomized in the heightened emotion experienced by remote spectators of the French Revolution. Carried away by the political possibilities afforded their neighbours, the spectators’ sublimely enthusiastic bliss risks tipping them into blind pathological dementia and madness (‘Wahnsinn’), excited by their unfettered imaginations. They experience an extreme—pathological—form of spectatorship, in which their projected participation in a faraway show of enthusiastic revolution exists, Kant suggests, too enthusiastically in their minds. As such, they experience theatre; not the spontaneous, natural village theatre Rousseau depicts—so natural it is not theatre but artless common dance—but a theatre of enthusiastic imitation in which they have excessively imagined themselves to partake.

Kant's politically inflected concept of sublime enthusiasm informed the critique of religious enthusiasm of the English philosopher Isaac Taylor (1787-1865). In Taylor's estimation, such enthusiasm coincided with a surge of religious fanaticism similarly spurred on by high affect and performed through excessively and hypocritically demonstrative gestures. In The Natural History of Enthusiasm, which enjoyed eleven editions from its first publication in 1829 until 1868, and in his follow-up volume, Fanaticism (1833), Taylor sought to dissociate what he saw as true, reasonable, and rational religious piety from the shallow, exploitative, and feigned religiosity of an overzealous and increasingly missionary Christianity characterized by what he saw as illusoriness and ‘vain exaggerations’.° This critique echoed earlier critiques of effusive religiosity put forward by, among others, the poet and priest John Langhorne (1735-1779), in his Letters on Religious Retirement, Melancholy, and Enthusiasm (1762), in which he describes ‘modern enthusiasm’ as luxurious indulgence in religious passions leading to ‘irregular and intemperate raptures’ also occasionally bordering on insanity. The inconstant bodily demonstrative ness of religious enthusiasts that Langhorne described was at odds with the rational and discrete exercise of ‘right devotion’.® Earlier still, the Earl of Shaftesbury had argued in ‘A letter concerning enthusiasm to my Lord . . . (1707) that critiques of folly and extravagance were more in vogue at the time of his writing than ever before. Enthusiasm, it seems, was subject to its own brand of enthusiastic rebuke. ‘The scientific literature on choreomania suggests that enthusiasm and theatre were two sides of a coin signalling a manic ‘too much- ness’ quickly tipping into untrustworthiness and lunacy. But, as this chapter argues, the senseless ‘too muchness’ of religious and political enthusiasts also mapped onto a particular sort of national over-identification by the mid- nineteenth century, so that one could be too much a French or a Polish national or too much a dance lover. Choreomania, theorized by the early to mid-nineteenth century not only as an epidemic but also as a psychiatric disorder, suggests too much dancing and zeal of a national sort. Choreomania becomes, in the terms of pioneer psychiatrist Etienne Esquirol (1772-1840), a ‘disease of civilizations’, queering nationalism and religion alike. Shifting Foucault’s analysis of modern discipline and psychiatry slightly away from a well-rehearsed focus on the ‘great confinement’—characterized by punitive institutions and systems of surveillance and containment—and towards the theatrical acting-out of choreomaniacs and other so-called monomaniacs, this chapter highlights a history of madness as public enthusiasm. Although as Deleuze reminds us, Foucault suggested that the ‘containment’ (‘renferment’) of deviant individuals in the nineteenth century also implied their unwanted protrusion into public space—their public presence and indeed their appearance as ‘mad’ people to be interned—this chapter underscores the more boisterous other side to this dark history.

The early eighteenth century, Convulsionaries were acting out their differences by over-identifying with a politically recalcitrant saint. Their gestures, alternately understood to be real and feigned, became increasingly theatricalized, recuperated into the medical and psychiatric history of the dancing disease: a disease of quintessentially theatrical excess.

THE CONVULSIONARIES OF SAINT-MEDARD IN 1730s PARIS: A JANSENIST ST. VITUS’S DANCE

Early eighteenth-century convulsionary antics, read through the lens of late nineteenth-century neurology, epitomized extreme religious states in a public sphere within which political and religious authority were highly contested. What came to be known as the Convulsionary movement swept through Paris in the 1730s, in the crossfire between church and state politics. A papal bull, Unigenitus, had been passed in September 1713 by Pope Clement XI (1649-1721) as an attack on the heterodox Jansenist movement, in particular Father Pasquier Quesnel (1634-1719), whose devotional handbook, Les Paroles de la Parole incarnée, Jésus-Christ, Notre Seigneur, tirées du Nouveau Testament [The Words of the Word Incarnate, Jesus Christ, Our Lord, Drawn from the New Testament] (1668), had provoked a storm of controversy: it was written in French and intended for laypeople. Quesnel's success had prompted him to write more popular religious tracts, such as Le Nouveau Testament en francais, avec des réflexions morales sur chaque verset, pour en rendre la lecture plus utile et la méditation plus aisée (1692), a French-language translation of the New Testament with commentary provided to readers to aid understanding. Pope Clement XI declared Quesnel a false prophet and charlatan, dangerous to the moral well-being of Christians who would be led astray by his and other Jansenist teachings. But the politics that resulted from this______ The French were divided into ‘Acceptants’, who supported the pope and king, and ‘Appellants’, who challenged the papal bull. By 1719, a compromise was reached called the accommodement (concession), written in a corps de doctrine, leading to the creation of a third group, the ‘Accommodants’, which nominally backed both Appellants and Acceptants but favored the bull overall (with minor provisions). By 1722, a royal decree had sanctioned the bull, under the pretext that the bishops of France had agreed to sign it. This created an even greater rupture between Gallicans and Papists, but did not stop the most committed anti-constitutionnaire bishops from continuing to attempt reformation.

When Philippe II, Duke of Orléans (1674-1723), regent since the death of Louis XIV, died in his turn, André-Hercule de Fleury (1653-1743), a Jesuit and former preceptor to the king, called on the young Louis XV (1710-1774) to reinforce Unigenitus, declaring the recalcitrant bishops’ stance to be misled. Fleury was proclaimed cardinal, and the Appellants lost all further right of appeal. As de Félice wrote in Foules en délire, extases collectives [Delirious Crowds, Collective Ecstasies] (1947), only a ‘miracle’ could save them.

This miracle emerged in the form of Francois de Paris (1690-1727), a famous Appellant and fervent Jansenist deacon, whose funeral on 3 May 1727, in the small working-class neighborhood of Saint-Médard, then in the outskirts of Paris, immediately gave rise to prodigious cures. These cures were soon verified by doctors, priests, family, and friends and, once notarized, described in clandestinely published tracts widely disseminated to convince skeptics of the efficacy of posthumous intercession by a figure whose public opposition to the bull was well known. The miracles described were wide-ranging. Convulsions produced at mere contact with Paris’s funeral stone, chunks of earth taken from the tomb area, and relics from Paris himself were all believed to allow people to recover their health. The most dramatic of these cures were kinetic, involving the sudden recovery of movement by individuals who had been previously paralyzed. Some miraculous feats of prowess were performed by the cured, further proof of the deacon's miraculous intercession. The first known miracle involved a young parishioner who suffered from paralysis in her left arm. She introduced herself into the deacon's premises while he was being prepared for burial, kissing his foot through the shroud and rubbing her arm against the bier. She then went home to spin silk and had now recovered the use of both her arms. News of this miracle spread, and throngs began fighting over the deacon's relics.

As word of these cures reached beyond the Saint-Médard neighborhood, Paris's tomb became a destination of choice for Jansenist sympathizers, aristocrats, artisans, priests, magistrates, and an increasing number of new recruits, many of whom sought healing for lifelong infirmities. Others sought social validation for political grievances through Paris's new status as martyr. Many gathered to watch.

The legal problems caused by the massive congregation of individuals led the government to enact severe, though not often heeded, legislation. Louis XV promulgated a law on 27 January 1732 forbidding public congregation around the deacon's tomb. He was compelled to issue another one on 17 February 1733, as the first had been ignored. Both laws were issued in defense of public order and included stipulations against the performance of convulsions in private homes as well as at the deacon's gravesite.

Kant's concept of enthusiasm as an 'effect', Jean-Francois Lyotard (1924-1998) suggests that enthusiasm implies both the deceit of theatre and performative action. Enthusiasm in this sense propels men and women into choreographies of heightened affect, enacted in effusive bodily poses which, uncontained and potentially uncontainable in public space, succeed also in acting on it. The heightened theatricality of enthusiasm, translated into the gestural sphere, thrusts itself performatively into the world. Enthusiasm's affective surplus, 'effective' in this regard, spills into the public arena to overwhelm and transform it.

Choreomania, taken in this sense, implies affect and effect, as well as a (feminine, queer) theatricality that simultaneously performs its own 'too muchness' and in doing so threatens to affect—to contagion—its spectators. The Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard were a case in point: convulsions themselves were theatrical. In Foucault's terms, the possessed person's body (usually that of a woman) 'is the site of a theatre'. It is, significantly, as Jordan points out in Convulsing Bodies, the site where the medieval supplice, or torture spectacle, becomes powerful again. With the possessed nuns of Loudun, made famous in Michel de Certeau's (1925-1986) La possession de Loudun (1970) and reprised in numerous fictional and cinematic works since then, the pornographic theatre of naked bodies the nuns' convulsions represented suggests a renewed regime of biopower. The young nuns move according to the dictates—quite literally, the theatrical directing—of the pastorate, and See also Paul Regnard, Les maladies épidémiques de esprit: Sorcellerie, magnétisme, morphinisme, délire des grandeurs (Paris: E. Plon, Nourrit et Cie, 1887), 116-118. Regnard situates this narrative in a line of spontaneous recoveries from partial paralysis among hysterics at the Salpétriére and across the ages. I will return to this history in chapter 6.

94 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE so become at once abstracted and alienated, even while they might be expressing a brand of discontentment in these performances of real pain.’’ In contrast, the convulsions performed by the eighteenth-century Convulsionaries suggest a theatrical acting-out that posits ‘abnor- mality’ in a theatre of effusive self-travesty: the Convulsionaries, while for the most part entirely serious about their miracles and political differ- ence, also played out and played at this difference, choreographing a site of resistance in Paris’s mar- gins without a notable directorate—without the intercession of a conductor of souls.’® As Hecker noted in his discussion of the Convulsionaries, wrapping them into the broader history of dance manias and epidemic disorders, the spectacles performed by these enthusiasts were enthralling: novel and comical at once. But they were also too novel, too com- ical, disrupting Parisian life with their theatrical pull. Nonetheless calling the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard ‘patients’, Hecker underlined their outlandish circus-like acts: they ‘bounded from the ground, impelled by the convulsions, like fish out of water’. ‘Some spun around on their feet with incredible rapidity, as is related of the der- vishes’, he noted; ‘others ran their heads against walls, or curved their bodies like rope-dancers, so that their heels touched their shoulders’.® Others showed more typical signs of motor dis- ease: these ‘patients were seized with convul- sions and tetanic spasms, rolled upon the ground like persons possessed, thrown into violent con- tortions of their heads and limbs, and suffered the greatest oppression, accompanied by quick- ness and irregularity of pulse. But the spectacle of their contortions prompted its own furore. This ‘novel occurrence excited the greatest sen- sation all over Paris, and an immense concourse of people resorted daily to the above-named cemetery, in order to see so wonderful a spec- tacle’.° The scene, Hecker remarked, eventually ‘degenerated’ into ‘decided insanity’.”! The ceme- tery had given rise to a fusion of psychiatric, neuromotor, and social madness: convulsions were spectacular, and though______ The Convulsionaries excited one another and, in doing so, excited their all too readily enthused compatriots. Charcot and Paul Richer (1849-1933), following Hecker's lead, argued in Les démoniaques dans l'art [Demoniacs in Art] (1887) that the convulsionary spectacle resembled St. Vitus's dance and tarantism. This reflection was earlier articulated by Louis Figuier (1819-1894) in his Histoire du merveilleux dans les temps modernes [History of the Marvellous in Modern Times] (1859-1862). Figuier described convulsions performed by one woman, Marie-Anne Vassereau, as a kind of St. Vitus's dance. For Figuier, her convulsions triggered a modern dancing epidemic that swept through Enlightenment France.

Marie-Anne Vassereau's convulsions were the spark that set the new St. Vitus's dance off, tearing through eighteenth-century Paris with infinite variations, each more miserable or comic [bouffonnes] than the next. People converged on the Saint-Médard cemetery from everywhere to participate in the shaking and quivering [frissonnements], the stiffenings [crispations] and the trembling. Whether they were ill or not, each endeavoured to convulse in their own way. It was a universal dance, a veritable tarantella. Soon, the countryside, jealous of the favours the Saint [Paris] was bestowing upon his city,

De Certeau writes that the physician's task, in attempting to determine whether a 'possessed' woman is actually possessed or merely feigning, is to 'see and to visit' ('voir et visiter'). Although physicians might be caught up in the emotion of the spectacle of her contorted body, verification of the truth of her possession would be assured statistically: the more such physicians performed the work of observation, the more certain their agreed readings were presumed to be.

Convulsionaries offered a popular theatre of aberration, characterized by contractions, paralyses, and ecstatic deliverance. In its time, it was decried as medical theatre: not just charlatanism, but a low-level comedy of cures that bedazzled the public, in the words of one disgruntled critic who complained of the scandalous performance of circus-like feats and the imposture the Convulsionaries presented under the guise of religion.

In a desperate letter denouncing their most histrionic performer, the notorious Father Bescherand (or Bécherand) de la Motte, the anonymous critic bemoaned the ridicule convulsionary theatrics brought on the institution of the church, theatrics flaunting excess and mesmerizing a fickle audience.

THEATRICAL CHOREA AND CONVULSIONARY FAKERY

The Convulsionaries' spasms and contortions were ostentatious; but they were also allegorical and, as such, instrumental in furthering the Convulsionary movement. In etchings provided by the Convulsionary apologist Carré de Montgeron (1686-1754), reproduced in Les maladies épidémiques de esprit: Sorcellerie, magnétisme, morphinisme, délire des grandeurs [Epidemic Mental Illnesses] (1887), by Charcot's student and collaborator Paul Regnard (1850-1927), a cast of characters is shown 'before' and 'after' their cure.

'La demoiselle Thibaut' (Miss Thibaut) (figs. 4.1 and 4.2) is one character, presented first in a position suggesting lethargy, as she lies on the ground, bloated, with her eyes cast upward, while a desperate friend or family member prays for her in the background. In the next image, she has seemingly regained a slimmer size and prays thankfully in turn. Marie Anne Couronneau, another Convulsionary, shown with crutches, leans back in an awkward, arched position, almost a typical arc de cercle (a back drawn like a bow) such as Charcot and his colleagues observed among so many of their 'hysteroepileptic' patients, as I discuss further in chapter 6. Again, in the next image, she is shown freely walking up stairs with her Barthelemy (Paris, 1731), n.p. See also Charles-Gaspard-Guillaume de Vintimille Du Luc, Mandement de Mgr Tarchevéque de Paris au sujet d'un écrit qui a pour titre: Dissertation sur les miracles, et en particulier sur ceux qui ont été opéreres au tombeau de M. de Paris en l'église de S. Médard de Paris; avec la Relation & les preuves de celui qui s'est fait le 3e Novembre 1730 en la personne d’Anne le Franc, de la Paroisse de S. Barthelemy (Paris: Chez Pierre Simon, 1731), n.p. 96

EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE ‘A DEMOISELLE 1 HIBAUT — romp, oe Joralade en'cet elat var un crap destine' a lensevelir ei lle mouroit, et fait mettre sur la Tonle Sa sereautejncredule se lle soit fait faire eneas de. -Avvitle ventre calle’ par un squire dine grosseur enorme, les pambes cre i rer ase ae a ite delamaia gauhe anchileser, iris ecwter, ct courerts dulceres, Lat it ecvtcher aubas deTernbeau de Mi de Paras le sg Suir 178 yrosses core enparalacic Lea pentefcs; pe ke hsfpry he nn musttresse MALADIE DE LA DEMOISELLE THIBAUT. Fec-simile d'une gravure du livee de Carré de Montgeron. FIGURE 4.1 ‘Ms. Thibaut’s Disease’ [enormous distension of the abdomen, legs, paralysis, etc.]. Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library.

crutches propped up high, as if triumphantly to demonstrate that she does not require them any longer.”’ These ‘before and after’ portraits, foreshadowing contemporary dieting advertisements, iconographically perform the passage from distemper and disorder to deliv- erance. The images show that cures happened and invite more. Captions narrate the miracu- lous transitions in pithy prose, suggesting quick snapshots encapsulating the benefits of convulsionary practice, just as Charcot and his team would later reappropriate these images as proof that convulsionary disorders partook of the broader category of hysteroepilepsy. The 27. Reproduced in Regnard, Les maladies épidémiques, 121-130. Regnard notes that Mlle. Thibaut’s case was attributed to hydropia by Carré de Montgeron but would in his own time be described as meteorism with hysterical contracture (125). He pro- vides further similarly illustrated case studies culled primarily from Montgeron and Mathieu (see esp. 118-171), noting that by 1732 the Saint-Médard cemetery was a rendez-vous for all the hysterics of Paris (‘le rendez-vous de tout ce qu'il y avait d’hystériques a Paris’), and the site of a ‘whole new Saint Vitus’s dance, resuscitated in the eighteenth century in the very heart of Paris’ (171). The Convulsionaries + 97

LADEMOISELLE UHIBAUT st guerie sur lechamp IoD? jourig Juin in By Tous sei membres hidnepigues replete lave tis pectaryele loan once sr le Tomb frien joiynantlsmains gue son bras gauche cy devant parelitigue, ebsis doite cy de Pant aie sec etcourerts diukeres, soubguerisy Sa servante, gui luyymetses pentowfes) Poppe diétenneimentde voir ses pieds sifortet st subitement edosenfleks « GUERISON DE LA DEMOISELLE THIBAUT. Fae-simile d______ 

Hystero-epileptics were too theatrical: their effusive poses and jagged gestures revealed a disorganization of the mind moving a theatrical body. In Les démoniaques, Charcot and Richer discuss an engraving of a crowd scene around Paris’s tomb, noting that one person sprawled on the floor, as if in an epileptic seizure, is not actually frothing at the mouth or rolling the eyes; this person has fallen but is not actually suffering from epilepsy (fig. 4.3). Other characters, in this and similar images, displayed further stages of so-called miraculous intercession, 28. Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 88-89n1. 98 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE LES GRANDS skcoURS Fae simile Wune gravure de B. Pieart exteaite des Cérémozics et coutumes de lous tes peuples, ete. FIGURE 4.3 the New York Academy of Medicine Library. presenting an overview of convulsionary events uncannily resembling and ostensibly prefiguring the poses Charcot’s patients would take.” While recognizing arched backs and upward-rolling eyes among the subjects depicted in these engravings, Charcot also noted the same among his patients, further cementing the link between past and present corporeal forms and so, too, the backward reach of modern clinical neurology. He and Richer concluded that from the most ancient forms of ritual possession to present-day clinical hysteria, the ‘exaltation of the emotions has not changed’. Their task was to parse this anatomically, morphologically, and dramaturgically and so to recuperate past disorders into the contemporary scientific fold. ‘The grands secours’. From Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques dans lart (1887). Courtesy Yet with this scientific method, ambiguity played a fair part, as did fiction: these were attitudes, poses, tableaux, theatrics, ‘representations’ that performed just as they enacted a rigid sequence of events.*! They were also not always entirely involuntary: Regnard quotes a long account provided by the nineteenth-century historian Pierre-Frangois Mathieu (1808-1864) in his Histoire des miraculés et des convulsionnaires de Saint-Médard [History of the Miraculously Cured and the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard] (1864) which suggests that some of the Convulsionaries performed deliberate actions, often together, so as to imitate or represent moments of Paris’s life. These actions were strung together with a set of further theatrical tableaux, involving spectators 29. In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 82. 30. In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 85. 31. The term ‘representation’ appears in various passages. See e.g. Jean-Martin Charcot, CEuvres complétes [hereafter Charcot, wvres completes], ed. Désiré Magloire Bourneville et al., 9 vols., vol. 3 (Paris: Bureaux du progrés médical, 1886-1890), 219-220. The Convulsionaries +» 99 in a mini-drama that he called ‘comedy’ (‘le comique’). Other ‘actresses’ engaged in tragic or tragi-comic performances of ecstasy, representing Christ’s passion, which they ‘expressed through their movements and gestures’, embodying every detail that might supplement the scene; Mathieu termed these movements ‘figurative’ (‘figuratives’), Another brand of theatrical Convulsionary Mathieu classed as visionaries or ‘ap______ "Notwithstanding the dismissive tone with which Mathieu taxonomizes these convulsion-ary performers, the choreography of pain and cure that they enacted suggests a public display of religious autonomy away from the disciplinary sphere of church and state. As collective expressions of pious enthusiasm, the Convulsionaries offered playful and also arguably powerful portraits of women (and men) taking religion into their own hands. This was a choreopolitics of revolt through corporeal acts of mimicry and representation.

But for Charcot and his nineteenth-century audience, paralyses and contractures presented a different set of problems. Convulsionaries were not only acting out; they displayed a cast of specific, recognizable bodily deformities and falls. What are now typically described as non-epileptic seizures or pseudo-seizures, with no special brain wave activity (no EEG abnormality), account for nearly a quarter of hospital admittances for epilepsy today.** In Charcot's time, these were described as convulsions with a semi-conscious intent, translated into the language of hysteria, imposture, or forgery.

Freud, who kept a lithograph of the famous painting by Pierre Aristide André Brouillet (1857-1914), 'Une leçon clinique à la Salpétrière' [A Clinical Lesson at the Salpétrière] (1887) of his teacher Charcot's famous Lecons du mardi [Tuesday Lessons] in his studies in Vienna and London, attempted to dig at the root of these pseudo-performances, taking Charcot's Lecons sur les maladies du système nerveux [Lessons on the Diseases of the Nervous System] (1875-1887)— whose authorized translation he offered to a German readership in 1886 as Neue Vorlesungen über die Krankheiten des Nervensystems, insbesonderer über Hysterie—into the realm of psychology. But these were complex psychosomatic events, whose designation as a disease and as theatre did not sufficiently explain, let alone diagnose, the knot of goings-on.

Ambiguity concerning cases of 'real' and 'hysterical' epilepsy was hotly debated, among others by the English neurologist and contemporary of Charcot William Gowers (1845-1915), who wrote that 'the convulsions that are called “hysterical”' are normally characterized by 'spasmodic movements of a more or less coordinated character'. These muscular contractions are, Gowers noted, 'in the main, such as may be produced by the will. Hence', he added, 'the spasm has a somewhat purposive aspect'. This 'purposive aspect' often lent hysteroepileptic patients the allure of theatrical performers.

The French physicians Louis Jacques Bégin (1793-1859), Francois-Gabriel Boisseau (1791-1836), and others defined 'Convulsionaries' in their Dictionnaire des termes de médecine, chirurgie, art vétérinaire, pharmacie, histoire naturelle, botanique, physique, chimie, etc. [Dictionary of Medical, Surgical, Veterinary, Pharmaceutical, Natural History, Botany, Physics, Chemistry, etc., Terms] (1823) as feigned or actual invalids. The ambivalence of the definition was fundamental." 

Guillaume-Hyacinthe Bougeant and the Jansenist Comic Pere Bucherand

Once the deacon's tomb had become outlawed as a site for Convulsionaries' activities, convulsionary enthusiasts had to find new sites for the performance of their pain. But they had already made a lasting impression on Parisian society: satires emerged, most notably by the Jesuit playwright Guillaume-Hyacinthe Bougeant (1690-1743) in his trio of works Apologie des miracles faits ou a faire au tombeau de M. de Paris [Apology for Miracles Performed or To Be Performed at Mr. Paris's Tomb] (1732), Le Saint déniché, ou la Banqueroute des marchands de miracles [The Saint Exposed, or, Bankruptcy of the Miracle Peddlers] (1732), and Les Quakres françois, ou les Nouvelles trembleurs, comédie [The French Quakers, or the New Tremblers, Comedy] (1732).

In these plays, Bougeant casts the Convulsionaries as actors in a ridiculous drama meant for the diversion of an equally ridiculous audience, entertained by improbable theatrics sustained by individuals most of whom were believed to be totally out of their senses. The events at Paris's tomb were cast as histrionics prompted by the audience's insatiable thirst for amusement, the 'great troupe" of acrobats and trapezists giving its regular show twice daily for the public's benefit. The dangerous feats the convulsionary performers executed only added to an already titillating experience, colored by its marginal urban location and anti-constitutionnaire hue. The most famous of the Convulsionaries was Father Bescherand, known for his ‘sauts de la carpe’, wild carp-like leaps performed in spite of a famously bad limp. In Les Quakres Francois ou les nouveaux trembleurs, Bougeant satirizes Father Bescherand as a complex plot unfolds to grace this virtuosic Convulsionary with a troupe of men and women paid to jump and leap with him so that he does not look so absurd performing his antics alone. In the play, M. du Sault (homonymously suggesting Mr. Jump) is a thinly veiled portrait of Bescherand. Bougeant claimed in his preface that the real man had made such a spectacle of himself to the city of Paris and to all of France already that it was only fitting his performance should find a new life in the theatre.

At first persuaded by M. Hablador (Mr. Smooth-talking), a Moliére-type doctor, and M. de Bonnefoy (Mr. Good Faith), a not-so-pious Jansenist priest, to leap about the deacon's tomb until the blood flowed through his bad leg, pumping and extending it by a few inches, M. du Sault eventually tires of this. He complains that he understands the principle— though he argues that if the blood extends his bad leg, it could extend and bloat the rest of his body as well—but all he has gained in the process is exhaustion. Even the spectators were starting to tire of this performance. 'If you want me to continue', M. du Sault tells M. de Bonnefoy, 'you need to find me a partner, or two or three, to imitate my movements. It is absurd, and scandalous, that out of so many people who come to pray at the deacon's tomb, I should be the only one to have convulsions, which, I have noted, are anyway starting to wear on the spectators?'

Du Sault would serve as a model for a small group of adepts, all of whom were to help him create a drama of pain more plausible because of the number of people performing it. This scenario poked fun at the supposed fakeries of the Convulsionaries, as well as the behind-the-scenes work of local doctors, cast as charlatans. The play also suggested that these leaps and bounds offered a performance of disorder and distress to an audience growing in intensity; but these convulsionary antics, as theatre, were displacing the religious and revolutionary cause. Bougeant's satire hardly exaggerated public opinion. A notice had not long before been posted at the entrance to the Saint-Médard cemetery, proclaiming that the Convulsionaries' pious exercises had devolved into a regular acrobatic show:

PUBLIC NOTICE, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, THE GREAT TROUPE OF JUMPERS AND ACROBATS OF SR. PARIS, which has until now sought only the pleasure and edification of those who do it the honor of coming to watch it, will give its regular performance evening and morning for the convenience of the public. Mr. Bécheran the Lame, who here has the honor of entertaining the princes and princesses, lords and ladies of the Court with success and applause will continue his regular exercises until the extinction of his strength, and for the satisfaction of the curious will perform many times the new and dangerous leap, holding himself only on his own two feet and with the help of only three people. The rest of the troupe will forget nothing to merit the esteem and goodwill of those who will honor its performance.


EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE zealots and opportunists of every stripe were not duped at the time: this was popular entertainment, and it was a popular religious exercise. Some miracles may have taken place at the start; but now the convulsionary happenings presented an occasion for play. Amateur actors and acrobats joined in with the rest. As Bougeant's theatre rehearsed the Convulsionaries' popular leaps and bounds, performers and devotees alike occupied the parish cemetery with an ever evolving set of stunts and pranks.

In Le saint déniché ou la banqueroute des marchands de miracles, Bougeant exploits comic antics derived from the performance of a supposed convulsive attack. He stages a character named M. Gautier, a Jansenist convert and fervent believer in the convulsionary miracles, suffering an episode of convulsions upon donning a fake relic wig (supposedly belonging to Father Quesnel) purchased at an exorbitant price and 'delivered' to him by his mischievous servant, Mathurin.

"M. Gautier, resembling a warlock on his way home from a sabbath, in Mathurin's insubordinate view (the wig is tangled, rendering it all the more 'real'), comes to be overtaken with emotion: 'Wait. What do I feel? All my blood, I think, is shaken by some extraordin- ary motion. Mathurin, quick, quick, a chair'". Mathurin, bringing a chair to his master, asks him what is wrong. 'A chair, I tell you, a chair', replies M. Gautier who, sitting, then sighing in relief, tells him: 'Ouf . . . I think I am having convulsions'. Mathurin replies, 'confusions?' to which M. Gautier responds, indignantly: 'Shut up, you idiot, it's a miracle'.

Bougeant's mockery of these supposed miracles unfolds as a whole cast of paralytic and otherwise misshapen characters are summoned to become subjects of miraculous cures. M. Caffart, another Jansenist Moliére-type doctor, intent on proving the reality of the miracles occurring at the deacon's tomb, explains to M. Gautier that a paralytic man has recovered his mobility, as was certified by a doctor, a surgeon, and a local priest. Yet when this man is made to demonstrate his recovery, the sceptic M. Germain, M. Gautier's cousin, points out that although he was previously paralysed in his left arm, he is now paralysed in the right. M. Caffart's sole response to this—and to other accusations that his host of paralytic and otherwise physically challenged characters are fakes— is that Saint Paris does not perform perfect miracles: 'that time has passed'. What's more, he was still in his apprenticeship stage.

This theatrical mockery by a Jesuit______ 

These included writing by Jansenist converts and the most outspoken and prolific of all, Montgeron, for whom convulsionary feats were acts of God. Yet the legacy of ridicule was set: a proliferation of tracts, etchings, and other visual sources amplified the popular appeal of this phenomenon—not quite a dance but a form of agitated gesticulation and collective theatre of motion that drew comparisons to dancing manias and other psychic and hysteroepileptic epidemics for some time. As the physician and hypnotist Anton Mesmer (1734-1815), father of ‘mesmerism’, saw it, the Convulsionaries' gesticulations theatricalized the complex imbrication of cause, symptom, and cure, informing his and his followers' own studies of animal magnetism. As with Charcot's hysteroepileptic patients, the Convulsionaries' gestures appeared to stem from tantalizingly invisible sources, useful in articulating psychological theories of illusion.

A ‘TRANSPORT CHARACTERISTIC OF DELIRIUM’: DANSOMANIES ON THE VAUDEVILLE STAGE
Choreomania epitomized corporeal and affective overzealousness. As a potentially revolutionary affect and ‘effect’, which could be experienced by 44, Guillaume-Hyacinthe Bougeant, Le saint déniché ou la banqueroute des marchands de miracles. Comédie (La Haye: Pierre Oiseau, a la Cycongne, 1732), 93-96. 45. Bougeant, Le saint déniché, 93. 46. Bougeant, Le saint déniché, 102-111. 47. See debates collected in Dissertation sur les miracles. See also Louis-Basile Carré de Montgeron, La vérité des miracles opérés par intercession de M. de Paris, Démontrée contre M. lArchevéque de Sens. Ouvrage dédié au Roy. Par M. de Montgeron, conseiller au parlement (Utrecht: Libraires de la Compagnie, 1737). 48, See Maire, Les convulsionnaires, 238-240; Wilson, Women and Medicine in the French Enlightenment, esp. 10-16, 104-124.

The Convulsionaries + 103 those engaging in it and by those watching from near or far away, spontaneous and excessive gesture signalled the possibility of a social body falling into disarray and reconstituting itself along different lines. Choreomania represented marginality, insignificance, and ‘too muchness’, derided in the public sphere; but also the slightly worrying energetic excess of social revolt. Dance manias afforded vaudeville entertainers opportunities for a spoof not only on overzealous acts of national or religious emotion but also on the medical gaze that overzealously in its turn saw this excess nationalism and religiosity as a disorder in its own right.

In La dansomanie, folie-pantomime, en deux actes [The Dancing Mania, Folie-Pantomime, in Two Acts], a comic ballet that premiered at the Théatre de la République et des Arts (precursor to the Opéra de Paris) in June 1800, the long-standing opera choreographer Pierre Gardel (1758-1840) prefaced the text of his ballet with an apology to the reader for the ‘audacity’ (‘hardiesse’) of his coinage: he could not, he claims, find a better word to describe the particular sort of madness (‘folie’) suffered by his protagonist than to call him a ‘dansomane’______ "Gardel's revolutionary sympathies in particular had prompted him to become involved in choreographing patriotic fêtes and anarchist theatre in the years following the French Revolution. With La Danseomanie, he showcased the common man and woman in a comic spoof that prefigured an emergent national discourse on monomania in psychiatric analysis. Gardel did this with a satirically light touch. The sort of madness his protagonist suffers is benign: M. Duléger (Mr. Lightfoot) is so obsessed with dancing that he refuses to allow his daughter to marry a man who cannot perform sufficiently skillful rondes de jambe, entrechats, and jetés-battus, until the girl's mother conspires with her vassals and her husband's dance teacher to trick him into awarding their daughter to the best dancer at a mock competition they stage at a masquerade ball. M. Duléger falls for the trick, and his daughter happily marries her intended.

Besides offering a pretext for executing virtuosic steps on the stage, this comic play of dancing prowess brings into view a portrait of the protagonist that pokes fun at his obsessiveness. So, while dance historians Lisa Arkin and Marian Smith have suggested that national character dances occupied as much space on the Romantic stage as the ethereal portraits of sylphs that have predominated in contemporary imaginings of the period, the playful exaggeration of national traits also aligned itself with a new psychiatric language of excess.

M. Duléger suffers from a 'transport characteristic of delirium' ('transport qui tient du délire') and a 'dancing religion'. He is described as 'ridiculous' and single-minded. Although arguably a spoof on Moliére's (1622-1673) Le malade imaginaire [The Imaginary Invalid] (1673) and other pre-revolutionary works staging the decadent bourgeoisie and laughable doctor class, Gardel's operatic ballet spoof was also taking a far more serious leap into the comic world of national disorder. Nation was increasingly a site for the contestation of normalcy: personal obsessions aligning themselves with new national characteristics provided occasions for the theatrical display of comic deviance. These deviants identified too much with the new nation; they were overly enthusiastic, effusive, and prone to spontaneous displays, including singing, dancing, and gambolling in public.

Whereas certain instances of deviant behaviour accompanied radical agitation, others merely performed gestural impetuosity in a public show of slightly disruptive disinhibition. This slightly reconfigures the notion of 'partial madness' Foucault argues predominated until about 1850; from then on, he suggests, there were no halfway measures with the mad: they were either entirely insane or they were not so." They had to be either entirely culpable when committing a crime or misdemeanor, or not culpable on account of madness. With the integration of juridical and medical power in the second half of the nineteenth century, madness became a condition different from déraison; one could not consciously 'act out', inasmuch as one could not simultaneously and knowingly hold, let alone perform, a fictitious and a real identity, one of which would be revealed in the theatricalization of the other.*> This was where, as I will detail later, a new brand of neuropsychiatric and neurological research would take over the work of decoding convulsive and other bodily signs, through historiographic and performative fieldwork in the clinic and beyond. These signs came to stand for the significantly involuntary actions of a body not able to express itself through other means. The cavernous depths of psychic disturbance in the nether reaches of primitive impulse paved the way for excavators like Charcot, Mesmer, and later Freud to activate and 'read' what seemed like a subtextual message. Yet early nineteenth-century psychiatry, and the monomaniacal fixations its subjects seemingly expressed, suggested a surface order of reality in which bodily signs such as convulsions held far less weight as a cipher. These were merely accidents in a general regime of accidents, for which there were multiple sites of performance and power. Monomania, in the genealogy this chapter tells, constituted not only a troubling form of partial madness but, more dramatically, a hyperbolic sameness, an overidentification with national and other often comical types.

REVOLUTIONARY SCENES OF EXCESS: THE NEW NATION
At the cusp of a century of new nationalisms, marked by the Congress of Vienna in 1814-1815 and the revolutions of 1848, leading to the unifications of Germany and Italy and uprisings throughout the Habsburg Empire, geopolitical territories around the world were defining new borders, ushering in a shift towards state autonomy and patriotic discourse. Concomitant with this was increasing attention to nations themselves as receptacles for the production and performance of collective affect; in turn, I argue, heightened instances of nationally tinged affective display were recast as a medical conundrum and psychiatric disease. So although Foucault has convincingly argued that the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were times of acute medicalization when nearly everything began to fall into the purview of police and state discipline, enabled by a castigating, judicially allied medical gaze, and although he has decisively shown that medical authority increasingly rationalized forms of deviance along political lines the better to sideline marginals (what he called, after Canguilhem, 'abnormals'),°° another look at nineteenth-century medical and psychiatric writings suggests that physicians were also interested in collective figures representing—often performing—slightly exaggerated national politics. More specifically, the theatricalization of national affect played out on stages and in the pages of medical compendia suggests that individual dispositions to act out according to exaggerated national types provoked as much interest and controversy as did individual attempts to deviate from a supposed political norm. Slavoj Zizek has described strategies of over-identification as subversive means to critique political regimes through subtle acts 54. See especially Foucault, Les anormaux, 145. Foucault argues that in the mid-nineteenth century, 'psychiatry becomes [the power of] medical jurisdiction over every sort of behaviour.' He attributes this specifically to a shift around 1845-1847 from the approach taken by Esquirol—whom Foucault considers the last of France's aliénistes—which emphasized the question of madness (‘folie’), as of a relation to truth (‘rapport à la vérité’), as opposed to that taken by Jules Baillarger (1809-1890)—whom Foucault calls the first of France's psychiatrists—which emphasized instead the distinction between voluntary and involuntary, instinctive and automatic, processes at the heart of 'mental illness'. Foucault, Les anormaux, 147-148. On Foucault’s ongoing analysis of the interpenetration of juridical and psychiatric reason in the nineteenth century, see also Michel Foucault, ed., Moi, Pierre Riviere, ayant égorgé ma mère, ma sœur et mon frère ... Un cas de parricide au XIXe siècle (Paris: Gallimard, 1973).

See especially Foucault, Les anormaux; Georges Canguilhem, The Normal and the Pathological, with an Introduction by Michel Foucault, trans. Carolyn R. Fawcett with Robert $. Cohen (New York: Zone Books, 1991). The Convulsionaries + 105 of performative exaggeration, but portraits of national enthusiasts in the pages of early nineteenth-century psychiatric literature suggest that few boasted such clear agendas. On the contrary, expressions of comically exaggerated national character showcased a different sort of transgressive excess and zeal. These enthusiasts drew their contemporaries’ medical attention and social mockery on account of their indulgence in pleasure and close sympathy with others: they were too French or too Spanish, too much into dancing or too morbid. Enthusiasm—particularly for other people’s cultures as well as one’s own—seemed liable to become as hazardous as any display of the 'dangerous individuality' Foucault has described. While elsewhere concerned with displays of individual difference, early psychiatrists were also intent on describing how enthusiasm could spread within groups and transpire across them, provoking instances of social porosity that might stimulate broader—genuinely grievous—social or political revolts. The lessons of the French Revolution were still being learned, and the heights of agitation that had led throngs of people violently to occupy public space and dispossess the aristocracy had physicians and early social commentators busily scratching their heads. In the shadow of Napoleon’s invasion of Spain in 1808, Le procés du Fandango ou la fandango-manie, comédie-vaudeville, en un acte [The Trial of the Fandango or Fandangomania, Vaudeville Comedy in One Act], by Jean-Baptiste Radet (1752-1830), Pierre-Yvon Barré (1749-1832), and Frangois-Georges Fouques Desfontaines (1733-1825), first performed at the Théatre du Vaudeville in Paris in 1809, theatricalizes the ambivalence and threats of excessive identification with other nations—suddenly and confusingly now also one’s own. In this play, a legal battle is staged to determine whether residents of the small village of Saint-Jean de Luz, on the Spanish border, should be permitted to indulge in a new Spanish dance fashion: the fandango, introduced by a Spanish dance teacher and posing, as its detractors argued, a grave threat to the upright men of the town left in the dust by the lively widows and other young people getting wind of this seductive and 'extravagant' new dance. The supposed dangers presented by the dance's lead critic, M. Clopineau (Mr. Hobble), draw on the irrational excesses to which such dancing purportedly led its enthusiasts: Mme. Folignac (Mrs. Crazymer, a love-struck widow), like M. Duléger in La dansomanie, was a self-avowed 'dansomane', a choreomaniac, because she was 'crazy about dancing'.° Although she owned her choreomania proudly, arguing that it was 'delicious' and 'fabulous' to experience such a happy and 'tender delirium',° the tribunal of husbands and jealous men led by M. Clopineau complained that this type of dancing—very different from the composed, stately, supposedly honest (and emphatically French) minuet—disturbed the public peace, as the enthusiasts' feet got the better of their minds.° The problem was not simply that they danced too much; they danced too fervently and, one is led to understand, in a passionate manner that was locally alien. Yet at the end of the play, the audience is asked to weigh in on the debate and tacitly give their approval to the new dance form in a spirited call to arms: women should not be locked up in the home, the tribunal's supporters claimed, but allowed to dance freely and gaily wherever they please. The dance enthusiasts win their case, and an example of the fandango is executed onstage with flourish by M. Gavotino, the Spanish dance teacher, and his avid dance student. Dancing, equated with libertinism and a Spanish-inflected—as well as a patently feminine—passion, is targeted for threatening to disrupt the masculine moral order, on gendered as well as on national grounds. M. Gavotino is unmistakably Spanish, just as M. Duléger, although French, was instructed by a dance teacher who disguised himself and his co-conspirators in national dress (Turkish, Chinese, and Basque) to enact the mock dance competition in La dansomanie. In both cases, dancing is depicted through the performance of national traits, enabling the comic portrayal of talent. Radet et al., Le procés du Fandango, 23.

In this regard, choreomania was a disease not of excess movement only but of overindulgence in national pastimes. It was idle and zealous; feminine and (usually) foreign; and, most of all, it performed an energetic surfeit at odds with modern nations' celebration of what Marx in 1867 would describe as measured physiological expenditure, necessary for the efficient accumulation of capital in a labour economy.° Men and women frolicking about in a public show of kinetic zeal were liberated but ridiculous, failing properly to harness the sort of national enthusiasm necessary for them to perform an industrious model citizenry. Yet in their zeal, they were rehearsing the sort of leisure—and pleasure— economy that would cement nations to their imagined histories and cultural inheritances in the incipient discourse on national culture. Benedict Anderson (1936-2015) describes all while covertly exercising their right to public corporeal jouissance. Modern nations, while explicitly celebrating traditions of social display largely invented, in Anderson’s terms, for the sake of social cohesion, paradoxically tended to overlook just the sort of collective corporeal ebullience that nurturing and transforming these cultural conventions requires.

MONOMANIA: A ‘DISEASE OF CIVILIZATION’

The nineteenth-century choreography of national affect was reflected in a host of psychiatric theories accounting for a mood of heightened public theatricality. So, too, dance, according to McCarren, represented the pathological expression of heightened affect. As McCarren shows, the Romantic heroine Giselle, in Théophile Gautier’s (1811-1872) eponymous 1841 ballet, suffers from an excess of emotion in the most famous mad scene of the nineteenth century, epitomizing the notion that dance represents madness as such; and that madness, in this view, is bodily, unspeaking, and so quintessentially feminine. Yet the libretto, which depicts a young peasant woman in the medieval countryside who dances herself to death, plausibly also drew from stories of medieval dance manias beginning to circulate at the time; with this in mind, Giselle’s dance depicts a complex of medical stories: not only chorea or syphilis, but choreomania, a dancing mania, individualized. That Giselle should have danced herself to death suggests a form of monomaniacal obsessiveness with dancing that was intently theorized in the nineteenth century and was dramatically portrayed in Andersen’s nearly contemporaneous story, The Red Shoes (1845), in which the hapless heroine dances herself to death as a result of wanting to dance too much. As with the story of Giselle, the significance of the red shoes reprises widely circulating tales of medieval dance manias, tales in which dancers react violently to the color red. Figures of the medieval danse macabre or Dance of Death were also by the nineteenth century well known (chapter 2), but the frisson provided by tales of St. Vitus’s dance as a deadly epidemic also reflected the new psychiatric discourse on obsessive fixation. As such, stories of dancing diseases provoked a new phantasm: the idea that people could dance themselves to death was itself in the nineteenth century a puzzle and an obsession. That one could do anything obsessively, to the point of death, signalled a form of affective excess that if left unchecked, moralists suggested, could lead to class and national transgressions, among other things. Overidentifying with others meant one could lose a sense of one’s own rank. Prosper Lucas (1808-1885), in his doctoral thesis at the Faculté de Médecine in Paris, offered one of the earliest studies of imitative ‘monomanias’ or obsessive fixations, arguing in De limitation contagieuse, ou de la propagation sympathique des névroses et des monomanies [Of Contagious Imitation, or, Of the Sympathetic Propagation of Neuroses and Monomanias] (1833) that popular movements had become a source of monomania in recent years. 

Ed. (London: Verso, 2006). The Convulsionaries + 107

Increasingly political, the Convulsionaries took a more political stance, imitative monomanias emerged, leading to government reforms that sometimes resulted in social alienation and provoked agitation of the body politic, resulting in disturbing acts of social revolt and collective madness.

Esquirol, one of the founders of modern psychiatry, argued that all manic disorders had national or historical conditions at their root. All manias, Esquirol thought, should be seen as 'monomanias', including the monomania for dancing. In his monumental Des Maladies Mentales [Of Mental Illness] (1838), Esquirol wrote: "mono-mania... borrows its character . . . from the various ages of the societies in which it is found", In more 'advanced' societies, it is characterized by pride, faithlessness, ambition, gaming, despair, and suicide. Monomania, Esquirol argued, was thus the disease of civilization par excellence ('la maladie de la civilisation').

Although this characterization was considered true of madness ('folie') in general, for Esquirol monomania offered more insight into the intense expressions of passionate affect that marked societies at all times. Monomania, he argued, ought to be considered not only mere obsession but also an extreme heightening of the characteristics of a given culture.

In France, he argued, a new form of monomania had emerged with the disintegration of the old system of religious belief and the rise of the police force: this was paranoia, a new type of persecution delirium, which filled the halls of mental asylums. During the French Revolution and ensuing periods, various forms of monomania had emerged, he noted, each characterized by circumstantial factors: in 1791 in Versailles, a prodigious number of suicides were reported by Pinel, who attributed these to widespread imitation of the French revolutionary figure Georges Jacques Danton (1759-1794).

Similarly, 'superstitious' monomanias had re-emerged after the pope's visit to France; and in the age of empire, many monomaniacs believed they were emperors or kings. The war against Spain had produced its own monomanias, spurred on by terror. In ancient history, Stoics had killed themselves out of pride, and the Japanese killed themselves out of excess virtue. These were all culturally specific forms of national delirium.

For Esquirol, 'the state of a society exercises a considerable influence on the production and character of monomania. The study of this form of disease', he argued, 'thus requires knowledge of the customs and habits of each people'. He was putting forward a concept of psychiatry founded in the description of cultural characteristics whose excesses presented cases of mental alienation. Nation, in this view, constituted one of the main categories for taxonomizing disease.

As I show further in chapter 7, comparison was emerging as a method of choice for scientific analysis, emphasizing variations across nations and eras, occasionally complicated by the intensity of the similarities between them. One such similarity in particular troubled Esquirol: 'convulsions have occurred in all eras, because they depend as much on the organism as on the imagination', he wrote, 'complicating all forms of mental alienation'. Unlike national behaviors and beliefs, convulsions were symptomatic of various disorders all over the world. This complicated the view that psychiatric diseases were determined by national characteristics. The following text is cleaned up and separated into separate paragraphs:

For Esquirol’s student, the psychiatrist Louis-Florentin Calmeil (1798-1895), quoted in the epigraph to chapter 3, the mind alone was at fault. Choreomania, in Calmeil’s terms, was a type of monomania in which the patient evinced an overzealous passion for dance, in contrast to other forms of monomania, such as vampirism or somnambulism.® And although religious deliria and other types of madness typically produced spasmodic muscular convulsions and hallucinatory phenomena, choreomania, Calmeil thought, should not be defined solely in psycho-motor terms. It was, like other monomanias, a product of extreme single-mindedness only. This was ostensibly what M. Duléger and Mme. Folignac suffered from in La dansomanie and La 64.

'Assez souvent', he writes, 'on voit . . . la lésion des sentiments religieux s'associer A la lésion des sens et Ala perversion des mouvements volontaires. Les hallucinations qui font croire a Yobsession diabolique, les tressaillements spasmodiques, les 108 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE fandangomanie, although both were eventually acquitted of their obsessions in narratives that promised audiences their own merriment to come. At the close of the tribunal staged in La fandon-gomanie, the audience is invited to celebrate the dancing duo and implicitly to take its side, on the promise that in doing so they too will have a chance to dance after the show is over. This was a far cry from the inflated language of social plague that would set medical writers off to the four corners of the colonial world and into the trenches of national archives to find extravagant examples of dancing manias with which to bewilder their polite readers.

In Calmeil's account, choreomania seems rather unthreatening. Although he describes it in terms of collective folly and epidemic madness, it frequently adds up to little more than a highly spirited fête. Describing a case of choreomania in Apulia in the seventeenth century in De la folie, considérée sous le point de vue pathologique, philosophique, historique et judiciaire, depuis la renaissance des sciences en Europe jusquau dix-neuviéme siécle [On Madness, Considered from a Pathological, Philosophical, Historical, and Legal Point of View, from the Renaissance of the Sciences in Europe to the Nineteenth Century] (1845), Calmeil wrote: 'youth ... has a passion for balls, flying, as if compelled by some secret instinct, to every party [féte] in sight as long as some glimmer of hope for happiness [bonheur] is to be found there. Some care only to dance, and deliver themselves to this with an ardour that appears to partake of a sort of frenzy'.”” Music served as a powerful stimulant, so that, Calmeil wrote, 'the impulse transmitted to the sensory nervous system via the musical instruments acts on the choreomaniacs by pro- ducing an irresistible transport, translated exter- nally into a succession of rh______

But unlike Baglivi’s tarantists or Plato’s Bacchic dancers, whose rhythms, Plato thought, should be outlawed on account of their irregularity, Calmeil’s censure emphasized the intensity with which dancers carried out their movements. For Calmeil, youthful festivity invited psychiatric concern because the boys and girls enjoyed themselves too much: they suffered excess zeal. This emphasis on excess pleasure and joy revealed a curious shift in concepts of health and disease, holding onto older, humoral ideas about imbalance but seeing ‘frenzy’ as the mechanical appearance of overzealousness only, stimulated by mental impressions. Calmeil and his contemporaries, it seems, were baffled by every sign of ebullient movement and powerful emotion.

Religious enthusiasm, which Calmeil described as ‘theomania’ or ‘theo-choreomania’, provoked zealous excitement by disturbing the ‘faculty of reason’, causing hallucinations and obsessions with the devil, as well as spasms and convulsions, and the ‘incessant need to dance’. Dancing was a sign and a symptom of excess passion, troublesome for the impulses that bodily movements could provoke. The catchiness of a tune was worrying because of its propensity to enthuse entire groups: for Calmeil, ‘this bizarre form of monomania’ (choreomania) was ‘susceptible to rapid propagation: it easily becomes contagious’.

A further example he describes is telling in this respect: a band of excited audience members reportedly exiting a production of Euripides’s Andromeda was seized with what Calmeil called contagious enthusiasm, resulting in what he describes as ‘epidemic madness’ (‘folie épidémique’), as they went singing and dancing down the street, in imitation of Perseus, all the way home.

Like the young Italian revellers, these theatregoers from contractions musculaires disharmoniques, les convulsions générales momentanées, forment quelquefois encore aujourd’hui le cortège de l’aliénation religieuse affective. He adds: ‘La folie peut succéder à une affection aiguë du cerveau, à un délire fébrile, à une apoplexie avec lésion du mouvement, à des convulsions générales, à une attaque d’épilepsie; l’aliénation mentale peut se compliquer, dès son invasion ou pendant le cours de sa durée, avec une affection spasmodique, avec un état de paralysie plus ou moins complet, avec l’épilepsie, la catalepsie, 'extase, les phénoménes de ’hystérie’.
 
 The case is also reported in Lucas, De l'imitation contagieuse, who notes, drawing on Sauvages’s Nosologie, that the story was reported by Lucian and constituted one of the sole cases related to nervous epidemics in antiquity, although it was not an epidemic outright (37). The Convulsionaries + 109 Abdére—first reported as a medical case linked to the Italian tarantella by Boissier Sauvages de la Croix—were hardly suffering in any usual medical sense; they certainly didn’t seek medical help. But they displayed contagious zeal, excitement that warranted a place in the ranks of psychiatric disorders considered, as Cal______ Although early psychiatrists were not typically involved in implementing punitive measures against such dancers, the slightly bewildered tone of caution articulated by Calmeil reflected concerns also voiced in the political arena: crowds whose energies proliferated quickly were potentially hazardous. As Jacques Rancière has suggested, theatregoers and patrons of the new cafés-concerts in Paris in the 1830s and 1840s risked, in the police prefecture's eyes, being roused to political action by the songs, dances, and dramatic acts that put them "outside the simple role of spectator."° They risked erupting into a revolutionary crowd, spurred on by the 'mass theatricality' that served as a 'conduit' for the 'reverie of mobile minorities.'"

Not only were workers indulging in bourgeois pastimes—pleasures that exceeded the requirements of hard labour—but also, by passing over class barriers in this way, they risked dreaming themselves out of their present existence. They would, in this event, adopt alien characteristics—middle-class ones—and so destabilize a fragile post-revolutionary regime. But Rancière points out the workers' own derision of displays of carnival spectatorship. Bourgeois decadents who came in swarms to gawk at working-class fêtes held at the Champs-Elysées or elsewhere spoiled, they thought, the zone of safety such revelries provided. Detractors argued that privacy was necessary to help workers avoid slipping continuously—in their observers' eyes—back into the stereotype of the lazy, sloppy, and uncouth brute. The workers, in Rancière's terms, were in this respect puritanical: just as they held fast to the privileged space of the fête, so, too, they resisted the label of drunken depravity that justified paternalistic intervention on the bourgeois' part.

The performance of pleasure in public was at stake, and its disinhibited show was discomfiting for all the constituencies sitting, revelling, or strolling on either side. Dance and the public fête served as a battleground not only for the liberation of unspent energies and collective jouissance, but for the right to occupy public space free from the tyranny of judgmental observation, in a social theatre vexed with class distinction. The public fête was a site of contestation for the right temporarily to unleash passion and emotion in the paradoxical privacy of socially delimited public space.

'The increasingly porous and open sociality of public space and the contested territories within which these roving parties moved made the dancing festivities a fraught affair, a zone of intensity at the heart of the nation's new radical politics. Spontaneous acts in particular were problematic, as they threatened to contagion any passerby. As Clare Parfitt-Brown has shown, spontaneity was employed in the early nineteenth century as a measure of impropriety, particularly with regard to bodily display and dance. Cancan dancers on trial in Paris in the 1830s and 1840s were questioned about whether their performances had been improvised: wilder, 'indecent' forms known as the chahut were more suspect than the choreographed and thus more predictable movements of dance routines overseen by dance masters. Likewise, Parfitt-Brown argues, dancing that subverted classical norms of grace, energy, poise, and bodily contact was considered suspect.' Like the choreomanias described by Esquirol 75. Although it went out of favour for nearly a century, the notion of excessive emotion—including joyous emotion—returned. In the 1920s, Pierre Janet (1859-1947), a professor of psychology at the Collège de France, argued that excess, rather than deviance, troubled everyday life. Joy, he wrote, provokes agitation, resulting in a type of delirium characterized by its intensity. Patients who are too happy show this corporeally, intruding into the public sphere with their extravagance, slipping outside the boundaries of a normally, and normatively, more contained individual self. 

EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE and Calmeil, the chahut suggested uncontrolled gestures stimulating collective contagion, provoking a potential for sharing ideas and emotions that could get socially and politically out of hand. Whereas earlier dance prohibitions had typically been enforced on religious grounds that high leaps and some rounds were ‘demonic’ (chapter 2), the nineteenth-century injunction against singing, dancing, and revelling bodies comparatively emphasized the dangers of mutual sympathy that overt enthusiasm stoked. In the next chapter, crowd theory emerges out of sociological writing indebted to neurology, French revolutionary history, and social psychiatry, all grappling with the changes that revolutionary and post-revolutionary crowd and popular movements occasioned. Significantly, religious enthusiasms—including the ‘jerks’ in Kentucky and Tennessee—became grounds for theorizing mimetic impulses as a social psychiatric problem, an epidemic reflecting the particular sorts of boredom and restlessness besetting the modern working class. 

CROWDS AFTER FOUCAULT

Witnessing the Iranian revolution in 1979, Foucault confronted for the first time, Said notes, the ‘entirely collective, involuntary excessiveness which could not be herded under conventional rubrics like class contradictions or economic oppression’. The affective and energetic surplus of history, spilling out into crowd movements, constituted an entirely different order of collective being and becoming; a scene of ferment characterized not by structures of oppression, surveillance, and control but by the apparently involuntary amplification of emotions and energies surging up during moments of communal anguish and hope. This chapter delves deeper into the discursive history of crowd movements, mass upheavals, and gestural spontaneities that theatricalize national becoming in the revolutionary era, roughly the eighteenth to the late nineteenth century. The chapter offers a discursive history of bodily turmoil, scenes within which the public spectacle of excessiveness plays out, ultimately to argue that crowds serve in the nineteenth century as a privileged site of theorization about spectacular spontaneity.

The chapter further moves the study of crowds into the sphere of 'dance' broadly construed, with Hewitt, as social choreography: the movement of bodies forming social space, at the edge of the 'aesthetic continuum' he describes as constitutive of modern art and social life. Crowds do not constitute aesthetic formations—orderly objects of contemplation—but the dissolution of orderly aesthetics into its converse, what I am calling an anaesthetic regime of ungainly, disorganized moves.

The figure of the disorderly crowd significantly forms political imaginaries in the nineteenth century: imaginaries that emerge discursively against the grain of the putative primordial herd. In this respect, the chapter carves out a further scene of thinking choreomania conceived in the nineteenth century as an unruly crowd condition, a surge of ungoverned and nearly ungovernable life. This extends Foucault's analysis of biopower to include movements subject to the 'involuntary excessiveness' he alludes to in the anecdote offered by Said—a sphere of inquiry otherwise conspicuously absent from Foucault's writing.

Even Foucault's analysis of biopolitics as a mode of government exercised on individual subjects through regimes of social and corporeal regulation implicating scientific research, statistics, and population control eludes direct engagement with the 'demos', the 'people'. Wendy Brown further notes, Foucault's work suffers from an oversight as far as group life is concerned: his lens focuses on the individual, subject to pressures exercised discursively and politically through regimes of thought and discipline (concerning sexuality and madness, criminality and deviance) constituting the subtle workings of biopower. Foucault fails, Brown argues, to consider the 'people' as a biopolitical unit, an entity rising up and organizing itself from below, to form an alternative, plural, and autonomous politics.

But even in Brown's rereading of Foucault's work, the demos appears on the page as an already formed discursive ideal. Her analysis does not engage with the performative, spontaneous crowd out of and through which the demos arises as a politically cogent force and against which the demos is discursively constituted. The volatile and improvisatory body of the crowd appears, I argue, in nineteenth-century social science at a time of proliferating uprisings, drawing attention to themselves and to the history with which they appear to resonate. As with Foucault's observation of the revolution in Iran, they emerge as fantasy objects of social science, revealing and forming nineteenth-century ideas of rational subjecthood indirectly. Cast in nineteenth-century literature as disorderly, excessive, and uncontrolled, yet also significantly diseased, crowds emerge as a force of nature against which the liberal subject, as outlined by Foucault, would appear. Imagined as indefinite and temporary, improvisatory and artless, but also vulnerable to contagion, gatherings of individuals in crowds become subject to discursive inquiry and medicalization, a problem Foucault and Brown pass over.

Whereas the individual subject, like the demos, arises in post-Enlightenment philosophy as an organized constellation of forces moving history forward into modernity, the disorganized mass of moving bodies pullulating on the scene of revolutionary political life comes to light in nineteenth-century social science as a subject of biomedical and biohistorical writing against the grain of historical progress. Significantly for dance studies, crowds come to be construed in social scientific literature as bodily beings shifting the course of historical progress by virtue of their tendency, in times of crisis, chaotically to appear.

As Judith Butler and Athena Athanasiou note in Dispossession: The Performative in the Political (2013), crowds are performative inasmuch as they appear in public space and in doing so show themselves as political constituencies. They demonstrate their presence and, as such, become political bodies publicly. Significantly, crowds appear in nineteenth-century medical and social scientific literature as an involuntary, bodily, automatic return to a prior state of group life—one of unthinking imitation and aggregation, herd- and hound-like. They serve discursively to illustrate the flip side of scientific modernity's obsession with another sort of automatism: that of the machine. Their automatism signals the prehistorical within modernity; as such, dance—appearing as the swarm-like movement of plural bodies in public space—constitutes modernity's unscientific, irrational, antimodern other half, that out of which it arises. Crowds thus represent a choreopolitical state of emergence and its discursivization, the impetuous movement of bodies cast as a primal force disrupting the smooth forward march of modernity into an efficient industrial age. Crowds in nineteenth-century social theory appear to gather, like a storm, against the productive machinism of rational economic life. The organic metaphor prominent in medically-inflected social theory, posited crowds as biological beings, violent and unpredictable like nature. As such, moving crowds in the nineteenth century epitomize the disorder of a pre-industrial age overwhelming the modern moment with its own brand of biopower. This suggests not only what Jeffrey T. Schnapp highlights as Freud’s concept of the ‘oceanic’, a beatific collective feeling overwhelming individuals with a liberatory sense of disindividuation, but crowds as swarms performing unpredictable gestures—in choreographic terms, flowing and starting, liquid and angular, explosive and resonant—bodies tumbling awkwardly into modernity from another age.

Crowds, this chapter shows, signal in the nineteenth century the intensification of all bodily potential for disorder and turmoil as well as their converse, a choreopolitics of control. Therefore, whereas literature on crowd theory has witnessed a boom since the social and political movements of the 1960s, from Canetti’s Masse und Macht [Crowds and Power] (1960) to R. A. Nye’s The Origins of Crowd Psychology (1975), Salvador Giner’s Mass Society (1976), Susanne Barrows’s Distorting Mirrors: Visions of the Crowd in Late Nineteenth-Century France (1981), Serge Moscovici’s Lage des foules [The Age of the Crowd] (1981), J. S. McClelland’s The Crowd and the Mob (1989), Jaap van Ginneken’s Crowds, Psychology, and Politics 1871-1899 (1993), Etienne Balibar’s La crainte des foules [Fear of Crowds] (1997), Howard Rheingold’s upbeat Smart Mobs (2003), Schnapp and Matthew Ties’s Crowds (2006), and Christian Borch’s The Politics of Crowds: An Alternative History of Sociology (2013), among others, the relationship between crowds, choreopolitics, and biopower remains overlooked.

Crowd theory's little-acknowledged prehistory in de Félice's writing on ecstatic dances, which decisively influenced Canetti's foundational work on group life, merits a further look, not only to clarify the extended genealogy of these intellectual movements in what one may construe as a prehistory of dance and performance studies but also better to distinguish the dancing crowd and dramaturgies of collective, imitative, and gesturally 'showy' assemblies from others. My aim in this chapter, then, is to outline a history of abrupt and fitful gestures in religious and neurological literature where these intersect with nineteenth-century discourses on collective pathology; and to think through the pathological 'showiness' of fitful gestures and their converse, play. This approach highlights the choreopolitics of early crowd theory as an animal, automatic, and comedic genre. The chapter thus places crowds at the basis of dance history, considered as the study of bodies moving in (and moving) social space, in this case just past the outer edges of torque-like grace. This chapter thus furthers the previous chapter's thinking about the queer space of popular religion where it overlaps with public instances of political protest, what Foster has called the choreographies of protest and Lepecki describes with regard to choreopolicing. Here, with the emergence of sociology and neurology, society at large appears periodically excessive, effusive, and uncontrolled. Its eruption onto the scene of urban modernity in the nineteenth century suggests a general 'convulsion', as one of its key moments. 3-7. Schnapp notes that ‘the “oceanic crowd” is . . . traceable at least as far back as the long-standing conflation in Greco-Roman culture of turbulence, whether maritime, meteorological, or political, with the turba (tupe), which is to say, the mob’ (4). On recent crowd theory in the broader social and historical sciences, see also Christian Borch, The Politics of Crowds: An Alternative History of Sociology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013). Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri differentiate what they term the (politically agential) ‘multitudes’ from the crowd, mass, or mob, which they consider passive and not politically efficacious; see esp. Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire (London: Penguin, 2004); Michael Hardt, ‘Bathing in the Multitude’, in Schnapp and Tiews, eds., Crowds, 35-40. On Edmund Burke’s (1729-1797) introduction of the notion of ‘masses’ and ‘mobs’ to describe the purportedly volatile and violent lower classes (in Reflections on the Revolution in France [1790])—and eventually the ambivalent power of a democracy ruled by numbers—see Stefan Jonsson, “The Invention of the Masses: The Crowd in French Culture from the Revolution to the Commune”, in Schnapp and Tiews, eds., Crowds, 47-75, esp. 51-53, 74. Jonsson further discusses the ambivalent notion of a ‘people’ (as sovereign nation, or as social force, and eventually as event), 55-59. I follow Borch’s contention that to distinguish e.g. crowds from masses is to eschew the ‘politics of definition’ by which such terms continue to change over time (Borch, The Politics of Crowds, 13). A discursive genealogy of the language of masses, mobs, crowds, multitudes, and people would constitute another study in its own right.

114 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE historians put it, which had the potential to upend political life.’ The analysis of choreomania as a disorderly crowd condition therefore moves the discursive history of jagged movement to the street, and to the choreopolitics of large-scale revolution and revolt. Central to the discussion on choreomania as a disorderly crowd condition is the emergence of sociology as a science that would, following modern history, in its turn following the language of medicine, return to the French Revolution as a primal scene of dangerous and contagious politicality epitomizing the disruptive choreopolitics of public protest. With the French Revolution, crowds retrospectively came to be described as unthinking, animal, organic, even ecological movements performing their excessive presence as a giant nervous spasm traversing political life. Further drawing the literature on the animalization of crowd movements into a new body of neurological literature on jerks, twitches, and tics in large crowds of religious enthusiasts in the American South, I argue that choreomania appears in the nineteenth century as a disease of disruptive sociality. The social body comes to be described in terms of its potential to erupt. Publicness thus comes to the fore in the discursive history of the dancing disease. Public space, as a contested sphere within which nineteenth-century nation states were defining themselves, required what Foucault called ‘docile bodies’: pliant, submissive bodies that did not draw attention to themselves. Bodies that were emphatically not theatrical: docile bodies hide, conform.® Discourse on the unwelcome appearance of eruptive, restless corporeal formations suggests the articulation of publicness as an arena within which fitful movement has no place. Organic Metaphors: Taine and the Origins of French Biohistory

Organic metaphors permeated the language of social contagion in the nineteenth century. While the revolution of 1848 and the Paris Commune of 1871 swept France into a fury of political protest in the latter part of the nineteenth century, interest in crowds in Germany was spurred on by the epidemics of cholera that swept away thousands of men and women in 1832, 1848-1849, and 1854, sensitizing physicians to human vulnerability in the new urban centers and awakening a new interest in social and medical history, revealing precedents for prevailing bouts of contagion in the popular movements of the past.

The French historian Hippolyte Taine (1828-1893), in his six-volume Les origines de la France contemporaine [The Origins of Contemporary France] (1876-1894), following Hecker's work in medical history, set the stage for a biohistorical analysis of crowd movements in France, depicting dramatic acts of popular dissolution in terms likening them to cataclysmic geological events. Writing a century after the height of the French Revolution, Taine looked back at the revolutionary outbursts of the previous century with disapproval: crowds had behaved like wild animals or children, he wrote, wreaking havoc as a beast of burden might when suddenly taking cognizance of its situation and shaking the shackles off its back, throwing its rider overboard.1 Taine took his disparaging organic metaphors further: rowdy crowds of revolutionaries, overtaking cafés, armed with pamphlets, standing on tables and chairs, seizing moderates by the collar and trampling them in the mud, reached ecological proportions as their movements became, he put it disapprovingly, like a ‘human torrent.2' These same crowds further reached mythopoeic stature: following an exegetic tradition depicting Liberty as a sympathetic, fulsome, and galvanizing woman maternally and seductively leading men and women into revolutionary action, Taine personified the revolution as a monstrous, barking Liberty, a Miltonian woman girdled in Cerberean hounds, a figure of Night as ‘terrible as Hell', advancing with giant steps, shaking a dagger and wreathed in a poor semblance of a royal crown. Like ten Furies, she deployed a destructive power at the head of an unrelenting and irresistible herd: tens of thousands of judges and executioners joined in a chaotic surge of motion behind her.3 This revolutionary figure was fearsome—an ancient goddess terrifying for its pre-civilized barbarity.

The new nation had not yet quelled its own revolutionary hounds; nor had it fully outgrown its potential for stupid herd-like life. By all accounts, the French people in Taine's depiction were brutal, animal: even at their most docile, they were too beast-like to turn away from the more violent leaders among them. Coinciding with centenary celebrations marking the uprisings of the French Revolution, Taine's chilling narrative set a hostile tone for discussions on crowd behavior at the close of the Second Empire, when a new set of uprisings and the widespread fires of the Paris Commune of 1871 were fresh in the minds of readers and writers alike. Unprecedented access to the Archives Nationales, which were enjoying greater support than ever before by a government keen to inscribe national history into the collective curriculum, allowed Taine to draw vivid scenes of men and women taken up in the fury of a revolutionary herd. This was an organically inflected history of collective motion, taking the cataclysmic movements of groups as its formidable object, prompting Nietzsche to call Taine 'the foremost historian now living', although, Nietzsche complained, the intellectual life Taine represented still suffered from a pessimistic and vulgar Germanic sentiment indebted to Hegel, progressing, as its proponents thought, towards a predetermined, static, and despondent futurity. This did not, for Nietzsche, yet herald an intellectual disposition living up to the surges of collective life that Taine's history evoked.

The organic metaphors Taine deployed nevertheless proved catchy. The notion of crowd movements as biological events similar to individual bodily spasms in particular inscribed political life into a social scientific discourse emphasizing individual and social crisis. In his contemporaneous four-volume history of the Paris Commune, Les convulsions de Paris [The Convulsions of Paris] (1878-1880), Maxime Du Camp (1822-1894) described a 'wind' of 'revolutionary madness' 'paralysing' and corrupting the urban machine. In his earlier six-volume Paris: Ses organes, ses fonctions et sa vie dans la seconde moitié du XIXe siécle [Paris: Its Organs, Functions, and Life in the Second Half of the Nineteenth Century] (1869-1876), arguably anticipating Foucault's biopolitical analyses of institutional structures of power, Du Camp claimed the danse macabre as a furious passion that struck men and women in Germany, France, Holland, Italy, America, and the Islamic Orient like a frantic scourge that threw exhausted populations into motoric frenzy.

Du Camp, like Taine, drew from broadly medical language, which with Hecker had already begun to characterize crowd movements in terms likening them to giant spasms and convulsive plagues. For the physician Jean Baptiste Vincent Laborde (1830-1903), writing in the heat of the insurrection of 1871, the 'terrible events' of the Paris Commune offered a 'sad and simultaneously a strange spectacle' to their contemporaries, a 'wind of madness' revealing a society so 'sick in spirit and body' it could only signal a 'mental illness', a 'collective madness'. The entire mechanism of the social body was broken. In Laborde's view, this state of crisis played out mechanistically through the exercise of tics and gestures, 'spasmodic contractions' representing 'involuntary motor impulses', which showed the organism's state of (often hereditary) disrepair. As the expressive 'play' of a pathological 'moral physiognomy', this degenerative theatre made public the 'absolute Taine, Les origines, vol. 2, 68. 14. Nietzsche bitterly notes the ‘tyrannical influence’ of Hegel through Taine and the spirit of pessimism to which French intellectual culture as a whole was succumbing. Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil: Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future, trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York: Vintage Books, 1989), 193. 15. Du Camp, Les Convulsions de Paris, vol. 1, i. 16. Maxime Du Camp, Paris: Ses organes, ses fonctions et sa vie dans la seconde moitié du XIXe siécle, 6 vols., vol. 4 (Paris: Hachette, 1873), 376. 17. J.V. Laborde, Les hommes et les actes de l'insurrection de Paris devant la psychologie morbide: Lettres à M. le docteur Moreau (Paris: Bailliére, 1872), i, ii, 3. 18. Laborde, Les hommes, 12. 19. Laborde, Les hommes, 13. 116 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE perversion’ of the individual’s dysfunctional, psychomorbid state. The individual assimilated tics, copied these, and in doing so revealed inter-generational transmissibility and influence. Violent revolutionary excitement, similarly ‘monstrous’ and hereditary (as well as often, in his view, bohemian and atheistic), showed the same sort of ‘organopathological’ dysfunction." Human weakness, wrote Laborde, quoting Rousseau, impelled men to seek association, gathering like herds and eventually arriving at politics. But for Laborde, this form of political association was not just a ‘human weakness’, as Rousseau had suggested; it more forcefully indicated psychological disease." Proof was in the portrait, and the annals of psychopathology and crowd psychology reveled in scenes each more outrageous and each demonstrative of a more passionate and instinctive," as well as a more theatricalized affect, than the next. One revolutionary character—a Girondin, or republican, ‘of the most common sort’—whose case Laborde describes fluctuated between emotions and opinions with an alarming degree of ‘mobility’, carried himself nervously, and trembled, suggesting the exact ‘portrait’ (‘peinture’) of a madman (‘halluciné’)." Others, similarly affected by alcoholism exacerbating what Laborde saw as hereditary predispositions to insanity, showed no fear in the face of danger. A friend of his, venturing out into the ‘orgiastic’ underside of Paris's guarded battle zones, performed an ‘unforgettable’ ‘peregrination’. In one street, this friend and his guide encountered an energetic and savage dance, a vertiginous, unbridled round, replete with hurrahs, while bullets flew overhead. A number of revellers, ‘bacchant-men’, were lying in pools of blood on the ground, singing raucously, contagiously insensitive to danger or pain. The scenes reminded Laborde's friend of the ‘joyous and insane indifference’ given to men stung by tarantulas. The friend's guide, in order to cross an especially perilous street, got down on his hands and knees, crawling through a chaotic brawl, though Laborde's friend notes he himself had been able to conserve his dignity and walked across the street—though not quite holding his head high—at least without ‘for a minute, descending to the rank of the quadruped’. He eventually succeeded in escaping this ‘Bacchic’ ‘Hell’, ‘without looking once behind’. Laborde reflects that his friend, and he himself, at a remove, thus were able to ‘witness, with a shudder, these impulsive events’ (‘On assiste, en frémissant, à ces manifestations impulsives’)."* In Laborde's analysis, these men not only suffered from an alcoholic disposition, but also showed symptoms of______ "They suffered, Laborde thought, from too much enthusiasm, translated into a Bacchic frenzy. Even at their most spectacular, men and women caught in the throes of social disease, Laborde argued, contagioned one another gesturally without going anywhere, without exercising rational, purposeful action. ‘Passions’, in nineteenth-century medical terminology, were also referred to as ‘mobiles’, as Laborde’s writing makes clear: volatile energies, bodily and mental movements spurring individual and collective action and affect, generally, his depictions underlined, to no good." The social choreography of these outbursts, to reprise Hewitt’s language, suggests mobility on the ‘aesthetic continuum’ of social and political life at the jagged edge, where disorderly bodies reveal society falling apart. For Hewitt, the ‘aesthetic continuum of bodily articulation’ suggests the extension of bodily life across art and political forms: bodies shape social being in the public sphere by indicating ways of holding oneself singly and in relation to others: ways of moving and aggregating." The forms bodies take make, reflect, and disrupt the choreographic forms—the choreopolitics—of social life. In cases described here, bodies gather to disrupt political life and simultaneously to constitute it anew as a popular force: not yet a demos, but a potential for communal rule.


Taine’s writing influenced a wave of social theorists, all contributing to the new literature on social disease. Writers including Gustave Le Bon (1841-1931), Gabriel Tarde (1843-1904), Emile Durkheim (1858-1917), and Henri Fournial (1866-1932) in France, Scipio Sighele (1868-1913) in Italy, and William McDougall (1871-1938) in Britain, contributed to an emerging discourse on crowds in social scientific and legal terms. Amply cited, among others, by Fournial, Tarde, Sighele, and Le Bon, whose writing on the psychology of revolutions was littered with ref- erences to his work,"* Taine spurred on a wave of new writing on crowd movements that typically derided the little man and feared the worst from the mob."’ May Day riots, strikes, and demonstrations were erupting throughout Europe, stimulating analysis. The new social theories, generally conservative in tone, reacting against the rapid industrialization and urbanization also mobilizing a socialist Left, and based on distrust of aggregation, drew from studies of epidemics and neuromotor disorder, psychiatry and criminology, to depict scenes of deviant behaviour. The pathologization of crowd and social movements linked natural eruptions, spasms, and antisocial behaviour in a disciplinary node ultimately to show that all bodily and social eruptions were pathological. In choreographic terms, the social body in distress emerged on the scene of industrial modernity as a weak (undisciplined) animal capable of sudden rage, tearing through the fabric of social life, just as biologically conceived society was becoming socially and politically constituted. In the 19th century, crowds were seen as a powerful force that disrupted society, representing the unpredictable and uncontrollable nature of the present. They were characterized as a primitive force that emerged in the modern world, transforming social spaces by bringing individuals close together. Crowds were considered choreopolitical, as they involved the spectacular disorganization of bodies in space. This disorganization is a negative fantasy that contradicts the orderly being constructed in modern social choreography.

Crowds, in 19th-century criminology, law, and psychology, were imagined as a radical force that moved against rational and efficient progress. They represented the most mobile and unpredictable aspects of the past and present, emerging as a force of nature that could hardly be prevented or cured.

Crowds were thought to stand outside time, representing the present moment's most dramatic disruption. They were seen as a force of nature that could be described but not prevented or cured. This concept of social choreography foregrounds processes of choreographic disruption, focusing on the disorganization of bodies in space.

In the 19th century, crowds were considered a choreopolitical phenomenon that disrupted social spaces by bringing individuals close together. The disorganization of bodies in space is a negative fantasy that contradicts the orderly being constructed in modern social choreography. Nineteenth-century crowd theory, I argue, imagines the upright social body as the refined and abstracted counterpart of the pulsating crowd. This respect draws from Hewitt's analysis of mid-nineteenth to early twentieth-century social choreography as an aesthetic formation. Hewitt argues that moving bodies not only reflect but also shape ideologies, from walking and ballet to chorus lines, organizing social form. Abstraction is the refinement of imagined disorder into an orderly form. Abstraction also signals the movement of writing a social body out of its imagined negative, resolving the inherent contradictions and tensions within it.

The fascistic connotations of the Final Solution deployed in Nazi Germany are not unintended. Fascistic body politics seeks to drain a political body of its supposedly messy, dark, heterogeneous elements, typically imagined as being represented in the bodies of blacks, queers, women, and Jews.

In Foucault's analysis of liberalism in The Birth of Biopolitics, social being emerges discursively in the nineteenth century as that which organizes itself in counterpoint to a purportedly uncontrollable and socially or racially inferior core. This self-organizing, discursively disciplined constituency performs itself as an aggregate body temporarily engaged in a state of emergence into public space.

Foucault's liberalism, like madness and sexuality, comes with Enlightenment modernity to signal an empty middle, around which talking, writing, and organizing happens. Liberalism signals the emergence of a system of governance that deliberately fails to organize bodies in space, leaving market processes alone. Modern liberalism writes into being the concept of a social body that represents another order, that of disorder: a state of perpetual crisis and undoing or disaggregation.

In my analysis of crowd theory, sociology emerges to think society organizing itself around and away from self-organizing aggregates, which could be construed as an emergent radical politics. Anarchically moving bodies come to figure as society's anaesthetic other: its ugly other half, fundamental to scientific modernity's self-description as abstracting itself from the putatively unmanageable horde, the animal being quivering at the heart of modern biopolitical life. Political and religious movements offered scenes of spectacular epidemic madness that social theorists likened to plague. For Sighele, religious movements propagating like wildfire on the arid prairies of America drew social bodies into line with natural disasters. Crowds were natural eruptions, transcending eras and cultural worlds. For these social scientists, all eras were prone to spectacular bouts of disruptive insanity. Citing Nietzsche, for whom insanity was the rule among religious sectarians, Sighele argued that political parties, like religious sects, were rife with epidemic psychoses.

Sighele viewed Arab and Indian dervishes, medieval demonomaniacs and their Italian heirs (dancers of the tarantella), Shakers and Christian Perfectionists in America, Russian nihilists, communitarians and ecstatics, as well as early followers of Christ and even Sturm und Drang enthusiasts in Germany, as indicative of moral epidemics pathologically constituted by spontaneous suggestion. According to Sighele, the 'spectacle' of a single 'irritated individual' triggered the whole movement of a crowd, by virtue of the suggestive influence this individual's gesture provided to those who were its witness, and who were, by virtue of this representation, animalistically impelled to follow.

In this view, individuals were at least as prone to imitate pathological behaviour as to imitate pacific gestures and moods. Yet in a rare concession to the calm energy that can be displayed by crowds, Sighele also suggested that on some occasions crowds may turn gay or generous, bursting into laughter or sparing a vulnerable life. However, the vast majority of his depictions, like those of his peers, showed aggregates of people as dangerously animalistic, as well as fickle, volatile, and unmistakably feminine.

Social imitation and 'contagion' were increasingly considered to be politically hazardous. In a lecture on criminal anthropology titled 'Psicosi epidemica' (Epidemic Psychoses) (1888), given at the cusp of massive demonstrations among unemployed workers and students in Rome and Milan, Giuseppe Sergi (1841-1936) argued that 'epidemic psychoses' could further spur on epidemic criminal activity, a thesis that gained currency among penal and crowd theorists in the ensuing decades.

Philosopher and sociologist Georg Simmel (1858-1918) argued that negative affect—a feeling of revulsion for crowds—was necessary for maintaining individual mental health. This view downplayed positive imitative factors, substituting them for the alien and alienating figure of a magnetic force by which negative undercurrents sweep up to a group's surface in the spontaneous act of imitation, the impulsive moment of collectivity. This concept of human beings as intensely mobile—vulnerable to reversals—revealed a pessimistic approach to social life that was shared by many during the long nineteenth and twentieth centuries. With Le Bon, social theory moved to the heart of state power. One of the most influential and socially conservative of the crowd theorists—indebted (though he rarely acknowledged it) to the Italian school spearheaded by Sighele and Enrico Ferri (1856-1929)—Le Bon argued that a magnetic impulse generated in a crowd exercised a hypnotic effect on individuals such that their conscious personalities vanished. This made crowds primitive mental units (what he termed ‘Yunité mentale des foules’), in which individuals’ actions were reduced to ‘the unconscious activities of the spinal cord’. This enabled him to explain why crowds were often dangerous: collective life, when frenzied, was entirely autonomic. Individuals surrendering to the impulsive activity of their spinal cords, regressing to an infant state of mind, suggested a depersonalized and pre-civilized state of being—barbaric.

‘Everybody knows that there are mental illnesses, and also that there are special institutions for the mentally ill. But maybe very few believe in the existence of the possibility of collective disturbances—a psychological disease propagating and spreading itself like harmful epidemics. Observations on various historical periods and on contemporary events among peoples, have clearly demonstrated to me [the existence of] such collective psychological diseases, which behave in their propagation just like any other epidemic; therefore I have named them epidemic psychoses’.

EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE

Le Bon’s theory helped him justify the superiority of individual, rational activity (and elite leadership) over all other forms of social organization. The organic simile enabled him effectively to abstract crowd movements from democratic politics and to depict what seemed like a natural, scientifically grounded alternative: crowds were not democratic but merely animal mechanisms. For Le Bon, the human motor was not only unintelligent but inefficient; it triggered uncontrolled chain reactions that had to be directed—in Foucault’s terms, governed. Le Bon's recourse to organic metaphors (inspired by Taine) rendered governmental structures implicitly necessary for curbing a merely animal, unthinking social body, protecting it from harm: "The psychological group is a provisional being formed of heterogeneous elements", he wrote, "which for a moment are combined, exactly as the cells which constitute a living body form by their reunion a new being which displays characteristics very different from those possessed by each of the cells singly." This figure of speech, configuring the social body negatively as an organic whole, compared individuals to the cells that make it up. This reduced individual agents to biological units as interdependent as they were purportedly separable from one another at the outset. Elsewhere, Le Bon argued that ideas, affects, emotions, and beliefs are as powerfully and nefariously contagious in crowds as is the effect of microbes.

Notoriously influencing a generation of politicians across the political spectrum, from Theodore Roosevelt (1858-1919) and Charles de Gaulle (1890-1970) to Adolf Hitler (1889-1945) and Benito Mussolini (1883-1945), Le Bon styled himself a consultant to the political elite. His vituperative views on crowd behavior enabled these state leaders better to understand and ultimately to shape rising tides of political discontentment and, ultimately, biopower.

Crowd scenes offered case after case of the apparently spectacular dissolution of individuality, constituting the modern subject by virtue of his or her capacity to withstand the herd. Individual subjectivity, as social psychology and later psychoanalysis would increasingly put forward, stemmed from the successful suppression of base, animal drives. Freud, whose theories I return to later, was particularly influenced by crowd psychology and its foundational writing in the myth of a savage Dionysianism pulsating at the heart of social life, liable to erupt and overpower it at any time. Freud was particularly influenced by McDougall, for whom "the individual, in becoming one of a crowd, loses in some degree his self-consciousness, his awareness of himself as a distinct personality, and with it . . . consciousness of his specific ally personal relations; he becomes to a certain extent depersonalized." McDougall argued that individuals regain an animal or childlike state when they are among crowds: their willpower dissolves in an overwhelming current of energy. McDougall's language was dramatic, emphasizing the primordial power of collective irrationality over the rational individual, who otherwise stands, his portrayal implies, staunchly in isolation: "the individual", he writes, "feels himself enveloped and overshadowed and carried away by the forces which he is powerless to control; he . . . does not feel called upon to maintain the attitude of self-criticism and self-restraint which under ordinary circumstances are habitual to him." Freud, reprising McDougall's concept of the "group mind" in Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921), saw this overpowering force as an occasion for religiously inflected "oceanic bliss". Individuals were not only subject to a suppression or repression of their base animality (as well as their tragic Greek inheritance); they also occasionally transcended themselves in rare moments of collectivity. "Men's emotions are stirred in a group to a pitch that they seldom or never attain under other conditions", McDougall wrote; "and it is a pleasurable experience for those who are concerned, to surrender themselves so unreservedly to their passions and Le Bon, Psychologie des foules, 20. Le Bon, Psychologie des foules, 15. Le Bon, Psychologie des foules, 113. Van Ginneken, Crowds, 171, 185-187. McDougall, The Group Mind, 57. McDougall, The Group Mind, 57. Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads

Freud saw the surrendering of the self in a crowd as a rare occasion for collective bliss, teetering at the edge of the ecstatic dissolution of the ego. However, Freud's recuperation of the collective power of crowds, as articulated by McDougall into a psycho- logical discourse on animal pleasure and prohibition, was more frequently countermanded by his concern that loss of individuality spelled danger and pernicious excess.

Conservative sociology's concept of spontaneous psychophysical degeneration contrasted with earlier medical theories put forward by, among others, the physician Prosper Despine (1812-1892). Despine argued that 'moral contagion' stems from individuals' predispositions to reproduce actions or feelings they witness in others. However, he insisted that such contagion occurs only inasmuch as individuals already have a tendency towards particular actions or feelings within themselves.

Crowds do not create new monsters out of women and men, but they catalyze and intensify existing impulses. Despine argued that crowds need to be curbed because of their capacity to stimulate positive and negative impulses. He pleaded for moral apologists to labor with him in an effort to thwart the social 'poison' spread by unruly popular opinion, spurred on in particular by the press.

Not all theorists emphasized the pernicious effects of plural bodies or even the existence of such metaphorical (or organic) entities. The legal philosopher Hans Kelsen (1881-1973) wrote: 'it is incorrect to talk of a bond "between" individuals.' Society is imagined by every individual, insofar as the whole concept of society is a 'psychic phenomenon.' With Kelsen, individuality comes to the fore as an object of political analysis, in which 'society' is a fiction. Individuals, for Kelsen, are responsible as legal agents; their actions have no bearing on others. However, Sighele, Fournial, and others, not content with this premise of individuality, pored over problems of legal responsibility in groups—groups embedded in ecosystems. One response was to argue that crowds were led by meneurs, leaders, whose example served as a catalyst to action in others, even if those others were operating on the basis of automatic impulses (or, as Fournial ventured, on account of a full moon). Still, someone in the mob had to be held accountable before an increasingly codified justice system. Legal analysis and organic cellularity meshed poorly. This left a gap in biosocial analyses of governmentality, according to which economic (and ecological) imperatives also moved the sociopolitical body along. This left little room for accident. In Foucault's analysis of biopolitical power, the legal determines the economic and is determined by it.

Rational actions—performed by efficient bodies, not subject to 'involuntary excessiveness'—move modernity along without the biosocial disruptions that catapult groups into temporary states of archaic surplus or impulsive animality.

Henri Fournial cites the French Revolution in particular as exemplary of the sorts of criminal acts, gestures, emotions, and attitudes that may be propagated contagiously in a crowd, in Henri Fournial, Essai sur la psychologie des foules. Considérations médico-judiciaires sur les responsabilités collectives (Lyon: A. Storck; and Paris: G. Masson, 1899), 81. Fournial also interestingly considers meteorological events among other ecological factors influencing crowd behaviour; he notes that of 125 noteworthy incidents recorded of the French Revolution, 48 fell on a full moon, further underscoring the crowd as an uncontrollable and feminine natural force.

EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE

So while animals may behave according to perfectly docile and controlled systems of mutual interdependence, the fiction and fantasy of animal spontaneity—operating at the base of the spinal cord, in Le Bon's terms—situated unruly social life in a lesser plane on the increasingly interdependent scales (and spaces) of biopower. Men and women, conceived increasingly, with liberalism, according to Foucault, as homo economicus, economic agents first and foremost, emerged as such inasmuch as they did so against the grain of a mythically animal and irrational, collective and chaotic—indeed lawless—plural being, whose anarchism would threaten liberalism with the truly democratic rule the demos nominally aspires to.

PUBLICS AND PUBLIC OPINION: THE DREYFUS AFFAIR

Crowds, mobs, masses, and multitudes were forming discursively in the pages of social scientific theory, often interchangeably. Occasionally, terms emerged to describe a unique type of social or collective formation. So whereas I use the term 'crowd' generally to depict the movements of groups (following Borch's contention that any etymological or epistemological delineation of such terms belies their historical imbrication in social scientific literature),<10> the notion of the 'public' also came in the late nineteenth century to signal a particularly theatrical and cohesive form of social choreography and a relatively more organized social formation. By the time of the infamous Dreyfus affair in the mid-1890s, discourse on the ‘public’ emerged to complement literature on the crowd. Publicness, with the Dreyfus affair, became the crowd's politically representative face, the discursive interpellation of the demos. Staunchly defended in an open letter, J’accuse’ [‘I Accuse’] (1898) by the realist novelist and radical sympathizer Emile Zola (1840-1902), whose vivid depictions of crowd uprisings virtually sparked a new literary genre, the Jewish military officer Alfred Dreyfus (1859-1935) came to the forefront of intellectual opinion. Dreyfus, Zola intoned, had been unjustly subjected to a government-backed smear campaign, imprisoned for allegedly communicating state secrets to German officials. Zola’s manifesto was supported by a wide circle of Parisian intellectual and artistic luminaries, including Tarde, mobilizing against increasingly aggressive anti-Semitic and xenophobic popular opinion. The repercussions of this case would divide French opinion for years to come. The city streets and pages of local newspapers simmered with debate on the Dreyfus affair, accompanied by a host of further scandals, revealing a new social scientific interest in national bodies and the ways they banded together, divided, and organized. Publicness, conceived as a gathering together of opinions rather than bodies, suggested a discursive social choreography abstracted from its messy and corporeal counterpart. Social choreography—understood in this case, I submit, as the shaping of ideas through their movement across social space—emerged in this case in the motion towards a consolidation of ideas about social bodies and the concerted, generally written, public defense of public life. Social choreography in this regard contributed to forming what I call the archival repertoire of public life, a discursive force that shapes as much as it reflects ongoing public and social scientific debate. Social bodies do not just organize or move through space; they move the language that defines and forms it, aesthetically, politically, and choreographically. Paris and other European capitals were in motion, and the emergence of the intellectual class through the activities of the press was countermanded by an equally powerful and often virulent discourse on the dangers and triumphs of political association. Sighele argued that the term ‘publics’ encompassed individuals with common literary, artistic, and intellectual interests, even when they were physically dispersed; but the term ‘publics’ also referred to popular groupings that shared political opinions.¹ In Tarde’s analysis, the public was more liberal than the crowd, inasmuch as one could participate in a few publics at once, just as one read various newspapers. In this view, publics were expansive and diverse; and they could overlap, unlike crowds, which were physically proximate and could intensify emotions to the point of violence or insanity.² Not all social theorists considered individuals, taken together, to form base or at worst dangerous social bodies. Many took individuals to constitute the basic units of society, not dissolvable into others, though individual moments and views might be shared (and transformed). Crowds, like opinions, gathered but did not always create new, more stupid, or more volatile social beings. Society was also conceived of as a positive force for aggregation: a vital capacity for the expansion and transformation of public life.

Tarde: Inter-Individualism and Collective Action as Art

In a rare homage to the positive vital politics of group being, Tarde offered a counterpoint to his contemporaries' alarmist readings of plural formations. As a social motor, groups, in Tarde's analysis, also afforded the occasion for the positive transcendence of individuality and herd mentality. In a relatively exceptional deployment of socially progressive philosophy in the emerging sociological field, Tarde offered a view of groups and individuals positively and creatively engaging in imitative behaviour.

A crowd is able to multiply itself and so becomes, in his terms, molecular. Tarde argued in Les lois de limitation [The Laws of Imitation] (1890) that imitation is a prime social and historical mover, often positively shaping social activity and political, artistic, and intellectual life, accounting for acts of creative and scientific invention.*® Although he also acknowledged, like his contemporaries, the temporary insanity that could lead reasonable individuals to perpetuate base, criminal acts in crowds, he was most interested in the minute instances of imitation that also brought about positive social and intellectual change.*”

For Tarde, imitations, oppositions, repetitions, and innovations constituted a world of vital activities operating inter-individually. Objects and relations were never static in a given moment but morphed slightly and continuously. Tarde's theory of inter-psychology suggested that human actions, taken at the level of their most incremental associations, offered an ever-evolving landscape of social, intellectual, and artistic movement.

Rehabilitated in Deleuze and Guattari's Capitalisme et schizophrénie 2: Mille plateaux [A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia] (1980), Tarde's interest in micro modulations paved the way for a new, though quickly marginalized, discussion on groups—social aggregates—and what he described, after Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716), as 'monadology', in 'Monadologie et sociologie' [Monadology and Sociology] (1893), a world of radical differentiations connecting the universe and all its motions together.** This world of dynamic differences reconceived the body as an energetic composite made up of infinitely varying "creatures," "worlds," or "monads," yielding a collective subject, and the collective constitution of the biophysical (and metaphysical) universe.*°

For Leibniz, the monad was a vital and a material principle, a force of organic clustering according to which all beings moving through the world were made up of infinitesimally small and dynamic parts that could be shared across bodies and recombine. Tarde saw in this a model for inter- and intra-corporeal association: a way of reconceptualizing the social sphere as being made up of minute movements, continually reorganizing people and things—imbricating them dynamically in one another.

Tarde was putting forward a theory of imitation foregrounding mutuality. The consequences for politics were significant: for Tarde, every world is social, just as every thing is a social thing—a society—vitally co-constituting inter-individual beings and publics in perpetual flux. These pluralities or interrelations tend towards gatherings (rassemblements) and relationships of inter-possession that have the potential to undo social hierarchy and the fixity of political roles. 

As a radically progressive social philosophy fundamentally at odds with his contemporary Durkheim's positivist theories of static and universal social structures, Tarde's affective biopolitics transcended individual and social formations in favor of diversity, difference, and change. Dancing, in this regard, like 56. Gabriel Tarde, Les lois de limitation, ed. Bruno Karsenti (Paris: Editions Kimé, 1993), 77. 57. Gabriel Tarde, Etudes pénales et sociales (Lyon: A. Storck; and Paris: G. Masson, 1892), 303. 58. Gabriel Tarde, Monadologie et sociologie, ed. Eric Alliez (Le Plessis-Robinson: Institut synthélabo pour le progrés de la con- naissance, 1999). See also Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, Capitalisme et schizophrénie 2: Mille plateaux (Paris: Les Editions de Minuit, 1980), 267. Deleuze notes Tarde's influence on Foucault in Foucault, 81n6. 59. See Eric Alliez, 'Présentation: Tarde et le probléme de la constitution', in Tarde, Monadologie et sociologie, 9-32, see esp. 12, 20-25. 60. Tarde, Les lois de limitation, 212-213.

Other forms of art, such as dance, can occur collectively, and new movements might be invented by individuals, then imitated, and thus incrementally transformed. Movement—moving bodies, in particular—served as modern science's litmus test for understanding crowds and, by extension, the transformations of social life. Metaphorically and materially, movement, dance, and the figure of dancing—particularly 'Bacchic'-type ecstasies—operated as lenses through which to view the forms and misformations of social aggregation.

This way of seeing social formations by attending to the movements and mutual influence of bodies in space emerged in fuller force with the aestheticized, popular dance cultures of chorus lines represented (in Britain) by the famous precision-engineered Tiller Girls, discussed by Hewitt, Burt, and others; but may have emerged in the late nineteenth century in discourse on the far more ambivalently choreographic (and choreopolitical) movements of bodies spilling through streets.

Positive theories of imitation were not entirely new. As with the incendiary depictions of crowds as impulsive, beastly forces, earlier nineteenth-century medical theory provided the organic language and an alternative political ground for theorizing group life. Prosper Lucas, sixty years before Tarde, had set forward a theory of imitation foregrounding genius and art. In De l'imitation contagieuse [Of Contagious Imitation] (1833), Lucas posited that voluntary or 'mimic' imitation ('imitation mimique')—which he set in opposition to involuntary, 'sympathetic' imitation—constituted an art form in its own right, when employed intelligently, through the exercise of the passions, by persons of genius.® Even voluntary imitation of pathological phenomena—most frequently madness, chorea, epilepsy, and hysteria—contained a portion of artistry, derision, or simply interest, he argued, which could turn mimic or feigned symptoms real if performed with too much conviction (and art).® This view emphasized casual, recreational imitation, simulating slight convulsive movements or 'nervous attacks' and suspended at will.

SOCIAL BODIES

The 'social body' in nineteenth-century literature on choreomania is disruptive, spastic, jagged, and queer; dark, animal, and feminine; but also, significantly, aggregate. As a disorder of aggregate bodies, choreomania comes onto the modern social scientific scene as uncontrolled movement, signalling a choreopolitics of corporeal up______ Purposeful corporeal movement, positively allied with modern factories and modern, 61. Though the Tiller Girls were most famously described in the late 1920s by Siegfried Kracauer (1889-1966), they were active in Manchester as early as the 1890s (having formed as a group in 1889). Masterminded by music hall director John Tiller to counter the chaotic chorus lines of the day and offer instead a model of corporeal efficiency and precision, they quickly became emblems of the new, Taylorized, rationalized industrial West. 

 Drawing from Hecker’s work on choreomania, recently summarized in French by Emile Littré in the Gazette médicale de Paris [Paris Medical Gazette] (1833), as well as the article on chorea by French physician Jean-Baptiste Bouillaud (1796-1881) in the Dictionnaire de médecine et chirurgie pratique [Dictionary of Medicine and Surgical Practice] (1829-1836), Lucas emphasized the intensity, ‘strange colour’ (‘étrange couleur’), and ‘most bizarre force of contagious propagation’ (‘la force la plus bizarre de propagation contagieuse’) characterizing cases of ‘sympathetic imitation’ in the ‘vast’ epidemics of choreomania as well as in the chorea of his day. Further describing cases of epidemic convulsions among nuns in Germany, in Holland, and at Loudun, as well as among the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, Lucas suggested that these were variously marked by epilepsy, insanity, catalepsy, trembling, bleating like sheep or making other animal cries, and ecstasy. In De Vimitation contagieuse, 33-43. Noting that these cases had first been described by, among others, Pinel and Kaaw Boerhaave (1705- 1753), Lucas turned his attention to the nuns’ barking, nosebleeds, coughing, and other types of ‘neurotic motility’ and ‘extreme sensitivity’ situating these phenomena in a diagnostic line with choreas and choreomanias (8-21). Lucas argued that the nuns’ acts of imitation constituted sympathetic—involuntary—imitations of complex neuroses, whose symptoms could be observed even if underlying physiological processes could not be (32-33). See J. Bouillaud, ‘chorée’, in G. Andral et al., Dictionnaire de médecine et de chirurgie pratiques, 15 vols., vol. 5 (Paris: Gabon, Méquignon-Marvis, J.-B. Bailliare, Crochard, 1829-1836), 262-272; and Gazette médicale de Paris 4, 1.2, 3 January 1833, 5-6. 63. Lucas, De l'imitation contagieuse, 7-8. 64. Lucas, De l’imitation contagieuse, 8. Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads + 125 streamlined, efficient regimes______ At its most forceful, this fitful regime of corporeality was likened to plague. In this view, choreomania was a disorder of imitative crowds; specifically, choreomania erupted among groups of people imitating one another’s gestures, attitudes, and moods pathologically, as it seemed to those who viewed and attempted to diagnose them. With this medical theatre, the concept of the social body as something that could be ill and tended to violence came more fully into view.

In Mary Poovey’s analysis, the ‘social body’ in early nineteenth-century Britain signalled at once the mass of poor people to be disciplined and cared for by generally well-meaning individuals who classed themselves as their social superiors; and the larger organic whole into which these poorer people were folded. The notion of a ‘social body’ suggested at once separation and sequestration; tending-towards (or caring for) and keeping at bay. The social body thus came to signify a space of cultivation, hovering between the unkempt organic state in which the sick and poor were understood normally to reside and the charitable structures of uplifting which new social policies and institutions increasingly engaged.

Describing this modern set of practices as a process of ‘disaggregation’, Poovey argues that the social body emerged discursively in the nineteenth century as a sphere separate from politics and economics; this set in motion a range of ideas designed to cultivate society as an organic entity abstracted from political or economic pressures.¹

The emergence of sociology in the early decades of the nineteenth century thus configured itself in terms of social disorder and care; with this, neurology, the new science of motion, described pathological movements among disorderly groups and individuals in isolation. The ‘social body’ emerged in the nineteenth century as a body liable to be diseased on account of its excess movements, which multiplied and intensified through processes of imitation exacerbated in groups. In less politically incendiary cases, the social choreography of disrepair revealed a regime of machinic efficiency against which bodies and minds reacted: individuals engaging in inane kinetic sport, either semi-involuntarily mimicking one another through the corporeal play of jerks and twitches or finding ludic routes of escape from otherwise boring or oppressive living and working conditions.

In some cases, eccentric bouts of religious enthusiasm served as a playground for kinetic agitation in gatherings as large and popular as their participants were corporeally—and affectively—transfixed. In America, where new utopianisms were seizing religious groups in what appeared to be a wave of religious frenzy, eruptive movements—including all sorts of spasmodic individual corporeality—passed ever more into the scientific limelight, articulated in crowd psychology, neurology, and epidemiology as nervous disorders.

‘ALL THE COUNTRY WAS IN COMMOTION’: THE ‘JERKS’ IN KENTUCKY AND TENNESSEE

The ‘jerks’ in Kentucky and Tennessee were a far cry from the psychopathological, criminal crowd behaviour described in early social psychology, according to which idle men and women—those not engaged in productive labour—were most liable to gather, agitate, and revolt, provoking no less, in Fournial’s terms, than civilization’s degenerate collapse.² Yet as in the case of the medieval and early modern dancers described in previous chapters, religious enthusiasts’ spectacular Anson Rabinbach, The Human Motor: Energy, Fatigue, and the Origins of Modernity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), 3.66. Poovey notes that the ‘social body’ is a nineteenth-century variation on the medieval concept of the body politic, transformed by early modern times into the body of councillors extending the king’s own body and eventually in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries into the mass of urban poor. Mary Poovey, Making a Social Body: British Cultural Formation, 1830-1864 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 7-8. 67. Poovey, Making a Social Body, 13. 68. In Fournial, Essai sur la psychologie des foules, 37. 126 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE displays of gregarious behavior came to be folded into medical literature on nervous dis- ease and nervous imitation, further extending epidemiological analyses of crowds and theatri- cal gesture. Felix Robertson wrote his M.D. thesis, An Essay on Chorea Sti Viti, at the College of Physicians of Philadelphia in 1805, capitalizing on his native knowledge of the American South to contribute a new case study to the European literature on chorea, which was becoming one of the most fashionable fields of medical study. His work on the ‘jerks’ in Kentucky, Virginia, and his home state, Tennessee, brought a new etio- logical perspective to Chorea Sancti Viti, empha- sizing the brain and nerves’ susceptibility to the influence of ‘external bodies’. Stimuli exercised on one person’s brain and nerves provoked mus- cular reactions characterized by a ‘sympathy of motion’, accounting for the epidemic spread of choreic affections. The mere presence of kinetic agitation in the public sphere increased the likelihood of fur- ther agitation, as people imitated other people’s movements. The impressions left on their nerv- ous systems provoked a motor response causing the spectators, as he called them, to reproduce any movements they observed, yielding a result not unlike, he mused, ‘the resemblance that often takes place between man and wife, a resemblance which, before their marriage, did not exist’.”” To avoid the pernicious effects of this ‘sympathy of motion’ when the movements performed were excessive or violent, as in the case of the ‘jerks’ at Methodist camp meetings, Robertson exhorted physicians to isolate patients as much as possible. Physicians should keep patients’ minds ‘occupied on new and agreeable sub- jects . .. which would best be done by travelling with an agreeable companion through a highly cultivated or wild romantic country’, and ‘visit- ing natural and artificial curiosities, particularly of the more sublime kind. By these means’, he added, ‘new trains of associate motions would be produced, which from their novelty, &c. might at length overcome those which produced the dis- ease, and the excitability of the brain would thus be expended’.” Simple exposure to fresh land- scapes provided stimulus enough for patients to encounter new—far more wholesome—objects and actions to emulate. The case study that formed the core of Robertson’s dissertation, enabling him to exam- ine this ‘sympathy of motion’ in some detail, was an outbreak of imitative movement that swept through the United States from Ohio to Kentucky, Tennessee, and parts of Virginia in 1799-1805, presenting, as he put it, an ‘unparal- leled blaze of enthusiastic religion’.”* Hundreds, and soon thousands, of men, women, and chil- dren had started to participate in camp meetings, outdoor religious services that lasted from four days to three or four weeks. Participants traveled to Robertson's essay on Chorea Sancti Viti, which he situates in a historical line with treatises on chorea. Babington includes a passage from Robertson's essay in "The Dancing Mania." Thomas B. Futcher (1905) also wrote about the dancing mania. Robertson cited the importance of isolation in containing the spread of chorea. Léon Babonneix also emphasized the importance of isolation. Robertson described the impact of chorea, citing Peter Cartwright's autobiography and works by Richard M'Nemar, J. B. McMaster, and Charles A. Johnson. These works highlighted the significance of the dance of St. Vitus and its impact on society. In his History of the Presbyterian Church in the state of Kentucky (1847), Rev. Robert Davidson (1808-1876) noted that attendance at these meetings was widespread, as "the labourer quit his task; age snatched his crutch; youth forgot his pastimes; the plough was left in the furrow; the deer enjoyed a respite from the mountains; business of all kinds was suspended; dwelling-houses were deserted; whole neighbourhoods were emptied; bold hunters, and sober matrons, young men, maidens, and little children, flocked to the common centre of attraction; every difficulty was surmounted, every risk ventured." The enthusiasm appeared so violently and wholly to possess participants' bodies and minds as to constitute in Robertson's view a religious epidemic: "The disease no sooner appeared than it spread, with rapidity, through the medium of the principle of imitation: thus it was not uncommon for an affected person to communicate it to a greater part of the crowd, who, from curiosity or other motives, had collected around him." Though at the time of Robertson's writing, the excitement was present in "almost every part of Tennessee and Kentucky, and in various parts of Virginia," it had died down and was thought "not to be so contagious (or readily communicated) as at its commencement." This suggested to him that predisposition to religious enthusiasm was a pre-requisite for the contagiousness to take effect. As it had abated, so too had the camp meetings.

However, the contagiousness that had been reported, and the violence of the gestures performed, spawned a host of medical theories linking imitation, contagion, and acute scenes of enthusiastic motility, constituting a whole literature on choreomania as social affect. David W. Yandell (1826-1898), professor of surgery at the University of Louisville, Kentucky, emphasized the gestures' communicability. Writing in Brain in 1881, he remarked that "the movement proved highly contagious and spread in all directions." In his view, this was, again following Robertson, a form of chorea, though in some cases it bore a strong resemblance to epilepsy and, in the majority of cases, hysteria, not least on account of its contagious aspect. It "was eminently sympathetic in its nature," Yandell wrote, "as has been so often remarked of these affections. The convulsions once started in a congregation spread quickly through it, until all the fit subjects were convulsed." He added that "repetition greatly increased the proneness to the disorder, which was invited by the masses on the supposition that it was a true religious exercise."

Clinical descriptions offered by Robertson and Yandell suggest a paroxysmic event, invariably involving a spiritual leader whose magnanimous oration and ostentatious demonstrations of his own states of excitement provoked followers into similar states. This was markedly different from previous clinical descriptions of epidemic choreas and other epidemic events, in which whole groups seemed spontaneously to rise up as if of their own accord, without a leader. "After a rousing appeal to the feelings of the listeners," wrote Yandell, "and especially during spirited singing, one and another in the audience would fall suddenly to the ground and swoon away. .. . Some fell suddenly as if struck by lightning, while others were seized with a universal tremor before they fell shrieking." Only a few excited individuals were needed to get the whole assembly going. See David W. Yandell, "Epidemic Convulsions," Brain 4.3 (1881): 339-350, 340-341. He writes that at a religious meeting in the courthouse in Knoxville, 150 people were reported by an eyewitness to have been "jerking" at one time. But elsewhere "the frenzy reached a greater height," so that "at a religious meeting in Kentucky, not less than three thousand persons fell in convulsions to the ground." He also notes one concourse at which twenty thousand people were said to have been in attendance (340), although Peter Cartwright cites as many as twenty-five thousand in his Autobiography. Cartwright also estimates that some camp meetings lasted for a few weeks at a time, with up to thirty or forty ministers from different denominations preaching in different parts of the camp simultaneously (43). "And here," writes Yandell, "were united all the elements best suited to stir the emotional nature of man, and to derange his nervous system".

EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE 

" Some symptoms seem to have provoked habituation, causing participants to "fall again under circumstances by no means exciting." Narration alone provoked paroxysms in the most unlikely (and often comical) circumstances: "women who had suffered repeat attacks sometimes fell from their horses" while relating their experiences and exercises to friends on their way to or from meeting-houses.* Some suffered from catalepsy—a suddenly rigid bodily state—lasting from a few minutes to two or three hours or, in extreme cases, up to a few days. As Yandell observed, drawing from eyewitness accounts, "others were violently convulsed as in hysteria or epilepsy, "wrought hard in fitful nervous agonies, the eyes rolling wildly". . . The extremities were cold; the face was pale or flushed, the breathing hard. Sensibility was annulled."** Extreme motion and extreme absence of motion equally characterized this apparently epidemic dancing disease. Strangest of all, eye-witnesses wrote, was when voluntary motion turned involuntary, so that actions commenced by choice came to be repeated as if automatic, producing an awkward sense of purposelessness and thus also of sheer theatre among those engaging in as well as viewing them. In Robertson's terms, participants "found themselves unable by voluntary efforts to suppress the contraction of their muscles, and to their own astonishment, and the diversion of many of the spectators, they continued to act from necessity the curious character which they had commenced from choice".** Contractions occurring primarily in the trunk and upper part of the body moreover made for a ridiculous countenance, resembling, Robertson put it, more a "live fish, when thrown on land, than any thing else to which I can compare them". 

To counter this mimetic return to an animal-like state, 'bodily exercises' were generated to discipline the participants, regularizing the wild and frantic gestures their enthusiasm compelled them to perform. This theatricalization of initially spontaneous exercises made for a ritual of imitation and counter-imitation and a codified set of games that gained the popularity of a new sport, viewed with a frisson from the medical trenches.

W. L. Sutton (1797-1862), in his 'Report on the Medical Topography and the Epidemic Diseases of Kentucky', published in Transactions of the American Medical Association (1858), described the 'jerks', 'or, as it has been called, epidemic epilepsy', in some detail. He noted that the 'Jerking Exercise' was the 'most common' and 'most remarkable form of these remarkable manifestations', first appearing in East Tennessee, 'where several hundred of both sexes were seized with this strange affection'. It 'soon became so common, and marked by such strongly-marked motions, as to give the generic name to all these extravagances'. Their 'first and most simple appearance consisted in quick and violent motions of the forearms', '[agitating] the whole body violently'. Alternately, muscles of the neck were affected, so that the head 'jerked right and left, with a force and velocity perfectly inconceivable; no feature could be distinguished'.

His account suggests familiarity with Robertson's dissertation and reliance on direct observation, coloured by his amazement at the spectacularity of the whole affair:

At the first twitch, the headdresses and combs of females would be thrown to a distance, and when the hair was long, it would snap and crack like a whip. This may seem to some incredible, but numbers, now alive, were old enough then to mark and remember the fact. At times, the muscles of the back would be affected, and then the subject would be thrown violently to the ground, and suffer the most violent contortions, graphically compared to the fluttering of a fish when thrown upon the ground. Again, the muscles of the whole body would be affected, and the person would be jerked to and fro, in all directions. All control of the muscles was lost, and he must necessarily go as he was driven, whether it was in a violent dash to the ground, or to hop round with the head, limbs, and trunk jerking in every direction, as if they must inevitably fly asunder. The bosom would heave violently, and the countenance become disgustingly distorted.

Rev. Richard M'Nemar (1770-1839), an eyewitness and participant in the camp meetings, provided a further account in The Kentucky Revival (1807), emphasizing the jerkers' rapid head movements and radical disfiguration: they appeared to be inebriated, possessed by a violent movement that threw them uncontrollably to the ground and propelled them in every direction. This was a dramatic performance of dangerous sport: 'nothing in nature could better represent this strange and unaccountable operation', he wrote, 'than for one to goad another, alternately on every side, with a piece of red-hot iron'. Engaging with increasingly frenetic enthusiasm in hopping, running, twitching, and tossing objects and bodies about, they 'bounced from place to place like a football', losing all motor control. It was 'no small wonder to spectators', he added, that they might 'escape without injury'. Rev. Peter Cartwright (1785-1872) noted in his Autobiography (1856) that 'persons taken with the jerks, to obtain relief... would rise up and dance. Some would run, but could not get away'. Those who resisted usually suffered from the jerks even more. Variations proliferated. The Rolling Exercise 'consisted in becoming violently prostrated and doubled, with the head and feet together, rolling over and over, like a wheel; or turning over and over sidewise, like a log'. It required intense physical exertion: 'the subject took a sudden start, and felt impelled to run at his greatest speed, as if engaged in a race, leaping over obstacles in his way, with surprising agility. This was continued until his strength was completely exhausted, when he fell down in a syncopal'. Finally, the Dancing Exercise emerged. Although it was not one of the original forms of 'bodily exercise', it had become a regular practice among Kentucky revivalists by the winter of 1805. Following the lead of a Mr. Thomson, they would 'go to dancing', as Sutton noted. Thomson was reported at the close of a camp meeting at Turtle Creek in 1804 to have 'gone to dancing, ... [continuing] this movement around the stand, in a regular manner for an hour or more, repeating in a low voice, all the time, "This is the Holy Ghost! Glory!"'. Offering writers a puzzling picture of kinetic prostration, delusion, and collective insanity, these religious enthusiasts appeared nonetheless to be having a raucous good time just as they were transfixed by the motions—and emotions—of their collective games. Like the Dancing Exercise, the Barking Exercise was a latecomer to the fad, consisting 'in the subject getting down on his hands and feet, and barking, snapping, and growling in a degree so natural as to deceive the unwary, unless they had their eyes directed to the spot whence the sounds proceeded. It may be difficult in ordinary times', wrote Sutton, 'to conceive how decent, respectable men could be induced to go through these extravagances'. Their mimetic return to animality was so genuine it 'looked strangely enough to see it done with the utmost solemnity'. But, Sutton argued, 'it would seem that no man could command his countenance, when he would hear these ejaculations interspersed with texts of Scripture: as, "Every knee shall bow—wow—wow; and every tongue shall confess." The Barking Exercise served as a culmination of all the others, so that even members of high society were possessed by this 'mortifying' fervor and barked. Barking might also lead to dancing, and vice versa, so that once a 'paroxysm had come on, and the will was powerless to arrest it', subjects could 'substitute other actions for the form with which he had been seized. Thus those who were invaded by the 'barking exercise' were usually able to change it into 'dancing!' 89. Sutton, 'Report on the Medical Topography'.

EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE

Yandell argued that 'some of the actors in these strange scenes' bordered on insanity. One participant related that 'while under conviction on account of his sins he went about the woods for two years, through rain and snow, "roaring, howling, praying, day and night."'*> Millennialist visions and trances seized thousands,* exacerbating the excitement already produced by this festive atmosphere, recalling for some observers, such as Robertson, the St. Vitus's dancers whose apocalyptic hallucinations and fits of syncope caused them to jerk and twitch, leaping over imagined rivers of blood (chapter 2). But to physicians reading the eyewitness reports, the fits of agitation and visions provided a theatre of observation in its own right: viewed from afar, these contorted figures had the appearance of persons possessed by a strange delirium doubling as a neuropathological condition foregrounding involuntary movement, and presenting all the difficulties of interpretation that any piece of theatre or literature might. In Sutton's terms, all had one thing in common: extravagance. These were reckless exercises performed without reason or restraint. The theatricality and baroqueness of the movements constituted their status as disease: they appeared superfluous, wasteful, luxurious, and irrational. Those engaging in them did so without reserve. This was why they were, he thought, potentially dangerous: together, these people exacerbated one another's motoric impulses, stimulated by sympathy and a kinetic contagiousness that spread uncurbed. Appropriately, the most commonly prescribed remedy against these fits of dancing, barking, jerking, falling, visions, and trances—besides Robertson's exhortation to isolation and sublime walks in the woods—was the exercise of moral discipline and fear. At a few of the congregations, including one led by Rev. Joseph Lyle in a sermon titled 'Order' in July 1803, threats to turn convulsive members out of doors succeeded in dampening down some of the frenetic activity, until it abated entirely." This proved to observers figuratively offstage that the movements were not literally contagious, not in a bacteriological sense, although members of the congregations excited one another so as to feel—and, significantly, look—as if these movements were spontaneous, automatic, and out of control. In Foucault's terms, a regime of discipline had gradually emerged over the course of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries aligning the individual, the subject and 'somatic singularity'; the individual was controlled through institutional mechanisms of punishment and an insidious system of normalizing checks and balances. But the medical literature on epidemic disorders of the nervous system also suggests a process of disindividuation that called for corporeal control just as it set aside the idea of the juridical or the individual—those Foucault claimed constituted 'Man' in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.°° Instead, epidemic madness and collective group behaviors suggested to writers a gregarious impulse at the heart of religious and social movements that warranted medical attention in its own right. The individual was not the only or even the prime subject of modern scientific debate; groups, and the many forms they could take, swarmed at the heart of modern concepts of energetic expenditure, affective belonging, and states of body and mind co-constituting the political subject, as well as its amorphous underclass, the ‘social body’. The movements of groups, and the choreographies defining these movements—triggered by leaders, and abated by sermons—revealed a disciplinary node con-joining medical, political, religious, social, and aesthetic figures in a modern state of being (and collective association) that enveloped the past into its folds. This collective figure appeared in social scientific literature as primitive and contemporary, animal and modern: moving groups offered insight into the workings of social life and the mechanisms of spontaneous human activity that were apparently moving its cogs.

Factories, convents, and schools proved key sites for the observation of pathological acts of sympathetic imitation, prompting a further explosion of medical literature drawing attention to the mechanistic responses of bodies to institutional settings. As Robertson and others noted, the human propensity to imitate motor behaviors sympathetically was not confined to large religious or political groups, although emotions were at a peak in those settings. A range of further cases offered opportunities for direct observation in confined spaces, where sympathy was even more liable to spread. ‘In the Pennsylvania Hospital’, Robertson wrote, ‘there occurred a few years since a... remarkable instance of ... [sympathy of motion]; an epileptic patient was brought into the house and was seized in the long room with a fit; and a number of convalescents having collected around him, several of them were in like manner, seized with convulsions’.1 In an episode reported from the Shetland Islands, a single epileptic seizure catalyzed a cluster of fits resembling it in form though not in substance: the imitators were not epileptic but seemed to have reproduced the epileptic seizure almost perfectly. Not only was the capacity for imitation noteworthy, but the convulsive nature of these gestures arrested physicians’ attention as well.10 One case, born, in its observers’ terms, from physically and morally oppressive working conditions, emerged in the context of a cotton manufactory at Hodden Bridge, Lancashire, reported in a 1787 issue of Gentleman’s Magazine. One young woman had—in jest—slipped a mouse into another one's shirt, knowing that the girl was terrified of mice. The latter 'was immediately thrown into a fit, and continued in it, with the most violent convulsions, for twenty-four hours'. The next day, three more girls were 'seized' in this way, and the next day six more. According to Hecker, who saw this as a case of morbid sympathy, the women were not predisposed to nervous disorders—they had not suffered any in the past—but the instinct of imitation provoked them to react to the first girl's convulsions with more of the same.

News spread, and now the sole idea that the cotton might be infected provoked yet more convulsions, among people not all of whom worked at this factory. The mere idea that the cotton might have been infected sufficed to set up to twenty-four people, mostly young women, into seizures, characterized by fits of anxiety, strangulation, and convulsions 'so violent as to last without any intermission from a quarter of an hour to twenty-four hours, and to require four or five persons to prevent the patients from tearing their hair and dashing their heads against the floor or walls'.

The initial reports had caused such alarm that the cotton mill was shut down, on the grounds that a disease might have been introduced into a bag of cotton.' A doctor was sent for, who administered electric shocks by way of a 'portable electric machine', which 'universally relieved' the patients, who were then enjoined to 'take a cheerful glass and join in a dance'; they returned to work the next day, with the exception of two or three, who were 'much weakened by their fits'.

In a rare moment of sympathy with the plight of these women—working women, in this case—Hecker attributed this episode to their 'miserable and confined life in the work-rooms of a spinning manufactory'. Although he also mused that this sort of situation was far less likely to produce convulsions than it was religious enthusiasm. The girls may have been bored.

In January 1801, a young woman visited a patient being treated for tetanic spasms at the Charité hospital in Berlin. Upon entering the ward, the woman suddenly 'fell down in strong convulsions', at the sight of which 'six other female patients immediately became affected in the same way, and by degrees eight more were in like manner attacked with strong convulsions'. Hecker argued that the women's behavior was comparable to that of a 'flock of sheep' and suggested that convulsions were signs of strong emotion: 'every species of enthusiasm', he wrote, 'every strong affection, every violent passion, may lead to convulsions—to mental disorders—to a concussion of the nerves, from the sensorium to the very finest extremities of the spinal cord. The whole world is full of examples of this afflicting state of turmoil, which, when the mind is carried away by the force of a sensual impression that destroys its freedom, is irresistibly propagated by imitation. Those who are thus infected do not spare even their own lives, but, as a hunted flock of sheep will follow their leader'.

Women were at the helm of a new feminized social sphere catalyzing volatile tendencies among bodies in public to move without the supposedly rational benefit of foresight. Imitation, widely construed in medical literature as an elemental component of social interaction and social life, also described a type of pathological contagion on the rise as urban centers and industrial labor were increasingly putting women (and men) in proximity with one another. Paris, in Laborde's terms, was the first true capital of the world, but it was also an agitated den teeming with perversions, ambitions, and madness.'

Durkheim argued in De la division du travail social [On the Division of Social Labor] (1893) that social solidarity was also on the rise as well following the Industrial Revolution, as was individual autonomy—and both were rising in tandem with broader negative and positive transformations of social relations resulting from the new division of social labor. This set of changes resulted in increased contact among strangers as well as a sense of social alienation, what Durkheim called anomie, a feeling of lawlessness which provoked crises and depressions among workers for whom the order of the world had become overturned.

In this context, the seeming rise of epidemic hysteria and convulsions revealed a rift: individual and collective bodies were rebelling, and the subjects' minds and bodies appeared disengaged. As a metaphor, the motor impulse coincided with a rise in mechanistic approaches to labor—allied with productivism—rendering women especially vulnerable. For the French polymath Emile Littré (1801-1891), St. Vitus's dance (which he equated with chorea) was a mental epidemic disorder propagated by motoric imitation.

August Hirsch (1817-1894), in his Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology (1886), described a hysterical outbreak 'of a religious kind' in Haute-Savoie in 1857, intimating that women, whom he considered more subject to imitation, were at once more animal, more 105. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 131. 106, Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 132. Félix Bricheteau reports a similar episode in ‘Relation d’une épidémie de chorée observée à Hépital Necker’, Archives générales de médecine 1 (1863): 433-447 and 532-549. 107. Laborde, Les hommes, 38. 108. Emile Durkheim, De la division du travail social, 8th ed. (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1967), xliii-xliv. 109. See also Durkheim’s study of anomie, specifically ‘anomic suicide’, in Le suicide (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2002), 264-311. For his indictment of Tarde’s concept of imitation as ‘contagion’, see esp. 108-117. 110. Sighele, La foule criminelle, 42. See Emile Littré, ‘Des grandes épidémies’, Revue des Deux-Mondes, 15 January 1836, reprinted in Emile Littré, Médecine et médecins (Paris: Didier, 1872), 1-40. Littré borrows liberally from Hecker's recently translated writing on the dancing mania and the Black Death, which he summarized in a book review published in the Gazette médicale de Paris (see chapter 1 here). See also Littré's detailed account in his Dictionnaire de médecine, de chirurgie, de pharmacie et des sciences qui s'y rapportent [Dictionary of Medicine, Surgery, Pharmacy, and Related Sciences]. Emile Littré, ‘Chorée’, Dictionnaire de médecine, de chirurgie, de pharmacie et des sciences qui s’y rattachent, 21st ed., ed. Gilbert Augustin (Paris: J.-B. Bailliére, 1905-1908), 313-315. Under the entry for 'Chorémanie', Littré refers the reader to 'Chorée', which he designates as its synonym (315). In the foundational Dictionnaire de la langue frangaise [Dictionary of the French Language], Littré offers brief entries for 'Chorée' and 'Chorémanie', though he notes them as synonyms only. Both designate an 'illness, also referred to as St. Vitus's dance [danse de St-Guy], consisting of continuous, irregular, and involuntary movements'. In Emile Littré, Dictionnaire de la langue frangaise, 4 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1873), vol. 1, 612. Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads + 133 machinic, and less well adapted to the strictures of a new mechanistic workplace, which favoured individualism just as it sought to break labour down into its component parts. Imitation was at the opposite end of individualism, dissolving it, reaggregating men and women into a social horde. The horde was in this sense understood as feminine and impulsive. Yet sympathetic behav- iours also revealed states of social solidarity and mutuality, discursively tied back in Hirsch's writ- ing, as in his contemporaries', to a pre-civilized state. Modernity and sociality seemed at once inextricably tied together and fundamentally incompatible. Attempts in the new social scien- tific fields to come to terms with motor impulses in groups and individuals persisted in describing restless states as ancient, feminine, and organic, revealing a pervasive prejudice according to which purportedly premodern beings sit closer on the biosocial scale to an automatic animal core. "WORKING THE BODY LIKE A MACHINE': COMIC ANTICS IN THE BACKWOODS What theorists of the 'mirror neuron' have observed, in______ 

For Rabinbach, social medicine and reform emerged in the last quarter of the nineteenth century to remedy new regimes of hyperproductivity entangled in a physiological discourse on energetic fatigue, signaling the converse of play. Workers engaged in too much work became sick with exhaustion and loss of vitality. Indeed, alongside the scientization of worker productivity (productivism), moments of idleness, boredom, and play arose as instances of archaic excess, a premodern vitality that had no more place in the normative sphere of overwork, whose disorder and disease paradoxically appeared as an excess of imitative gesture. Imitation thus worked doubly hard in the nineteenth century as a metaphor suggesting at once the breakdown of individuality and the human spectacle of mutuality in shared gestures that mechanically jolted workers out of their monotonous everyday—eruptions of premodern idle life onto the industrial stage. Imitation in this sense was experienced as pathological and entertaining, science and art. But most humorous was individual men and women's bodies' awkwardly attempting to mimic the jagged angularity and automatisms of the machine.

Amply theorized with regard to the cinematic representation of it by Charlie Chaplin (1889-1977) in Modern Times (1936), as Gordon has shown, automatic angularity had a far earlier start as a neurological disease allying boredom, monotony, involuntary gesture, and work. The neurologist George Beard (1839-1883), in an article published in the Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease in 1878, described a lumberjack community in the Moosehead Lake area of northern Maine, some of whose members, in response to a loud noise, sharp command, or 'startle', jumped suddenly and engaged in echolalia (the immediate and apparently meaningless repetition of someone else's words) and automatic obedience, performing actions such as hitting a close friend upon command or placing their hands in a fire. They could repeat lines from Virgil and jump off the ground, 'the height of the jump [being] proportional to the degree of unexpectedness of a startle'.1

Sighele called this 'psychic mimeticism', a neurosis. On Beard's work, see F. Andermann and E. Andermann, 'Startle Disorders of Man: Hyperekplexia, Jumping and Startle Epilepsy', Brain & Development 10.4 (1988): 213-222, 216-217; and FE. Andermann and E. Andermann, 'Hyperekplexia and Other Disorders of Startle: Differential Diagnosis with Epilepsy', in Peter W. Kaplan and Robert S. Fisher, eds., Imitators of Epilepsy, 2nd ed. (New York: Demos Medical, 2005), 185-190. On the neurophysiological triggering of various automatic behaviors, including startle, see also Devereux, 'Normal et anormal', 58-62. 

H. and J.-M. Saint-Hilaire and L. Granger, ‘related to the historically boring nature of life for lumberjacks in the forests of Québec and Maine, where jumpers provided a welcome distraction’. Neurologists Frederick and Eva Andermann further note that the jumpers themselves, and those watching them, laugh after being startled; ‘jumping provided a ready source of amusement in the lumber camps’. Beard was aware of the hereditary nature of the disease but, Andermann and Andermann note, ‘did not believe that the condition represented a “pathological nervous disease”; instead he considered it to be a “fixed psychological state” and “a remarkable illustration of the involuntary life.”’ A long day’s work in the logging camps prompted loggers to engage in ‘mutual tickling, punching, and startling of the fearful’, so that ‘this repeated horseplay’ led to jumping as ‘“probably an evolution of tickling.”’ Acts of automatic imitation offered participants a source of release from the boredom of everyday life. As Mary Merryweather (c. 1813-1880) noted in Experience of Factory Life (1862), she and her co-workers were often bored and sought socially sanctioned forms of relief: ‘when no other [excitement] was provided, religious enthusiasm would occasionally take its place’. Osler further argued that ‘the habit of working the body like a machine’, which was a product of the Industrial Revolution, led to a new concept of energy, including ‘energy depletion’ and fatigue, and concepts of stress. Yet jerking and ‘startle’ behaviors and acts of kinetically comical and excessive religious enthusiasm offered social solidarity as well as an occasion for recreation, often at the protagonist’s expense. De la Tourette, who translated Beard’s writing on startle disorders, argued in ‘Etude sur une affection nerveuse caractérisée par l’incoordination motrice accompagnée d’écholalie et de coprolalie’ [Study on a Nervous Affection Characterized by Motor Incoordination Accompanied by Echolalia and Coprolalia], in the Archives of Neurology (1884), that startle disorders, including miryachit (in Siberia) and latah (in Southeast Asia), presented a theatrical performance of motor actions and role play. Coprolalia (involuntary swearing) added a verbal dimension to these bodily acts. Transculturally and transhistorically, bodies in states of boredom performing automatic jumps and startles provided a spectacle to peers apparently suffering from a dearth of productivity—idleness understood in these terms to be pathological. Rabinbach suggests ‘idleness and savagery’ were widely viewed in the nineteenth century together, both equally F. C. Thorne, "Startle Neurosis," American Journal of Psychiatry 101 (1944): 105-109. The gradual disappearance of the jumping Frenchmen has been attributed to the reduction of boredom and isolation among modern lumberjacks (Howard and Ford, "From the Jumping Frenchmen of Maine," 704; Saint-Hilaire et al., "Jumping Frenchmen of Maine," 1269-1271). J. Hardison described a similarity to "goos-eyeness" in "Are the Jumping Frenchmen of Maine Goosey?" Journal of the American Medical Association 244 (1980): 70.


119. Gilles de la Tourette, "Etude sur une affection nerveuse caractérisée par I'incoordination motrice accompagnée d’écholalie et de coprolalie," Archives of Neurology 9 (1884): 19-42; 158-200. Andermann and Andermann, in "Startle Disorders of Man," draw comparisons between latah and jumping, underscoring the performative value of what neurolo- gist R. C. Simons calls "Role Latah," the last of three phases of latah: the three phases, Andermann and Andermann write, include "first, the immediate response, corresponding to excessive startle; second, the attention capture which corresponds Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads + 135 applicable to the degenerate, primitives, and the working classes.1”° Role play was not new and suggested the comedic interchangeability of individuals via the interplay of their gestures. Sydenham had noted the pantomimic—highly entertaining—quality of St. Vitus's dance in Schedula Monitoria (1686), in which he described involuntary actions resulting in an uncannily automatic performance, and thus comedy. "St. Vitus's dance shows itself by a halting, or rather an unsteady movement of one of the legs, which the patient drags," he wrote. "Then it is seen in the hand of the same side. The patient cannot keep it a moment in its place, whether he lay it upon his breast or any other part of his body. Do what he may it will be jerked elsewhere convulsively." This provoked entertainment for onlookers: "if any vessel filled with drink be put into his hand, before it reaches his mouth he will exhibit a thousand gesticulations like a mountebank. He holds the cup out straight, as if to move it to his mouth, but has his hand carried elsewhere by sudden jerks. Then, perhaps, he contrives to bring it to his mouth. If so, he will drink the liquid off at a gulp; just as if he were trying to amuse the spectators by his antics." The pantomimic aspect of the jerks and convulsions, further remarked upon by Dr. Alexander Tweedie (1794-1884) in A System of Practical Medicine. "This automatic mimesis accounted for the gestures' tendency to 'spread by contagion' or 'sympathy', through the involuntary movement of the sympathetic nervous system. This was a social theatre of jerks, convulsions, and twitches, translated into medical terms; it defined the new field of social epidemiology, in which ambivalent forms of motor contagion and ostensibly benign social play were described as pathological events.

From a social and affective standpoint, the lumberjacks' horseplay may have troubled some of those suffering from startle, who would have been ostracized; so, too, those performing sharp, involuntary gestures may have unwillingly amused their witnesses, in the cases of St. Vitus's dance that Sydenham describes. Involuntary gestures were comical to spectators, belying a fear of social contagiousness, motor dysfunction, and loss of control. Bergson, Tarde's successor at the Collége de France in 1904, wrote that broken, awkward bodies, subject to mishaps—trips, falls, burps, and farts—are humorous, comic bodies, as opposed to nearly abstract the body of the tragic actor, who does not sit, for fear of drawing attention to corporeal vulnerabilities. The humour involved in comedy is that which draws attention to the mechanical, even mechanistic quality of a body that can fall apart.'

Taken in this light, choreomania appeared to signal the subversively comic to expletive, echopraxia and automatic obedience. The third component, according to Simons, they write, is '“Role Latah", consisting of an elaboration of some of the responses into intentionally amusing performances. This may be an important component of this disorder in Imu, the Ainu equivalent of latah, where affected individuals attend special functions expecting to 'perform.' But, they add that this 'willingness to perform is not a feature of jumping, which is considered a handicap and a disability in North American society' (219). See R. C. Simons, 'The Resolution of the Latah Paradox', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 168.4 (1980): 195-206.

136 «+ EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE potential of clumsily moving bodies to contagion one another and thus to assail the social whole. PRIMITIVISM, FASCISM, AND THE ‘BIOLOGIC CORE’ Increasing distinctions at the turn of the twen- tieth century between contagion, suggestion, and imitation revealed the continued growth of scientific interest in these fields as ideas about—and practices harnessing—social bodies became ever more powerfully aligned with the efficient workings of nation states. As the chief physician at the Asiles de la Seine, Dr. Auguste Vigouroux (1866-1918), and Dr. Paul Juquelier (1876-1921), professor of clinical medicine at the Faculté de Médecine in Paris, wrote in La contagion mentale [Mental Contagion] (1905), experimental psychology in the early twentieth century used ‘contagion’ metaphorically to dis- cuss cases of mental contamination or infection not literally caused by germs. But this type of contagion was a variant of (and to be differen- tiated from) ‘imitation’, inasmuch as ‘mental contagion’ was involuntary. It also differed from ‘suggestion’ (in the old sense of Mesmerism, or hypnosis), whose effects may emerge over time. Mental contagion was, in contrast, they argued, always spontaneous.' As they put it, it was the pathological transmission of an element or agent—not exactly microbial—whose effects on the person ‘contagioned’ by the ‘contagioner’ were immediate, involuntary, and irresistible. ‘Mental’ (or ‘psychic’) qualities were a function of the cerebrospinal axis, so that ‘contagion- ers’ could affect the physical reflexes, voluntary movements, and emotional states, as well as the ideas and beliefs, of others.1*° But although the metaphorical use of con- tagion, suggestion, imitation, and sympathy to describe crowd movements was becoming popu- lar among some psychologists, sociologists, and other medical and social scientific writers by the early twentieth century, others still used these terms to denote physical or biological hierar- chies across cultures, setting those who were purportedly lowest on the evolutionary scale as those most prone to various types of mimesis. E. M. Davenport (1866-1956), in his work of religious and social anthropology Primitive Traits in Religious Revivals (1905), argued that ‘nervous instability’ was ‘a normal characteristic of primi- tive man’, appearing among northern Siberian tribes, North American Indians, and others.1”° ‘Likeminded people are those whose mental and nervous organizations respond in like ways to the same stimuli’, Davenport argued. “They might conceivably respond unconsciously to the same stimuli, as animals do’, in which case ‘we should . . . call them instinctively likeminded’. But, such a ‘low scale of human development’ being unlikely, ‘sympathetic likemindedness’ more accurately described the mental characteristics of people acting under the influence of suggestibility, imitativeness, imagination, and heightened emotion. These traits, which he deemed ‘exceedingly primitive’ and ‘probably universal’, were responsible for ‘impulsive social action’ exercised primarily among people ‘who have least inhibitory control’. A population ‘under control’ was, conversely, one in which these tendencies were in check; and in which ‘we have deliberation and public opinion and social evolution rather than revolution’.”

Supposedly, primitive people—not only in the past but in the present as well—were not only more prone to impulses leading to acts of sympathetic contagion but also on that account more liable to engage in spontaneous acts of social rebellion and political revolt. As theories of crowds and mobs, masses and publics, came to be developed more systematically in the 1910s and 1920s in works of social psychology by E. A. Ross (1866-1951) and others linking democratic and social democratic movements to biologically conceived public life, so too interest in crazes, fads, fashions, and the aesthetic structures of nation states gained greater sway.

See Ross, Social Psychology; and Wilfred Trotter, Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1916), influenced by Le Bon. The frequent reprinting of Mackay’s Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds at the start of the twentieth century suggests its continued influence in those years. Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads + 137 social theorist Wilhelm Reich (1897-1957) took this further: fascism, which his ‘medical experiences [as a physician] with men and women of various classes, races, nations, religious beliefs, etc.’ taught him penetrates the ‘biologic core’, ‘relies . . . on the mystical thinking and sentiments of the masses’.

It could be fought ‘only if . . . the mystical contagion of the masses is tackled through education and hygiene’. The social-psychological disease he was describing, a disease of ‘all the irrational reactions of the average human character’, took physical and mental order, contagion, imitation, and sympathy to the 1930s world of over-mechanization and ‘biologic rigidity’. People engaged in mundane, mechanical work, detached from their natural, biological needs, including sexual health and gratification (what he called the ‘function of orgasm’), yielded a ‘sick society’. Depersonalization and dissociation from the biologic core resulted not only in fascism but the inhibited, miserable, and angry mysticism of the masses. A renewed sex-economy, for Reich, would liberate society from the enclosure of the past. In the 1960s, Canetti's writings described a renewed taxonomy of crowds, including the masse de fête, a celebratory gathering marked by joy, vitality, and gregariousness. The masse de fête was also marked by repetition, linking pastness and futurity, bringing individuals together in a celebration that promised further fêtes to come. These fêtes allowed for the public performance of play and the corporeal show of solidarity, serving as grounds for the constitution of a living political arena that allowed for insubordination and vivacity.

The next chapter turns to the emergence of neurology as a science of movement, recuperating ancient figures into a modern clinical setting. Charcot and his collaborators practiced "retrospective medicine," informed by visual and narrative montage. They read scenes from the past as scenes of hysteroepilepsy and hysteria, chorea and choreomania. This comparative exercise led to the pursuit of comparative work outside hospital walls, seeking modern-day remains of choreomania in neighboring Luxembourg. With Meige, the shift to an ethnographic method gave way to a flurry of further sightings of "choreomania" in the colonial world.

This chapter considers ‘hysteria’ as a concept suffusing modern scientific writing on the dancing disease, considered in this respect as a disorder of illegibility and concomitantly of scientific articulation. Scientists—neurologists, in particular—explain the inexplicably gesticulating body by resorting to comparison and historical artifact, which illustrate the contemporary body in distress by juxtaposing it to past and foreign forms. Without ever being entirely explained, the ‘hysterical’ body becomes science’s site of greatest articulation: the fitful body serves as a litmus test for modern science’s capacity to account for hermeneutically impenetrable figures and events. And this occurs through a process of stylized, dramatic, and richly illustrated narration.

Neurology, as modern science’s arguably most interdisciplinary discipline to emerge in the nineteenth century, draws from history and art history, illustration, psychiatry, epidemiology, and other fields to inscribe erratic gestures into new systems of thought in which these gestures achieve a recognizable, patterned status. Irregular gestures and poses become recognizably abnormal forms that can be treated; and they do so inasmuch as they are convincingly mapped onto historical precedent. Repetition—repeatability—and, in this sense, theatre become the mode by which neurology enters scientific modernity. Hysterical gestures are understood inasmuch as they reproduce poses culled from the annals of the past. History becomes a measure of universality; and science becomes itself, in its purported universalism, through the (semi-choreographed) bodily representation of past forms.

This chapter then moves chronologically through modern neurology’s imaginaries—its ways of seeing antiquity first in ancient artifacts, then more recent but still past cultural narratives; and finally in the clinic, and further afield, outside hospital walls. In all these instances, neurology construes itself as a science paradoxically finding, remembering, and knowing the present by way of an excavated past. This variation on the old Platonic principle—by which knowledge is remembrance—imagines modern science as an art of repetition, in short as theater. Modern neurology, from the late nineteenth century, emerges as a science steeped in humanistic methods, foregrounding narrative, anecdote, ekphrasis (the description of images and scenes), performance, and reperformance. Neurology sees and does gestural reprise. Scientificity, then, appears in the nineteenth century as a method connecting contemporary corporealities and past expressions of these corporealities, in short, as a way of reading bodily history through choreographic congruences.

These congruences emerge in the neurology clinic in terms of patients’ apparent echoing ways of moving their limbs with visual and narrative depictions of motion and gesture highlighted in literature and visual arts by Charcot and his team. This slightly recasts what Lepecki has described as dance’s special way of archiving movement through choreographic redos and re-enactments, which remember and preserve—but also transform—dance and bodily practices in and through dancers’ bodies.

So whereas Lepecki sees current dance practice’s ‘will to archive’ as a method for understanding dance history through dancers’ bodies in choreographic reprises and homages, neurologists in this chapter read patients’ movements and subtly instruct their bodies. This instruction maps patient gestures onto an excavated corporeal and choreographic history folded retrospectively into a neurological core. Neurology patients, in other words, seemingly involuntarily repeat choreic, hysteric, or epileptic movements without an origin; they appear to reveal a phantasmatic meeting point between their own supposed disorders and the visual or historical depictions of similar movements their physician directors endeavour to replicate in their patients.

These congruences, echoes, and repetitions provide a false sense of evidence of rise in studies of hysteria across disciplines—what he semi-jokingly terms New Hystericism (3-18). Micale offers a useful review of scholarly literature in Approaching Hysteria, 33-107, arguing that the ‘first attempts to set down in a systematic fashion the intellectual history of hysteria’ date from between 1890 and 1910, with the work of Charcot's students, Gilles de la Tourette in particular (33-34).

Lepecki, “The Body as Archive.” 140 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE the universality and scientific validity of these gestures—the arched back, the cross shape—which come to appear dramatically as neurological diseases, though the gestures themselves are neither entirely confirmed nor newly created in this exercise of juxtaposition. As Foucault argues of madness, discourse creates something out of a chasm, an absence, an unarticulated complex of experiences; makes a concept and singularity out of and around myriad things. Neurology produces an imagined relationship between current and older movements, finding resonances, but also finally revealing an empty middle, a fantastical conjuration—rather than a ‘will to archive’, what we might call a ‘will merely to repeat’. Modern neurology in this sense approximates what Rebecca Schneider has influentially described as ‘re-enactment’, whereby present performances of seemingly authentic actions do not just copy something prior but become entangled in a thick knot of doublings, false originals, and their equally (un)original reproductions. The ‘temporal tangle’ that results from this perpetual redoing suggests a porous relationship between the present and the past, in which neither is quite separated from the other: the present does not sit outside of and return to the past, nor is the past entirely separated from the present. Rather, what Schneider, following Elizabeth Freeman, calls ‘temporal drag’ suggests ‘pastness—. . . on the move’: pastness that does not stay fixed but enacts what Freeman describes as ‘temporal transitivity’, a sort of constant becoming-other that requires the flitting and fleeting motion of a temporal to and fro.° Temporal ambiguity, including as regards ‘origins’, suggests a choreographic motion that does not just reveal history’s fits and fainting spells, moments of (historical) intensity that gather and dissipate, but the hopping, skipping, and jumping motion—the lateral, diagonal, or zigzag move—of ideas and bodies across time, revealing that ‘history’ is never linear; nor is it ever entirely ‘past’. ‘History’, Schneider writes, ‘remains before us’.

In Charcot's clinic, history remains in the hysteric's body, whose forms Charcot takes it upon himself to describe, rechoreograph, and recode. Hysteroepilepsy, in Charcot's formulation, serves as a privileged site for tapping into past somatic manifestations: figures and scenes of antiquity remerging in present-day hospital settings. The past, in this view, is saturated with hysteroepileptic events, represented in and re-enacted by modern hysteroepileptic bodies. The past emerges as an antediluvian force rippling through the archaeological layers of urban civilization and modern bourgeois life. The past operates contrapuntally in the present as ‘archival drag’—performance theorist David Roman's term, after Freeman, reprised by Schneider, to describe the process of ‘dragging’ images, myths, statues, into the present in tableaux vivants that enact ‘still-ness’: a quality of being still here—or still there;* still in a ‘temporal drag’ between archive and performance.

This chapter then draws a number of strands together, performing a hinge function in the narrative of this book, centered on Charcot and the journeys (the choreography) of his ideas through various roots and routes—which subsequent chapters will explore in Madagascar and beyond. Framed by Charcot and his collaborators' historiographic and iconographic experiments at the Salpétriére, particularly their exercises in visual and historiographic montage, the chapter also returns to the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, who for Charcot represented a prior order of bodily fits and starts that prefigured those of his patients. The chapter shows that Charcot's comparison of the Convulsionaries' attitudes with attitudes he observed firsthand among his patients at the Salpétriére inspired at least one student, Meige, to seek further evidence of hysteroepilepsy outside the hospital's walls. The passage (or translatio) from historiographic and clinical exercise to fieldwork thus, with Meige's itinerant adventure, comes into fuller view, articulating the move this book highlights from a broadly medical to an anthropological field of observation, whereby the dancing disease becomes, by the early twentieth century, a disorder of (predominantly racialized) national and ethnographic ‘culture’. 8. Schneider, Performing Remains, 75. RETROSPECTIVE MEDICINE: ST. VITUS’S DANCE AS HISTORICAL ANTECEDENT

In his Etudes sur l'hystéro-épilepsie, ou Grande Hystérie (1881), Richer, the French neurologist and visual artist and a former student of Charcot, offered a hundred-page addendum to his study, titled ‘Historical Notes’, in which he performed a review of the medical and non-medical literature on hysteria. He was practicing what he called ‘médecine rétrospective’, drawing from artefacts, images, and historical narratives to demonstrate the historicity of contemporary clinical events. In doing so, he revealed the burgeoning field of neurology as a product of nineteenth-century historicism—travelling across eras—and comparativism, travelling across geographic sites and disciplines, to forge new ways of seeing bodily fits.

Referring to works ranging from Calmeil’s De la folie (1845) to Littré’s ‘Un fragment de médecine rétrospective’ in La philosophie positive (1869), ‘Des rapports entre l’hystérie et les affections convulsives épi-demic liées à la folie religieuse, comme la possession, les manifestations des convulsionnaires’ by Theodor Valentiner (1854-1913), in Le mouvement médical (1872), and Charcot’s own Lecours sur les maladies du système nerveux (1872-1883) delivered at the Salpétrière in the 1870s and 1880s, Richer outlined historical precedents of clinical cases that were defining the new neurological field of hysteroepilepsy: a type of hysteria resembling epilepsy in its choreography (its bodily attitudes) only.

Richer’s approach, informed by Charcot’s studies, reconsidered broadly held notions that dance maniacs were in some cases actually epileptic. Hecker had written: ‘where the disease was completely developed, the attack commenced with epileptic convulsions’: ‘those affected fell to the ground senseless, panting and labouring for breath. They foamed at the mouth, and suddenly springing up began their dance amidst strange contortions’. Epilepsy, like many other neurological conditions, was still poorly understood; and the retrospective comparisons that Richer and Charcot outlined between hysteria, epilepsy and chorea sought not only to lift prior bodily forms and mental states out of religious art into medicine but also to attempt to clarify the complex space of interchange between imagination and fitful bodily movement. This ‘retrospective’ gesture reinscribed the extended history of fitful movement disorders into a new drama of hysteroepileptic diagnosis, a disease category broadly described by Charcot in terms of epileptiform movements provoked not by organic but by ‘hysterical’ (non-organic) causes.

The range of conditions Charcot considered hysterogenic was enormous. In his work with Richer, Charcot described hysteroepileptic phenomena including religious ecstasies; demonic possession, satanism, and witchcraft; psychic contagion; catatonic states, spasms, paralyses, and contractions; and benign popular traditions. In drawing together this dizzying array of somatic behaviors, Charcot and Richer were effectively claiming nearly all of human Richer was a professor of artistic anatomy at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. On Charcot’s use of visual art in his research, see esp. Christopher G. Goetz, ‘Visual Art in the Neurologic Career of Jean-Martin Charcot’, Archives of Neurology 48.4 (1991): 421-425. Goetz argues that ‘art . .. misguided Charcot’s career when he relied heavily on artwork in his attempt to convince critics that disorders seen at the Salpétriére Hospital, Paris, France, were independent of his suggestive influence’ (421). Goetz also notes Charcot’s lifelong attraction to art and early dream of becoming a visual artist before deciding on a medical career; this led him to seek to ‘justify scientific credibility through art’, earning him a reputation as a ‘multitalented and culturally sophisticated man’ and drawing to him an audience of artists and philosophers. See also Christopher G. Goetz, ‘Shakespeare in Charcot’s Neurologic Teaching’, Archives of Neurology 45.8 (1988): 920-921; Christopher G. Goetz, Michel Bonduelle, and Toby Gelfand, Charcot: Constructing Neurology (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995); Rhona Justice-Malloy, ‘Charcot and the Theatre of Hysteria’, Journal of Popular Culture 28.4 (1995): 133-138; Sigrid Schade, ‘Charcot and the Spectacle of the Hysterical Body: The “Pathos Formula” as an Aesthetic Staging of Psychiatric Discourse: A Blind Spot in the Reception of Warburg’, Art History 18.4 (1995): 499-517; Sander L. Gilman, “The Image of the Hysteric’, in Gilman et al., Hysteria beyond Freud, 345-436; and Sander L. Gilman, Seeing the Insane: A Cultural History of Madness and Art in the Western World (New York: Wiley, 1982).

EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE history as precedent for hysteroepilepsy. The new field of neurology was construing itself as a brazenly all-encompassing answer to religious and spiritual paroxysms from across historical eras, transcending historicism to arrive at a universal scientific field. As Richer wrote, ‘why should it be a cause for surprise that in periods of great exaltation, religious excitement pro- voked reactions of the nervous system which, in the end, resulted in the grande hystérie!" In their view, these reactions had simply not been recognized or diagnosed properly before. Paroxysmic types of religious enthusiasm were, for Charcot, Richer, de la Tourette, Regnard, Désiré-Magloire Bourneville (1840-1909), and others, actually nervous conditions triggered by hysteria. In effect, these bodily attitudes were, they thought, hysteriform phenomena (phenomena taking the form of hysteria) only now diagnosed but ancient in their expression. The possibilities afforded neurologists’ historiographic studies were nearly boundless: from prehistoric figurines and Greek vase paintings to friezes, caricatures, ivory plates, tapestries, engravings, miniatures, and the authors’ own photographic service at the Salpétriére, the world seemed to be filled with precedents for hysteroepile______ Bacchic orgies, zealous divination ceremonies, the rites of the cult of Dionysus with their noisy cortege of Maenads and Satyrs, the dancing mania (‘dansomanie’) also called St. Vitus’s dance (‘danse de Saint Guy’) in Germany and tarantism in Italy, etc. (fig. 6.1).1°

The ‘etc.’ is significant: the list presupposes continuity between these phenomena as well as the self-evidence of their similarity. This was a list to which readers might, the ‘etc.’ implied, add. The contours of demoniacal complaints appeared in Richer’s depiction as received knowledge—denoted by the list of cases inviting further additions and comparisons—yet this was also modern science at the cutting edge of a new field. Those who had been possessed could be wrapped into the relatively—it seemed to Richer—self-explanatory purview of historical cases now cast as ‘pure pathology’. Comparison between eras enabled Richer to extend the scope of his visual project and situate the newly named hysteroepilepsy within the broader framework of human history. As he noted, ‘the analogies . . . between ancient convulsive epidemics and the grande hystérie that we observe sporadically today are founded in the same type of nervous contagion that we have demonstrated among hysterics, and on comparable symptomatic manifestations’.

The analogy between ‘ancient convulsive epidemics’ and clinical studies enabled him to abstract from each on the basis of apparent visual and morphological similarity: proof was in the image and choreography of bodies on the page. This is not to say that there were not also movement disorders in the past—seizures, contractions, paralyses, falls—but that the overwhelming concatenation of all these gestures into a neurological fold pathologized a far greater range of events than merited it. Richer’s recuperation of ancient figures into modern diagnoses allowed him to map out an expansive neurological terrain according to which nearly every ecstatic dance or village féte was an expression of an organic (neurological) disorder. This exuberant comparativism arguably over-recuperated the complex corporeal and spiritual past into the domain of modern medical science, a field far more expansive, heterogeneous, and humanistic in its reliance on visual art, theatre, and anecdote than the myth of scientific objectivism—and ahistoricism—allows.

Neurology was, Richer claimed, engaging in a historiographic method, retrospective medicine, looking back to the past and drawing from its iconographic sources to explain and supplement phenomena witnessed presently in the neurology clinic. The method was enabled by Richer’s own visual arts training in human anatomy, which allowed him to depict and describe graphic and postural similarities between subjects: among them, the famous attitudes passionnelles, the dramatic postures Charcot described as gracing the crowning stage of a hysteroepileptic seizure, including the hysterical arc de cercle.12

But as Hacking notes, retrospective diagnosis frequently misconstrues personalities, events, and their interrelations, leading to a reified view of the past and present. Richer’s visual method, while innovative, risked falling into the trap of anachronism, reading the past through the lens of the present, and vice versa. Médecine Rétrospective + 143
FIG. 93. — MENADE EN ETAT DE CRISE. (Fragment d'une peinture sur vase.) FIGURE 6.1 New York Academy of Medicine Library.

Disease, which we may understand as an abnormal state of bodily or mental suffering and even, with Canguilhem, organic degeneration tending to an abnormally rapid movement towards death, is historically and socially constituted. Canguilhem notes that disease refers to that which comes to be construed as abnormal, non-normative, in a given culture; and this can include something as basic and in many respects natural and normal as dying.

Neurology, as a modern science, deliberately takes as its subject forms of life which in earlier times may not have constituted diseased states but which neurologists recast as such: epileptic seizures, long associated with shamanic visions, only come to be seen and lived as forms of suffering to be treated (even eliminated) inasmuch as individuals come socially and culturally to be unable to participate in the everyday structures of economic and political life, rendering their conditions widely experienced as undesirable.

This is not to say that all disease is only socially or historically constructed, or that there are no transhistorical and transcultural events that can be recognized to be similar (even identical); but that states of being have histories as disorders—ways of moving, speaking, or feeling that run counter to current cultural norms. Dancing manias similarly emerge in the nineteenth century as diseases because present bodily forms are compared to ancient ones, in a juxtaposition that reads both in pathological terms.

For Richer, the grounds for comparison across cases of 'hysteroepilepsy' were various. Choreomania in the Middle Ages, epidemics of 'demoniacal possession', the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, and ecstatics were among the myriad hysteroepileptics he depicted. In Les démoniaques dans lart, he and Charcot began their graphic journey with an image of Jesus curing a possessed man in a fifth-century mosaic in Ravenna, before passing to further images of Jesus and a cast of saints, including Saint Catherine of Sienna delivering a possessed woman, in a late sixteenth- or early seventeenth-century fresco by Francesco Vanni (1563-1610). Saint Ignacio likewise delivered a swarming cast of demoniacs of their possession in a painting by Peter Paul Rubens (1577-1640). Nearly all the images involved a saint's intercession and the performance of a cure, to which Charcot as healer would inevitably be compared—by visual analogy, though never by explicit reference.

Charcot himself was first struck by the visual similarity between these depictions and the gestures and contortions of his own patients in a visit to the church of Saint-Ambroise in Génes. As Richer, who was his intern at the time and on the visit with him, reports, Charcot was struck by the 'spectacle' (‘spectacle’), literally the theatre that a possessed woman presented, in a painting by Rubens he saw at the church. For Charcot, this painting presented a scene, a ‘tableau’ ‘crying out with truth and, it seemed, borrowing brushstroke by brushstroke from the convulsive scenes occurring daily in his practice at the Salpétrière.’1 Thus began their odyssey, dedicated, in Richer’s words, to Apollo, god of medicine and art.19 Soon enough, their adventure would encompass multiple volumes of large-format depictions of various ecstasies culled from the past. Charcot and Richer did not rely on visual comparison only; narrative histories further grounded their case studies in an appeal to antiquity, reconfigured through the lens of modern medicine. Their recuperation of ancient historical sources was nearly boundless. Significantly, their use of prior medical literature included not only Calmeil’s psychiatric studies, but Hecker’s writings on St. Vitus’s dance and on the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard. Hecker’s essay ‘The Dancing Mania’, translated into French by Dubois in the Annales d’hygiène et de médecine légale in 1834, provided vivid narrative precedents to the sorts of convulsive events Charcot and Richer saw in early European history. In a way, Charcot and Richer thought, these characters were all demoniacs: jerking, twisting, and bending their bodies, performing obscure spasms and re-enacting ancient convulsive pos- tures; often, they thought, these ‘demoniacs’ merely indulged in theatrical posturing.1In that sense, Charcot and Richer argued, the ‘demoni- acs’ were hysterical: possessed by overly active imaginations. Contemporary histories of the pilgrimage to Echternach and word of mouth on the part of a contemporary judge helped Charcot and Richer complete the cursory picture of medieval ‘possession’ to which contemporary hystero- epileptics were still, in their view, subjected.1 Further visual sources serving as evidence of these recuperations of the past in present hystero- epileptic forms were suggested to them by a Florentine colleague, Dr. Tommaso-Tommasi, to whom they give thanks throughout the pages of Les démoniaques dans lart, as well as by various other writers who joined in this grand project of iconographic and historiographical collage.18 As an exercise in amateur art historiography, Charcot and Richer’s full-colour, large-format compilations presented a baffling array of bodily contortions, ecstasies, and exorcisms, each per- forming a theatre of transport and distress. Page after page, each event seemed at once more extra- ordinary and more banal than the next. In Les 18. Richer, Lart et la médecine, 3-4. 19. Richer, Lart et la médecine, 3. 20. Hecker, ‘Mémoire sur la chorée épidémique du moyen Age’. See Richer, Etudes sur 'hystéro-épilepsie, 617-621, and Jean- Martin Charcot, Euvres completes: 1, Lecons sur les maladies du systéme nerveux, ed. Désiré Magloire Bourneville, 1 vol. (Paris: Bureaux du progrés médical, 1892), 336-337. In Calmeil’s words, Convulsionaries were prone to ‘ecstato-convulsive theomania’, not quite a hysteroepileptic diagnosis but a psychiatric descriptor that roughly fit the bill. See Calmeil, De la folie, vol. 2, 314. Also in Maire, ed., Les convulsionnaires de Saint-Médard, 241. 21. In a long footnote to the brief section on the St. Vitus’s dancers, Charcot and Richer give thanks to M. Majerus, a judge in Luxembourg, for his firsthand account of the dancing procession, which involved thousands of pilgrims gathering outside Echternach, before proceeding into town, according to a well-defined and rhythmically regulated hopping pattern: three hops forward and one______ In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 36n1. 22. In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 12. Médecine Rétrospective + 145 difformes et les malades dans l'art [The Misshapen and Diseased in Art] (1889), Charcot and Richer compiled images of lepers, syphilitics, idiots, dwarves, and other ‘grotesque’ characters— including the dead—depicted in sumptuous, religious, and lay iconography, echoing case studies in the Salpétriére clinic.”* Implicitly performing a comparative analysis, they juxtaposed visual images from the annals of art and church history, only slightly glossed—a paragraph or two for each—enough to draw each back, ‘again and again’, as Schneider suggests theatrical re-enactment and archival drag do,” to the grande attaque hystérique, the great hysterical attack. The grande attaque’s contours would then become apparent to readers through this exercise of repetition and juxtaposition. Repetition—and here recuperation—would make the grande attaque emerge as a distinct figure encompassing nearly all of the body’s paroxysmal and convulsive movements. Charcot and Richer’s iconographic collage and clinical re-enactments (staged ‘again and again’), offered a choreographic spectacle of the body in distress, stage-managed by a small group of scientific mages. As Charcot and Richer wrote of the ‘epidemic of convulsions’ at Saint-Médard, convulsions constituted a ‘theatre’ exhorting all in attendance to recognize the power and proof—the evidence— of religion,” just as Charcot and Richer would, implicitly, through their works, exhort their own readers to recognize the new neurological science’s historicity: its place in the annals of saintly exorcism, now sanctioned and verified by experimental research. Didi-Huberman has argued that the photographic work of image-making at the Salpétriére provided a theatre of hysteria in which patients staged themselves for their master, Charcot.”° But Charcot and Richer’s encyclopedic exploration of figures of contortion and pain also reveals a historiographical methodology casting the new in light of continual returns to the old. This was a theatre of transformation, a mystical exercise infusing contem- porary models with ancient art. The theatrical method forged, as much as it observed, hysteria and specifically hysteroepilepsy as an exercise in repetition with a slight measure of difference. This was science not as novelty but as theatre— performing a return, with difference (‘again and again’), to the past.

THE EVIDENCE OF IMAGES: HYSTEROEPILEPSY AND ICONOGRAPHIC ILLUSTRATION

In Les démoniaques dans l'art (1887), Charcot and Richer collected visual and historical materials pertaining to ‘demoniacal possession’ to showcase examples of hysteroepilepsy in history. These episodes, which involved convulsions and often tympany were, they argued, forms of hysteria, a broadly psychosomatic condition whose contours they were seeking to describe. Unlike previous definitions of hysteria, such as those articulated by Hecker, theirs emphasized individual predispositions to act out according to highly patterned and predictable corporeal forms, rather than the excited, often religiously stimulated life of groups. Hysteroepilepsy resembled epilepsy inasmuch as it involved falls or swooning. As Charcot and Richer noted of an image depicting a procession of dancers in Echternach, ‘it is quite easy immediately to recognize the role hysteria and hysteroepilepsy play in this case, as in the epidemics themselves’. ”They were referring to what may be the most often reproduced visual ‘evidence’ of dance manias, an image also frequently cast as an example of an epileptic procession, furthering the confusion between epilepsy, hysteroepilepsy, and dancing manias. This was an illustration now attributed to Pieter Bruegel the Younger (c. 1564-1637),”® reproduced in a nineteenth-century woodcut by Jean-Nicholas Huyot (1780-1840), depicting what is plausibly a procession of persons 23. Charcot and Richer, Les difformes et les malades dans Vart, i. 24. Schneider, Performing Remains, 6, 18-19. 25. In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 85. 26. Georges Didi-Huberman, Invention of Hysteria: Charcot and the photographic iconography of the Salpétriére, trans. Alisa Hartz (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003). 27. ‘Ilest facile, en effet, d’y reconnaitre 4 premiére vue que hystérie et l’hystéro-épilepsie jouaient la, comme elles font fait dans les épidémies proprement dites, un rdle prédominant’. Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 35. 28. This is by far the image most widely, if not the only one, used to represent St. Vitus’s dance. Although it was long attributed to Pieter Bruegel the Elder, it is now considered to be the work of his son. See Park and Park, ‘Saint Vitus’ Dance’, 514. 146 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE DANSEURS DB SAINT-GUY CONDUITS EN PRLERINAGE A L'RGLISE DE SAINT-WILLIPROD, A EPTERNACH, PRES DE LUXEMBOURG! D'aprés un dessin de P. Broughel, 4 la galerie de Varchidue Albert, & Vienne. FIGURE 6.2 ‘Saint Vitus’ dancers driven as pilgrims to the church of Saint-Willibrord, in Epternach [sic], near Luxembourg. After a drawing by P. Breughel, in the gallery of the archduc Albert, in Vienna’. From Charcot and Richer. Charcot and Richer employ both the Bruegel and Hondius images in Les démoniaques dans lart and the Legons sur les maladies du système nerveux to illustrate St. Vitus’s dance (the danse de Saint-Guy), only somewhat convincingly. In both pictures, a small group of women, apparently ill at ease, are lifted off the ground and each one carried firmly by two strong men; the procession is accompanied by musicians playing bagpipes.” As neurologist Geneviéve Aubert has suggested, the original Bruegel drawing exists in at least three versions, at the Albertina Museum in Vienna, the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, and the Staatliche Museen in Berlin. The Vienna and Amsterdam versions are known as ‘Die Epileptikerinnen von Meulebeeck’ (The Epileptic Women of Meulebee) and ‘Pelgrimage naar Meulebeke’ (Pilgrimage near Meulebeke), respectively, and bear inscriptions in Old Dutch that read: ‘Those are the pilgrims who on St John’s day, outside Brussels in Molenbeek, must dance, and when they have danced or jumped over a bridge, then they are cured for a whole year of St John’s sickness’.°° The inscription accompanying the Berlin______ And when they have danced over the bridge, or have been forced to do so, then they seemed to be cured for a year of the falling sickness. Ahead go the musicians or bagpipers, then follow the pilgrims held by strong servants, reluctantly against their will (as shown in the following second and third figures), sometimes shouting and vociferating; but when they come near the bridge, then they turn around, using great resistance; however, they are promptly overcome and carried and lifted over the bridge; once crossed, they sit down on the ground, as if exhausted: and then come the servants of the place quenching their thirst and giving them something warm: and so is the work accomplished.

Nicely Médecine Rétrospective + 147 UN GHOUPE DE DANSRURS DE saiNr-ctY Fac-simile d'une gravure de Hondius. FIGURE 6.3 ‘A Group of St. Vitus’ Dancers. Facsimile of an engraving by Hondius [1642]’. From Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques dans l'art (1887). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library.

‘pilgrims’ only.*t What is surprising, Aubert suggests, is that neither inscription mentions Echternach or St. Vitus. Charcot seems to have drawn the conclusion that these were St. Vitus’s dancers from a spurious caption inscribed under Bruegel’s drawing in a posthumous publication by the French collector Paul Lacroix (1806-1884) in 1873, which reads: ‘Sufferers from St Vitus’ Dance going on a pilgrimage to the church of St Willibrord, Epternach [sic], near Luxembourg. After a drawing by P. Breughel (Sixteenth Century), in the gallery of Archduke depicted by the excellent and skillful painter Pieter Breugel. Engraved and published by Henricus Hondius’ house, in The Hague, 1642’. In Aubert, ‘Charcot Revisited’, 158.

31. Aubert, ‘Charcot Revisited’, 157-158. 148 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE Albert, at Vienna.*? That the Echternach dan- cing procession was not, in spite of this depic- tion, particularly choreographically legible was overlooked by Charcot and Richer, as these figures all indistinguishably came to designate what they considered to be epileptiform move- ment disorders. More interesting yet, a descriptor provided to me by the Rijksmuseum suggested in parenthe- ses that the image of these St. Vitus’s ‘dancers’ (or, confusingly, epileptics) is alternately titled ‘Landscape with Four Drunken Men and Two Drunken Women’.*?

Molenbeek, named after a creek in what is now greater Brussels, boasted a sacred well dedicated to Saint Gertrude, known for its miraculous cures. It attracted thousands of pilgrims, including epileptics. Some pilgrims may have been drunk on their way to the wells. Others may have performed seizure-like motions, even though it is unlikely all would have been under- going epileptic (or even non-epileptic) seizures at once. One woman’s open mouth and the oth- ers’ awkwardly turned heads suggest they are in states of relative discomfort, perhaps under- taking the pilgrimage against their will. But the prominence of the women in this image—all the central characters are women—and the presence of male companions or attendants with them gives pause. The women, judging by their dress, are likely of a lower class, as Charcot and Richer point out, and would not necessarily have been able to afford hired help. Charcot and Richer’s gloss suggests that the men were companions, also on the pilgrimage, and that servants in the background were gathering water from the stream for its curative properties or perhaps to quench the pilgrims’ thirst. *4 But two of the women are also quite large-bellied. Are they merely corpulent, or are they pregnant, performing a pilgrimage for an unborn child? The other two women appear to be lifted almost off the ground as the men grasp their armpits to hold them up. This may have been a way to help them jump, mimetically to enact the cure. The description noted on the Hondius engraving reads: ‘Two epileptic women walk, each supported by two men, on a country road, near the right. The first woman is screaming’. The second reads: ‘Two epileptic women walk, each supported by two men, over a country road. In the background, a third woman, also supported by two men. A fourth woman sits by the side of the road under a tree’. These images, taken together, represent a scene, in which, plausibly, a cast of female pilgrims to the waters in Molenbeek are being held—and helped—so that they can ‘dance’ (or leap), in the belief that this motion will help protect them or their unborn children from motor disorders—including epilepsy or chorea—at least for the following year. Read as a performative pre-enactment, this scene depicts the pre-emptive representation of choreic distress, designed to quell further paroxysms. As pilgrims perform the jump or struggle with a bodily fit that might occur outside the heightened time of the pilgrimage, they use the intensity of the pilgrimage to ward off further attacks. This medical theatre represents and significantly pre-presents physical distress to its sufferers (and their deferred audiences) in a cyclical structure of yearly returns that tries to break that very cycle in the performative event. As deferred viewers, we retrospectively grapple with the discursive claims presented by the captions accompanying these images and the choreography captured as a still. Trumped only by the deceptive half legibility of the gestures, our reading is necessarily partial: considered on their own, these women seem to be prone to emotional paroxysms, organic or mechanical falling, 32. Aubert, ‘Charcot Revisited’, 159. See P. Lacroix, Vie militaire et religieuse au Moyen Age et à l'époque de la Renaissance (Paris: Librairie Didot, 1873). On the dancing procession at Echternach and its connection to St. Willibrord, see also Backman, Religious Dances, 116-126. 33. ‘The title indicated reads ‘De pelgrimstocht van epileptici naar de kerk van Meulenbeke (Landschap met 4 dronken mannen en twee dronken vrouwen. Pieter Breugel inv)’. 

Identification provided by email from Susan van Gelderen, information specialist, Collection Information Department, Rijksmuseum, ‘RE: Brueghel—Pelgrimage naar Meulebeke’, to the author, 9 November 2012. ‘The description has since been modified to read: ‘Twee epileptische vrouwen worden door hun begeleiders meegenomen op de pelgrimstocht van epileptici naar Molenbeek bij Brussel op Sint Jansdag. De voorste vrouw protesteert luid’. This eliminates mention of drunkenness but emphasizes the first pilgrim’s loud protestation, still suggesting significant contestation regarding the event of the scene, as well as the increasing inscription of this image into the annals of the history of epilepsy, associated by art historians and curators with St. John’s Day, though it is still not clear why the first pilgrim is ostensibly distressed. In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 35-36. 35. In Dutch, ‘Twee epileptische vrouwen lopen, elk ondersteund door twee mannen, over een landweg, naar rechts. De voorste vrouw loopt te schreeuwen en “Twee epileptische vrouwen lopen, elk ondersteund door twee mannen, over een landweg. Op de achtergrond komt een derde vrouw aan, eveneens ondersteund door twee mannen. Een vierde vrouw zit langs de kant van de weg. Médecine Rétrospective + 149 or fits. They are clearly struggling, though it is uncertain whether they are struggling against their companions; and there is a group of them, winding their way through the countryside as if on a cacophonous parade. But the men’s bodies are contorted as well, as they hold the women up. It may be that they are also performing the pilgrimage or that they are merely struggling under the women’s weight. The women are disproportionately large in the image, which may explain why they required two men, one at either side. Their disproportionate size may also suggest their importance as focal points in the image, though (unless my hypothesis that they are pregnant stands) it is not certain why the women are foregrounded in this event. The musicians appear to cower, suggesting the whole affair may have been trying: this is not quite a jubilant, boisterous féte. Charcot and Richer’s reading of these pilgrims moving through the countryside reveals at once a retrospective neurological reading and the faintness of a pageant gone by, recuperated into the choreomania repertoire. Repeated again and again by neurologists in the last century, this image has become the quintessential— often the only—representation of choreomania. As such, the image comes to epitomize a collective fantasy, shot through with layers of artefactual readings. Charcot and Richer saw the form St. Vitus’s dance, confirmed in their eyes by a caption, enveloping this pilgrimage into the hysteroepileptic fold: a collection of disparate images and scenes made to support, and evidence, what they encountered in Charcot’s clinic. As McCarren has pointed out, hysteria and the myriad neurological disorders associated with it—including chorea or St. Vitus’s dance— pose the problem of visuality inasmuch as they resemble dances and, resembling one another, suggest sameness where there may be none. But this privilege accorded to dance and movement as a site of seeing—Charcot’s realm of greatest expertise (as opposed to his student Freud’s preference for the aural)—and thus to dance, movement, and theatrical gesturality as the art forms of the unsayable, misses a crucial point. While dance may be ‘the ability to represent itself in images, through movement’, as McCarren suggests,** and thus to express femininity, for instance, in a semiotic system in which women, like children, are to be seen and not heard, dance and femininity in Charcot’s iconographic system also point to other systems— other histories—which moved. Juxtaposed to one another, the images Charcot and Richer stage in their work perform a class of intertextual movement that situates dance-like gesturality, leaping performances, and hysteria on a continuum with the historical relic, and thus too with the antiquarian past. These figures all participated in the grand iconographic repertoire of religiosity and the expressive language of visual art. Rather than signifying silence, these images signalled bodies whose choreographies Charcot and Richer, as neurological mavens, took it as their task to interpret and to collate. The bodies, rather than appearing silent, seemed to be gesturing through the ages, constellations now finally read in collusion with science. In recognizing these scenes as hysteroepileptic, choreic, and choreomaniacal, Charcot and Richer grounded their findings in a fantasy of premodernity. Few images of choreomania exist. While the Bruegel image has come to epitomize visual ‘proof’ of choreomania as a serious medical condition associated with popular lore, caricatures depicting the ridiculousness of the so-called St. Vitus’s dance highlight the difficulty of diagnostic legibility and the condition’s comic potential as movement gone awry.

A medical caricature published in Lalbum comique de pathologie pittoresque, recueil de vingt caricatures médicales dessinées par Aubry, et al. [Comic Album of Picturesque Pathology, Collection of Twenty Medical Caricatures Drawn by Aubry, et al.] (1823) depicted buffoonish sufferers of St. Vitus’s dance (the danse de Saint Guy) performing a comical and pathetic village round with floppy hats and soft faces, their legs bent in a seemingly haphazard fashion (fig. 6.4). Charcot reproduced this image in his Nouvelle iconographie de la Salpétriére [New Iconography of the Salpétriére] (1904) as yet another illustration of the dancing disease from the uncertain annals of choreic history.

Actual motor disorders characterized by incoordination and involuntary movement could, it seemed, be covered up by popular dances, just as popular dances, in the caricaturist’s depiction, presented a choreic potential: all popular dances had the potential to appear odd and ridiculous. But I have also been arguing that these awkward gestures became archival ‘stills’, ‘dragged’ into live clinical scenes apparently demonstrating the recursion of ancient gestures in the present. The archival repertoire of choreic movements became live again in Charcot’s patients’ theatrical illustrations. In the next sections, I turn to Charcot’s experimentation with scenes of chorea and hysteroepilepsy among patients who were reproducing, as it seemed to him, figures from the archival past.

Spontaneous Crucifications and Hysteroepilepsy: Convulsionary Remains

In order to link ancient iconographic scenes and his own patients’ gestures, Charcot and his colleagues studied an intermediary medical theater, offered by neurology ‘patients’ whom they read retrospectively as suffering from neurological disorders in the more recent past. In order to do this, Charcot drew from a repertoire of case studies depicting individuals steeped in scenes of highly theatrical religiosity and popular lore. The Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard offered an ideal case in point. They were contorted, excited, and histrionic, and they showed particular gestures that captured Charcot and his colleagues' attention in terms of their potential for neurological study. In his Légons sur les Médecines Rétrospective + 151 maladies du système nerveux, Charcot described the Convulsionaries as a case study in hystero-epilepsy, particularly showcasing what he described as hysterical hemianaesthesia (anaesthesia in half of the body). He argued that if the Convulsionaries were reported not to have experienced pain on the penetration of a sharp object—such as a sword—into their skin and if contact with such an object did not produce any hemorrhaging, this was because they were not actually experiencing physical pain. They were engaging in a theatre of pain; their heightened emotion presented a case of 'acute hysteria'.° The whole spectacle was a charade but a no less medically diagnosable one. Although specific forms of religious gesture appeared in epileptic, hysteric, and hysteroepileptic fits, their exact character could be attributed, Charcot thought, to the range of symbols and signs available to them in a given culture. Christianity offered a fountain of iconographic gestures, in the cases of the Convulsionaries. Many Convulsionaries, he wrote, 'operated veritable crucifixions among themselves, placing those among them on crosses and fixing them there with nails going right through their hands and feet. These "saints," who more or less allowed themselves to be crucified, were hysterics'.** Proof included testimony by La Condamine, who wrote that the Convulsionaries suffered and shed blood only when they were pierced on the right sides of their bodies. This corroborated what was observed at the Salpétriére: hysteria was often characterized by hemi-anaesthesia.*® Charcot observed 'spontaneous' crucifixions among his own patients at the Salpétriére, documented among others by Regnard. In Les maladies épidémiques de l'esprit, Regnard depicts a figure of a young woman performing a crucifixion (fig. 6.5) juxtaposed to identical images drawn from Charcot's clinical practice (fig. 6.6). These crucifixions constituted one of the primary attitudes passionnelles and characterized any number of mental (or spiritual) epidemics. But, significantly, such attitudes were involuntary and spontaneous, Charcot and Regnard noted. Although the attitudes mimicked Christ's passion on the cross, they differed from 'artificial' crucifixions, poses performed by Convulsionaries, among others, with intention—as theatre. Artificial poses involved an elaborate mise en scène on the part of performers and bystanders, who collected hammers and nails as props for these convulsionary performances. The border between theatre and 'real' neurological disease was thin in Charcot's practice; significantly, his recuperation of popular theatre into the domain of neurology made of this new science a retrospective historiographic exercise in medical choreography. Neurology recuperated and reperformed gestures from the past recast as disease. Yet what Charcot called hysterical convulsions—those not entirely acted out but in his view genuine symptoms of organic dysfunction—represented in his view real instances of heightened emotion affecting the neurological core. For Charcot, this diagnosis helped dispel eighteenth-century medical opinions, such as the opinion expressed by Philippe Hecquet (1661-1737) in Du naturalisme des convulsions dans les maladies de l’épidémie con- vulsionnaire [Of the Naturalism of Convulsions in the Diseases of the Convulsionary Epidemic] (1733) that crucifixion was provoked by insanity (aliénation d’esprit’). Charcot countered this view, arguing that crucifixions constituted a neurological disorder, partially imagined (and so psychiatric) but played out in 37. Charcot writes: "in the Saint-Médard epidemic, for example, the sword thrusts given to the Convulsionaries did not, it is said, produce any hemorrhaging. The reality of this cannot be disclaimed without examination; if it is true that many of these Convulsionaries were guilty of sleight of hand [jonglerie], we are nonetheless obliged to recognize, after careful consideration of the question, that most of the phenomena presented, whose history has been transmitted to us via naive description, were not all simulated, but amplified, exaggerated. It was almost always a case, the critics have demonstrated this, of hysteria taken to the highest level; and so, for these women struck by anaesthesia not to shed blood when pierced by a sharp instrument such as a sword, it was sufficient . . . that the instrument should not be pushed in too deeply." Charcot, Euvres completes, vol. 1, 303-304.

Lindsay Wilson provides a useful discussion of Hecquet’s beliefs and practices as a physician, such that he was too frail to attend the events firsthand but retorted that he had seen and studied convulsions all his life; his detractors on the other hand should go see the events for themselves. He argued for the ‘naturalism’ of the convulsions, i.e., their status as physiological, rather than supernatural, events, a stance that contradicts Charcot’s retort. But Hecquet’s naturalism was determined largely by the ‘imagination’, as he attributed the convulsions to a disturbance of the vapours, among men occasionally and nearly universally among women, when the passions were ignited. In Wilson, Women and Medicine in the French Enlightenment, 26-30.

152 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE CRUCIFIEMENT D'aprés I'leonographie photographique de la Selpétriére, par Bourneville et P. Reguard. FIGURE6.5 ‘Crucifixion. From the Iconographie photographique de la Salpétriére’. From Paul Regnard, Les maladies épidémiques de l'esprit (1887). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library. the nervous system. In that regard, the convulsionary theatre presented a form of neurological hysteria: the body disordered without the direct action of the will. Neurology in this view captured mind and matter, history and biology. This was a science at the forefront of medical research, recuperating all the most invisible and nearly illegible gestures into its fold; neurology in this sense performed the ultimate ‘reading’ of all the subtlest and most dramatic gestures from the annals of religion, spirituality, and culture, and its proponents were the new spiritual and hermeneutic elite, the new interpreters of movement across the cultural and historical spectrum. Following Charcot's theory, the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard provided neurologists with a rich opportunity for retrospective diagnosis, as their practices were full of potential for dramaturgical readings that could translate into and inform case studies in the clinic. The Convulsionaries experienced intense tympanic pains and subjected one another to abdominal binding. As with St. John's Day dancers, bystanders often administered relief, resulting in a dramatic mise en scène, complete with theatrical props.

Charcot linked the epigastric discomfort to a long line of thinking associating abdominal troubles and hysteria. This connection was made as early as 1746 by the physician John Andree, who associated hysteric fits with "a Working in the Abdomen," followed by "Distention and Rumbling of the Hypochondria [upper abdomen], with a Swelling at the Stomach." Although hysteric fits resembled epileptic seizures, Andree wrote that their "seat" was in the abdomen, not the cerebellum. However, hysteric and epileptic seizures might occur simultaneously if the nervous system was so weakened as to admit the two disorders at once.

Tweedie, in A System of Practical Medicine (1840), also noted that "a tympanic state of the abdomen was a frequent symptom" in St. John's and St. Vitus's dances. However, as Charcot and Richer noted, convulsionary activities did not always include abdominal distension or tympanic pain. At first, miracles had occurred without convulsions, then epileptics made their way to the Saint-Médard cemetery to seek help for their own con-vulsive movements, initiating a second phase, characterized by some miracles accompanied by real convulsions. Finally, a third (the longest and most satirized) phase, lasting over a century, was characterized by convulsions without miraculous cures. Those who imitated real epileptics in the second phase now outnumbered those who had actually suffered from neurological disease. It was during the second and third phases that tympanic binding emerged as a routine (theatricalized) practice, and the administration of secours (or help), performed by secouristes (or helpers), provided a gripping show to all who gathered to watch. Although noting the high proportion of ‘imagination’ playing out in these scenes, Charcot was convinced that their purpose was not primarily entertainment—or lewd entertainment.

According to one eyewitness, secours were divisible into five categories: (1) kicking or trampling on the Convulsionary; (2) exercising pressure by heavy weights, or squeezing with tongs; (3) beating with clubs; (4) pricking with swords, spits, etc.; and 154 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE i 7 er = Pr Fig. 105. — Ceinture compressive des ovaires. FIGURE 6.7 ‘Ovarian Compression Belt’. From Paul Richer, L’hystéro-épilepsie, ou grande hystérie (1881). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library. as Hecquet had disapprovingly argued. ‘I don’t see’, wrote Charcot, ‘what lewdness could have to do with these andiron and pestle blows admin- istered with such violence, although I am cap- able of recognizing that a depraved mind will engender practices such as this. But I think it is much simpler and more legitimate to admit that the secours . . . were administered in response to a very pragmatic and empirical concern, whose sole result was to produce a real improve- ment upon the torments suffered in a hyster- ical attack.’ “* Charcot sought his own means to relieve hysteria’s tympanic symptoms. ‘Ovarian compression’, a technique he sought to perfect, enabled those wearing an apparatus he devised to benefit from continuous compression of the ovaries (fig. 6.7). In Regnard’s wry note, ovarian compression successfully administered might have curbed many a witch’s demons, sparing much of the violence of the Inquisition; unfor- tunately, compression had only emerged as a regular practice at Saint-Médard.*® Ovarian compression, acting on the body, cured appar- ently demonic disorders of mind. This cure was particularly dramatic because hysteria left no material traces: ‘at the autopsy of a hysteric one finds nothing’, wrote Regnard, ‘neither in the brain, nor in any other organ’.*° Hysteria was a condition of excess fancy, he and Charcot thought. It was the imagination that provoked bodily fits. Only these could be observed, com- pared, and decoded. Charcot did not claim to have invented ovarian compression, although his new ovar- ian implement facilitated its exercise. Thomas Willis (1621-1675), he remarked, practiced compression of the abdomen to suspend con- vulsive spasms thought to______ Compression was performed either by embracing the patient closely around the waist or using tightly bound sheets. The Spanish physician Luiz de Mercado (1525–1611) also used abdominal friction as early as the sixteenth century, as noted by Charcot. Mercado believed that the uterus traveled according to the “ancient doctrine.” One of Mercado’s compatriots, Nicholas Monardes (1493–1588), similarly used this method to attempt to keep the uterus from crucifixion.

But in spite of Charcot’s success, and this litany of historical precedents with which he framed his practical innovation, the British physician William Gowers (1845–1915) noted in Epilepsy and Other Chronic Convulsive Diseases (1881) that ovarian compression was rarely successful in England. This suggested to Gowers that cultural conditioning influenced patients’ behavior and, ultimately, their “cure”. Gowers preferred to administer iron tonic and pour one or ideally two gallons of water on patients’ heads, a remedy probably as efficient in context as Charcot’s compression belt.

Just as fantasy seemed to provoke hysterical conditions that translated into kinetic deformities, so too their treatment depended on equally powerful fantasies, practiced on the part of physician and patient alike.

CLINICAL THEATRES: FROM MOTOR DELIRIUM TO THE GREAT LABOURING, OR ‘HAMMERING’, CHOREA

Charcot directed, or choreographed, many scenes of hysteroepilepsy reproducing and confirming what he and his colleagues saw in history and the visual arts. Case studies in his clinic abounded, corroborating ancient scenes of corporeal disarray with everyday medical practice. This section turns to Charcot’s clinic, in which images and archives appear ‘live’.

This is not to suggest that archival research held precedence for Charcot and that his patients in all cases mimicked what he read or saw in galleries and picture books; but that the translation between archival and iconographic research and performative practice in Charcot’s clinic constituted neurology as a science at the borderline between repetition and discovery, the past and the present.

Neurology operated as a theatre of repetition, in which the past appeared in the present in neurological form. The present was saturated with the persistence of ancient gesture, just as the past, for Charcot, appeared rife with previously, in his view, undiagnosed neurological disease. Contemporary bodies served as his canvas and testing ground for this hypothesis.

For Charcot, live instances of hysteria and hysteroepilepsy suggested a theatre in which the patient entered the ‘scene’ or ‘stage’ of modern science. This was not only symbolic on a historiographic level, as hysteria came with his research finally, he thought, to be diagnosed; but in a more mundane sense, hysteria occurred onstage presently, via individual performance every day. The patient entered onto the scene of science in Charcot's clinic dramatically, at the culmination of a prolonged, but repeatable and increasingly, through observation, predictable set of acts—a rechoreographable dance. Charcot and his colleagues marked out stages of a hysteroepileptic attack, rendering it more narratable and its stages transposable onto ancient figures and scenes. The patient's seizure presented a dramaturgical arc, from onset to crisis and resolution.

The first, epileptiform stage of a hysteroepileptic attack appeared, Charcot and his collaborators noted, to some extent like epilepsy but was not actually epileptic. (It did not involve insuppressible neuromotor abnormality.) The second phase, which they thought was characterized by contortions and 'large' or 'great movements' ('grands movements'), represented a period of 'clownisme' ('clowning'), involving 'illogical', 'strange', 'unexpected', 'implausible', and 'fantastical' attitudes or poses; these were 'invraisemblables', implausible, not true to life.

The third stage, that of the attitudes passionnelles, worked like a tableau vivant involving 'passionate' or highly affective gestures and often hallucinations in which 'the patient enters himself into the scene and simultaneously (the French enables this double entendre) 'makes of himself a mise en scene' ('entre lui-même en scène') so that 'by the expressive and animated mimicry in which he engages, and the fragmentary phrases which he lets loose, it is easy to follow all the incidents of the drama which he believes he attends and in which he plays the principal role.'

The fourth stage of an epilep- tiform seizure involves the gradual resumption of normalcy: consciousness returns choppily, cut in with leftover hallucinations and brusque gestures, contractions, and cramps. The patient is exhausted and somewhat distressed.

These illustrations resonated, Charcot and his colleagues argued, with the ecstasies depicted by artists in the past, though these artists had sought primarily to portray a religious feeling, prayer or passion, rather than a violent contraction or convulsion, thus distorting the true character of hysteroepilepsy—a medical condition which enjoyed, they wrote, 'all the constancy and inflexibility of scientific law'. Yet this apparently inflexible law found incar- nations in various, at times, they wrote, ‘implaus- ible’ and nearly illegible contemporary scenes. Near illegibility rendered Charcot’s readings all the more magisterial, priest-like. The script he interpreted was obscure, difficult, yet he read it as an expert in decoding unpredictable gestures and cracking gestural codes. Choreomania, like hysteroepilepsy, was essentially an Orientalist fantasy, at once other and governable, unwieldy and tamable, undisciplined and disciplinariz- able. Choreomaniacal gesture represented the final frontier of modern science’s capacity to capture in language what eluded it—the body in a state of anarchic disarray.

The patient Geneviéve B. presented an especially vivid case study of what Charcot called hysteroepileptic chorea. In March 1872, when she was twenty-nine years old, she demonstrated symptoms Charcot classed as acute hysteria accompanied by hallucinations, tympany, and jumping (or leaping) chorea. She first showed a period of delirium, in which she began to perform ‘a bizarre sort of dance’ (‘une espéce de danse sin- guliére’). She would leap into the air and throw her head alternately backwards and forwards. This ‘motoric delirium’ (‘délire moteur’), which was caused, according to Charcot, by her halluci- nations, persisted as long as she was not lying in bed. Her fits continued until he discovered that compression of her left ovary allowed them to subside. He further noted acute tympany, a sure sign that her case was attributable to hysteroepilepsy.

Geneviéve was not performing—or, with his guidance, reperforming—tableaux from the art historical past but showcased gestures that appeared in this case to borrow from everyday dance and popular practice. As with patients whose cases I further outline later, Geneviéve engaged in partly strange but also very com- mon movements, seemingly automatically. The ‘bizarre sort of dance’ she performed suggested to Charcot that she was suffering from chorea, a recognizable and yet to his mind still largely unspecific motor disease, indicated, with some frustration on his part, by the vague ‘sort of’. Yet neurologists were working hard to describe these irregular movements and to ascribe to them names and regular and predict- able forms.

In April 1873, Charcot suggested that Geneviéve suffered from a seizure character- ized by an incessant need to move; she jumped and danced around, holding herself up at the foot of her bed, raising her skirt, endeavouring to embrace everyone around her, and showing ‘extreme lewdness’. By September, she was agi- tated (‘secousses’) and restless, running around the garden, threatening to break everything, while emitting sharp cries, which seemed, how- ever, momentarily to relieve her distress. Again, she complained of sharp pains in her left ovary. Her tympany by then, Charcot noted, was enor- mous. As before, compression in the left ovarian region calmed her fits. But the cure was not con- clusive. By the following April, after an epilepti- form seizure, she was seized again by a ‘leaping’ or ‘dancing’ delirium (‘délire saltatoire’). She began to hallucinate, seeing ravens and speaking to them; she jumped, cried, and pulled her skirt alternately between her legs and over her head, ‘as if to chase snakes away’.®* This chorée saltatoire (or leaping chorea) seemed ‘to be co-ordinated on a definite plan’, Charcot wrote, imitating, for example, specific dances or professional activities. This mimetic aspect led [54] In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 102. See also Charcot, EEuvres completés, vol. 3, 438-439. [55] Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 102. See also Charcot, Euvres complates, vol. 3, 439. [56] Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 109. [57] In Bourneville and Regnard, Iconographie photographique, vol. 1, 57-58. [58] Bourneville and Regnard, Iconographie photographique, vol. 1, 60.

Médecine Rétrospective + 157 led him to argue that chorea was suggestible, explaining why so many hysteroepileptics performed specific poses, lying in some cases prostrate with both arms outstretched as in imitation of the cross, or piercing themselves with swords without drawing blood. They were succumbing to extreme states of emotion leading to a specific, automatically triggered set of motions. In the case of the leaping chorea, patients engaged in expressive movements ‘such as those of the dance, and particularly character dances’. But another, nearly interchangeable sort of chorea presented a similar set of recognizable everyday activities: in the hammering chorea (‘chorée malléatoire’), patients completed ‘professional actions, such as the movements performed by an oarsman or a blacksmith’. [50] The leaping and hammering chorea in Charcot's writing appear almost interchangeably: dancing and working offered similar gestural models that his patients appeared to imitate. It is not always clear from his descriptions, however, whether the patients deliberately performed these or whether he saw in his patients' movements professional or leisure activities that he then made reference to in describing them, plausibly in so doing further influencing his patients' actions. But that was also the point. For Charcot, susceptibility to influence was a major trait of hysteroepilepsy. He sought for his patients to be suggestible, just as he noticed that they were so. Saying that the patients were performing an action like beating eggs or dancing a mazurka helpfully, to him and his colleagues, described the gestures and simultaneously further influenced the patients' repetition of them as if they had been voluntarily and deliberately doing these specific things at the outset. The measure of cause and effect was often blurry, confirming the extent to which Charcot was studying a special subset of hysteria, in which involuntary gestures and heightened emotional states produced the semblance of a voluntary action, which was in effect, he argued, performed somewhere between a voluntary and an involuntary state—what Freud would later further articulate as the subconscious. [50] ‘The gesture then could be traced through the ages as corresponding to and also revealing specific cultural forms, simultaneously universal and culturally specific. In this way, Charcot believed he was mapping contemporary neurological disorders onto cultural history, carving out new scientific territory and folding into it nearly all gestural culture from the past. In his lecture on ‘rhythmic hysteric chorea’ (‘chorée rythmique hystérique’), Charcot described the case of a young woman who typically performed a rhythmic swaying motion on the right side of her body, which she swung backwards and forwards. She would do this, he wrote, systematically, to a distinct rhythm which—according to those knowledgeable in these things, he wrote—was reminiscent of popular dances known as ‘mazurkas’. This did not mean she was performing one, only that the comparison to the mazurka enabled his scientific description. Elsewhere, Charcot described the case of Flor—, who performed ‘rapid rhythmical movements’, in which, he wrote, she ‘[seemed] to be whipping eggs’. Flor—would also ‘[bend] her fingers, applying their tips to the thumb; and raising her arm, [make] the gesticulation of an orator who is demonstrating’, or ‘[dance] alternately on each foot, very nearly imitating a jig or dance of the Tsiganes, or of the Zingari of Andalusia’. He characterized her chorea as ‘hammering’ (‘chorée malléatoire’), although it suggested dances as well as professional activities. Most important for Charcot was that Flor—’s chorea was distinct from what he called the ‘vulgar’ choreas (chorea minors) described by Sydenham, in which there was no voluntary action or repetition, only a general, slightly disorganized, non-patterned tremor of the limbs. Charcot’s innovation was to see specific patterns and gestures in his patients’ motions and to attempt to describe these in terms of their paradoxically involuntary imitation of specific actions.

Charcot, CEuvres completes, vol. 1, 393. Tweedie, like Charcot, described a hammering motion he called ‘malleatio’: it ‘consists in an apparently irresistible disposition to beat the knees with the hands as with a hammer. The action is regular but involuntary’, Tweedie remarked, ‘and occurs in paroxysms. Instances have occasionally occurred of involuntary rotatory motion of the whole or part of the body . . . Propulsion, either forwards, backwards, or in zigzags, has occasionally occurred’. One case was recorded of ‘a man who sometimes went out and walked forwards till he was exhausted and obliged to be carried home in a litter’. ‘The physician Mr. Kinder Wood, Tweedie noted, had also earlier described a woman whose ‘nervous susceptibility’ provoked her to suffer ‘pains in the face’, succeeded by a ‘twinkling of the eye, motions of the legs, and rotation of the arms’. She beat the palms of 158 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE things. In other words, Charcot was diagnosing instances of neurological disorder as a sort of dance theatre: movements that could be described by their repeatability and their participation in a spectrum of gestures from ancient history and everyday life. ‘Labouring’ actions seemed paradoxically purposeful yet automatic and involuntary, and in this sense they resemble what Hewitt has described after Agamben as dance. ‘Dance’, Hewitt writes, reprising Agamben, ‘as movement “independent of any motor purpose”—might be taken as paradigmatic of a Kantian aesthetic of “purposiveness without purpose.”’ Charcot’s patients’ actions were ‘purposive without purpose’, gestural movements imitating specific activities yet involuntary. Taken on a large scale, dance manias and other seemingly epidemic instances of ‘purposive’-seeming—yet in this sense purposeless—gesture constituted a ‘dancing’ disease in the nineteenth century: a disease of involuntary gesture imitating other gestures, including those representing specific activities or past times. For Charcot, the dancing mania and other epileptiform convulsions all represented or appeared to represent gestures previously performed by others, typically elsewhere. Patients were first and foremost interpreters, mimes; they did not initiate, but reproduced what was suggested to them. St. John's or St. Vitus's dance, epidemic possession in Loudun, the tarantella, and the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard could all be attributed, Charcot argued, to participants' susceptible imaginations—to their capacity for automatic and involuntary imitation. But in this capacity, they also, he thought, were able to access and represent for him and his amphitheatre audiences a bodily portrait of past forms: they served as contemporary keys to the corporeal past. Hysteria, Charcot's work submitted, encompassed nearly all the mind and body might conjure and theatricalize in a public show of distress.

His patients' gestures abstracted movements from everyday life, revealing a theatre of hysteria in which an aspect of everyday reality entered onstage, en scéne—specifically onto the scientific stage—performed by the patient, who could not, however, in her depictions, entirely master it. The patients seemed always to be at the edge of uncontrol and of the inexpressible, showing in their gestures a side of reality they seemed unable fully to hold. If many patients willingly helped Charcot's theatrical show by complying, consciously or unconsciously, performing gestures he argued they would show if he suggested them, they may have done this as a way to exercise their own theatrical proclivities, or in order to gain the favor of a powerful man whose influence on scientific and cultural life in Paris was immense.

Significantly, however, they did so at the borderline between apparently voluntary and involuntary gesture—that which marks choreomania as a 'modern' disease of repetition, a hiccupping, hesitant entrance into modernity. This does not mean patients did not also suffer. As Asti Hustvedt has compellingly argued, many of Charcot's patients may have suffered real psychogenic disorders, some of which may also have been lastingly relieved over the course of their stay at the Salpétriére.

The theatrical flourishes that their choreas involved, often triggered and manipulated by Charcot—although many patients themselves were arguably adept at triggering theatrical choreic gestures—won them substantial accolades from a Parisian public dazzled by their convulsive moves. As Gordon has convincingly argued of epileptic cabarets inspired by Charcot's clinic, Charcot's fame increased just as his patients' did through these performative scenarios: all were performers on a Parisian stage where distinctions between patient and pundit, science and art, blurred.

But the not-so-subtle sexualization of these patients' gestures, as her hands on her thighs and beat her feet on the ground, as if to produce a rhythmic cadence. 'On some occasions', Wood added, 'she would move up and down, or from side to side on her chair, and then springing on her feet, leap and jump, or be propelled forwards'. At other times, 'she would go into every corner of the room, striking the furniture'. But her movements were not always violent: Wood noted that she would also 'frequently dance on one leg, holding the other in the hand'. This way, her beating and tapping gestures gained 'musical time': 'In the course of the complaint it was observed, that the blows on the furniture were in musical time, and the involuntary actions, as they were considered, changed to a measured step. Although ordinarily an inexpert dancer', he added, 'she would on these occasions move about elegantly as in a minuet.' It was ascertained that there was always a tune in her mind, impelling her to these movements. When the tune was performed on the drum, she ran up to the instrument and danced with great activity and apparent delight, but the movements were always stopped by the rolling of the drum. Although yielding, as it seemed, unavoidably to the desire of dancing, she nonetheless always wished for the rolling of the drum, that the muscular excitement might be checked.

In Tweedie, ed., A System of Practical Medicine, 330-332. 63. Hewitt, Social Choreography, 83. 64. See Asti Hustvedt, Medical Muses: Hysteria in Nineteenth-Century Paris (London: Bloomsbury, 2012). Médecine Rétrospective + 159 movements—in spite of Charcot’s claims to the contrary—also allied dancing, working, involuntary convulsions, and heightened hallucinations and fantasy in a discomfitingly subterranean world of implicit desires for power and control, in which the work of observation abstracted and governed impulsive movements. As Freud would note, lurking beneath the involuntary movements he himself observed in Charcot's clinic was the spectre of an obscure other side—a 'dark continent', unknowable and ungraspable except through opaque signs that came up to the surface like sylphs.

HYSTEROEPILEPSY, GENDER, AND ANTIQUITY: THE POETIC REDISCOVERY OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

Not all hysterics were women. Charcot and Richer made a point of this in the concluding section to Les démoniaques dans art, although younger women figure prominently in their hand-drawn illustrations. But the confusion between St. Vitus's dance and epilepsy and, in Charcot and Richer's terms, the new catchall diagnosis, hysteroepilepsy, drew on an increasingly feminized conception of disorderly gesturality—gestures queering public space by virtue of being 'too much'. Femininity, characterized by Freud as a 'dark continent', was to him unknown and nearly unknowable. The dancing disease thus became feminine and 'dark' largely through its association with premodern (ancient and medieval) corporealities in distress, hardly legible, but read again and again nonetheless, through the annals and images that nineteenth-century medical writers increasingly relied on to perform their diagnoses. Choreomania became in this way a disorder of the nineteenth-century imagination, at once articulating a present scene of scientific historiography and, in doing so, exposing—excavating—scenes of corporeal mayhem. As an ancient yet strikingly 'modern' disorder ('modern' inasmuch as it was articulated in a contrapuntal relationship to the past), hysteroepilepsy came to signal scientific modernity's capacity to read the past in present bodies, implicitly understood to be attuned to the subtle undercurrents still rumbling through them. Hysteria, Breton famously declared, was the nineteenth century's 'greatest poetic discovery'. But in Charcot's clinic, hysteria signalled poetic rediscovery, a method for rereading ancient gestures in present terms, as a disorder of involuntary recurrence. The late nineteenth century, through hysterical and hysteroepileptic, fitting bodies, tapped into—or believed it tapped into—an ancient, highly feminine past. Yet many hysteroepileptics were also men, feminized through their involuntary gestures, which marked them as not quite modern, not entirely up to the modern-day work culture of hyperproductivity, purposefulness, and speed. As Micale has pointed out, the overlooked prominence of men in Charcot's service suggests that hysteria was not just feminine but also described a general weakening of the nervous system—including weakening from work-related strain—observed at the time. In the 1880s, Charcot published more than sixty case histories of male hysterics, with a quarter to a third of the case studies related to children and men. All hystero-epileptics were curable by ovarian or testicular compression, as well as other forms of blows and bindings. Charcot's theatrical mise en scène of hysteric patients on his lecture-hall stage complemented a cast of iconographic sources and visual collage that allied contemporary and ancient forms of convulsive theatricality.

Micale notes that Charcot's work on male hysterics has been largely eclipsed by feminist and Freudian psychoanalytic literature. However, Micale suggests that robust workers were as liable to succumb to hysteria in Charcot's analysis as effeminate types. Jan Goldstein describes the hysterical diagnosis as an occasion for gender subversion among men, including Gustave Flaubert.

Modern neurology in the nineteenth century was the greatest poetic creation, operating as poesis, making and remaking the fantasy of a just barely graspable origin. Scientific knowing was a work of collage and bricolage, pilfering methods from across art history and anatomy, historiography, and clinical observation. This gesture of abstraction performed a return, articulating a sense that present diseases have always been here, buried in the detritus of pre-revolutionary France or ancient Greece.

Charcot and his colleagues' analyses were corroborated with precedent from characters from the past. Nothing would enable Charcot and his students better to grasp the past's afterlife than fieldwork in places where choreas were reputedly still present. This sideways movement from the archive to the field signals a translatio from a historiographic to an ethnographic plane, prompting the expansion and transformation of the choreomania repertoire into the realm of anthropology, and ever further into colonial lands: yet another repository of fantasies about the past and primal 'other', ever more racially marked. The Dancing Procession of Echternach

Meige, a student of Charcot, visited the site of a reputedly still active medieval dancing procession to see what traces of the hysteroepileptic past might be found there, outside hospital walls. In an article published in the 1904 issue of Nouvelle iconographie de la Salpétriére, 'La procession dansante d'Echternach' [The Dancing Procession of Echternach], Meige suggested that he was disappointed to find the remains scanty. The great medieval leaping procession he had expected to witness firsthand, in its more or less 'still' active state, had been by 1900 almost unrecognizably transformed. Although more well-attended than ever, it was comparatively staid, even controlled—not at all the grimacing expression of spontaneous hysteroepileptic unleashing that he had imagined. There were, however, remnants of the old procession, such as the line formation, made up of rows of people connected to one another by holding a handkerchief, which appeared in an illustration of an early fourteenth-century manuscript of the Roman de la Rose in the Royal Library, The Hague.

As the neurologist Paul Krack has pointed out, previous iterations of the procession seem to have offered more spectacular body pos-tures for the interested observer. A seventeenth-century depiction of the procession shows a pilgrim performing an arc de cercle in front of Willibrord’s tomb; and a legend written down in 1858, probably of medieval origin, suggests that an Echternach citizen named Veit (Vitus) had provoked a dancing madness by playing his fiddle; Willibrord had had to intervene against the disease, and pilgrims processed annually in his honour so as to be protected from the dancing madness for a year.”! St. Vitus was at once protector and provoker of the dancing disease. But the event Meige encountered resembled more of a military march, with men and women lined up in neat rows, flanked at the front and the back by musicians, who were also interspersed between them, forming their own tightly choreographed group. Spectators lined the event in neat rows, perhaps mildly amused by the hops the processing participants performed in tune with a brass band (fig. 6.8). The few ecstatic faces, abrupt gestures, and expressions of enthusiasm Meige did observe were not caused______ "Rather, singing, dancing, and laughing, he argued, influence our motor behaviors, especially if we are ‘suggestible’. Because religious enthusiasm increases individual susceptibility to impulsive behaviors, provoking imitation, impulsive behaviors and fits may occur in and around a procession, in an attenuated form." Religious faith is particularly contagious, he argued; this explained why religious dances were often characterized by zealous motor activity.

In Meige’s journey, a new figure of the dancing disease emerges, revealing a will to archive and ‘re-cognize’ choreomania through a methodological process of live returns. With Meige, the modern scientific body encounters a living archive by becoming co-present, experiencing the frisson of what appears to be still past at an ethnographic site that seems to have preserved history better than a modern clinical setting.

Luxembourg was hardly a primitive place in the French imagination, compared to the European imagination of colonial worlds I will discuss in later chapters. But the town of Echternach’s apparent preservation of an ancient tradition promised to reveal kinesthetic histories elsewhere unavailable to the modern neuroscientist. As an effort to recapture the past and re-encounter an original cast of gestural events, this scientific journey was set to fail; yet it dramatized a modern attempt to find the corporeal past over there, in a place that can still be reached.

While this arguably genealogical method did not purport to seek an ‘origin’ for the dancing disease, it sought to find a more ancient, better preserved, and more original copy of present-day variations. The journey to a corporeal past that Meige performed revealed a hope to encounter what Roach has called a ‘mnemonic reserve’: a set of gestures, dances, and imaginaries contained not in written records but in the bodies and movements of people.

The mnemonic reserve—what we may further think of as a repertoire of cultural histories—also reveals a cluster of fictions about the past, articulating a narrative recombining the contortions of earlier generations with present-day scientific imaginaries to constitute 75. "Performance genealogies," writes Roach, describe "expressive movements as mnemonic reserves, including patterned movements made and remembered by bodies, residual movements retained implicitly in images or words . . . and imaginary movements as an archival repertoire, living and in 'drag', as much as events are translated—dragged—across discursive and geographic planes. Although Meige's archival return left little trace of the event, other contemporary narratives enable us to see what it was that he saw and thus to reconstruct the social choreography of the dancing procession as an actually very orderly, deliberate, and planned affair—not at all the scene of mayhem that Charcot's 'demoniacs' suggest.

As in previous narratives describing Bruegel's pilgrims, local traditions in Echternach claimed that the dancing procession was preventative: it constituted a popular theatre of movements engaged in at a designated time of the year to protect participants—even through the intermediary of hired dancers—from suffering choreiform and other movement disorders, as well as epilepsy, for the following year.

The Irish Jesuit Province, in a short article titled 'The Leaping Procession at Echternach', published in 1886, barely more than a decade before Meige's participatory return, suggested that the 'dancing saints' ('saints dansants') making their pilgrimage to Echternach every year did so in the hope of being 'cured or spared by imposing on themselves as a penance, the convulsive movements and contortions accompanying the dreaded illness'."

"'One of the most curious relics of the Middle Ages', the author of this short article noted, 'existing in its primitive form to the present day, is the annual procession in honour of St. Willibrord, held at Echternach, in Luxembourg, and popularly known as "The Leaping Procession."' The village of Echternach had been a 'famous place of pilgrimage', and though 'the origin of this strange devotion is doubtful', was still 'crowded at Pentecost by sufferers from St. Vitus' dance, epilepsy, and similar disorders, accompanied by their friends and relations'."

Most pilgrims, coming from Eifel, Upper Moselle, Saar, or further yet, arrived in bands of thirty, forty, or more, 'headed by their parish priest and a banner-bearer' as well as their own bands of musicians, 'march[ing] the whole way, singing hymns and litanies'. Others arrived by train and were 'conducted to the places prepared for their reception—great barn-like rooms, roughly fitted as dormitories, with beds of straw'.

'Curious sight-seers of a better class are few', the author noted, 'and consequently, have no difficulty in getting accommodation at the inns or in the houses of well-to-do villagers'."

The image offered in this account suggests a significant concourse of people and a dramatic city-wide affair. One correspondent at the Cologne Gazette remarked in 1880 that nine thousand pilgrims took part in the procession, 'without counting the large body unable, through age or infirmity, to leap with the others';" spectators swelled the ranks further. The whole procession was orderly, as the Echternach priests had 'thoroughly organised the smallest details' so as to provoke 'no disturbance nor noisy mirth'," so that the 'exercise' might not 'degenerate into a frolic, and have to be suppressed'." * Young villagers, ‘lads and lasses, sixteen years of age and under’, took part as hired dancers, agreeing to ‘leap and jump not for themselves but for others, being hired by pilgrims who are unable themselves to take part in such vigorous exertions’. They accosted strangers, asking ‘Wolt Ihr mich dangen für zu sprangen?’ (‘Will you hire me to jump for you?’), and danced for a few pennies, all the more vigorously if they had been hired by a few pilgrims at once. By the time Meige visited, expecting dramatic contortions, the procession had become even more orderly and imposing. A few years after that, Willibrord’s tomb was relocated to the Echternach basilica, providing further space for participants and watchers to gather. By 1920, at the height of the dancing procession, over twenty-four thousand people made the pilgrimage to this small town.

But the procession was still comparatively tame, dreamed in minds, not prior to language but constitutive of it, a psychic rehearsal for physical actions drawn from a repertoire that culture provides.


NEW GENEALOGIES: MEDICAL PRACTICE AND EARLY ANTHROPOLOGISTS MOVING OUT TO THE ‘FIELD’

Fieldwork was becoming a prime site for diagnostic observation, prompting what I argue constitutes a shift—a translatio—in the discursive history of the dancing disease. The journey from a broadly medical to an ethnographic field was fittingly fitful, wayward—what I am calling ‘choreographic’, denoting the sideways movements that fields perform and the rhizomatic routes they travel. Scientific articulation of the dancing disease in the last decades of the nineteenth century passes from an ekphrastic and historiographic to an ethnographic mode, criss-crossing (zigzagging across) geographic areas—mostly colonial ones—to become ever more ‘illegibly’ not just feminine but also African.

Anthropology is typically understood to have emerged in the nineteenth century out of the older fields of natural science and natural history, as well as archaeology, marked by the rise of museums; anthropology also arose with the increasing burden on administration in the imperial colonies,** and was as such often complicit with colonial rule.® But anthropology and ethnography were also, I argue, steeped in medicine’s own fascination for antiquity. Colonial medicine and medical history in particular provided an antiquarian pull, setting the stage—providing ‘scenes’—for the new ethnographic study of exotic behaviours and beliefs. Physicians, like anthropologists, stationed all over the world, had a privileged perspective on human movement, positioned to view, as from upon a hill, like a monarch, as Pratt suggests, the plains of what they saw as scientific history stretching out before them. Anthropology and ethnography emerged out of colonial medicine as sites—literally, fields—for observing the dancing disease. This is significant on a few accounts. The concatenation of historiographic and ethnographic methodologies—reaching to the past and the other—continued to embed modern scientific imaginations of choreomania in an elusive field of writing in which ancient history re-emerges as repetition taking place elsewhere. Choreomania in the late nineteenth century became a disorder of historical alterities just as these alterities seemed to erupt not only on ancient and modern European but American and, even more markedly, colonial land. Choreomania appeared antediluvian, primeval—not just historical and superstitious but prehistorical, inarticulate, animal, and pre-discursive. Choreomaniacal bodies festered and erupted, like boils, wherever ‘modernity’ was not—as its imagined other. Anthropology was the science of exotic body politics; but so, too, it perpetuated the study of human movement.

Jean Christian Marc Boudin (1806-1867), one of many under-acknowledged nineteenth-century writers who straddled medicine and anthropology, suggested that movement and travel (‘déplacement’) are at the heart of human history.¹ The relatively untranslatable notion of ‘déplacement’ is suggestive, denoting at once displacement—a usually undesirable sense of being no longer in one’s home territory—and the far more neutral choreographic sense of merely moving aside. ‘Déplacement’ suggests a transfer of people, objects, and ideas between sites (or fields). This provokes a shift: what I am calling translatio. The process of déplacement suggests not only a movement away from one place and towards another but a residual carrying over, a remainder—the drag and dragging—of memories and habits from one location, or field, to another. Boudin calls this sense of movement ‘irresistible’.² But it also suggests a passage—a discursive choreography—between areas of knowing, determined not only by geographies but by methods of reading and knowing. Boudin, who foregrounded travel and movement in his concept of human history, was heavily involved in the early days of the Société d’Anthropologie de Paris, a body initially composed mainly of medical professionals. Founded in 1859 and formally established in 1864 by the government of France for the ‘scientific study of the human races’, the Société d’Anthropologie translated early medical comparativism into the increasingly systematic study of human populations in colonial outposts overseas. 

Other founding members of the Société besides Boudin likewise came from medical and psychiatric ranks. Further professions listed among those practiced by the Société's founding members included geography, history, geology, public administration, Orientalism, linguistics, law, art, archaeology, and literature. But the majority of listed affiliates were from the medical world, from pharmacists and anatomists to military physicians. The ubiquity of physicians affiliated with the military and imperial orders in particular multiplied the number of medical professionals having access to exotic behaviors and disease, accounting for the vast majority of early publications on the new anthropological scene.

In 1865, a year after the French anthropological society's founding, over a third of the titulary members residing in Paris were primarily active in medicine; two thirds of the members outside Paris (including the British physician Thomas Aitken) were also medical professionals. Among national correspondents, half listed medical affiliations. By 1895, with the gradual institutionalization and professionalization of the new anthropological field, medical affiliations waned: out of roughly 550 members, only about 90 (less than one-sixth) were primarily active in medicine and related sciences.

Similarly, in England, the Anthropological Society of London, founded in 1863 by James Hunt (1833-1869) of the Ethnological Society of London (with which significant rivalry would ensue), claimed an affinity with the natural and medical sciences. The German Anthropological Society and the Berlin Society for Anthropology, Ethnology, and Prehistory, founded by Virchow, himself a writer on movement and dancing epidemics, likewise boasted interests in the intersection between medicine, culture, and society.

Although the development of anthropology in Germany, which had virtually no colonial presence, revolved around the concept of Völksgeit, national character, articulated by Johann Gottfried von Herder among others, and Bildung, learning for self-edification, believed to foster a spirit of curiosity about the world's people and to inspire novel approaches to culture, it similarly boasted a foundation in biological science and travel. 


EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE 

 These anthropological and ethnographic endeavours represented a seismic shift in disciplinary understandings of corporeality and movement, as writers translated colonial and missionary medical observations to a new discursive plane, foregrounding what Clifford has called a 'travelling culture', which involved research increasingly performed 'in the field'.% Moving bodies in anthropology were being described in cultural terms, at once grounded in and abstracted from the places where they were observed. And whereas these anthropologists were engaging in the increasingly professionalized world of medium-term travel and in the 'circulatory system' Gilroy has described as characterizing the modern transatlantic (and modernism more generally), they were also methodologically entrenched in a collecting culture. From this perspective, non-European natives seemed to reach back to—to re-enact— pre-European time. As such they were representational, artefactual: history's excess and residue, its remainders. Foucault noted that the early ethnographic sciences imagined non-European cultures to exist outside of what they imagined as modern, linear (European) time; non-European cultures were considered to be ahistorical.°** Choreomania, conceived as an ancient and non-European disease, was also thus 'ornamental': a disorder of superfl______ Choreomania was fantasized as ahistorical in its tendency to re-emerge and repeat; it did not belong to (linear, European) time but offered, through European bodies, a theatrical re-enactment of pre-civilized other states. Choreomania thus represents movement at the limits of modern, imperial Europe and the migration and circulation—the choreography—of ideas about these limits across fields. In the next chapter, comparativism comes to the fore as a methodological force that further meshes ideas about chorea and choreomania in the obscure otherworld of colonial medical fantasy.

The tarantella, long described in early modern medical literature by writers as a popular practice designed to expel a spider's noxious poison, emerges on the nineteenth-century medical scene as a site of bacchanalian revelry. The next chapter moves not only to southern Italy, imagined as Europe's gateway to Africa, but also to the African 'dancing disease', the tigretier, described by the British explorer and travel writer Nathaniel Pearce (1779-1820) as a tradition that, like tarantism, primarily implicated unhappy women.

Further excavating the genealogical links between fantasies of African tarantellas and colonial others, the chapter moves to a modern case of an African 'dancing disease', imagined as a tarantella by government officers worried that it was performed, deceitfully, to mock them. Lies, sex, and dance form the trio that set choreomania apart in the Italian south as a holdover dubiously connecting northern Europe to a 'dark' and—to many of its observers—inscrutable African past.

TRAVELLING CULTURES: POSTCOLONIALISMS AND DARK CONTINENTS

Part II delves deeper into the colonial and postcolonial spheres within which choreomania moved. No longer only a European fantasy of prior disorderly movements—among post-plague dancers, the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, and 'hysterics', as well as French revolutionary hordes—coming up to haunt a figure of modernity imagined contrapuntally against these prior 'disorders', the concept of choreomania now comes to signal a whole new amalgamation of bacchanalian fantasies, with uprisings in Africa, the Americas, and the South Seas. As I will show in the ensuing chapters, 'choreomania' travels with its translations in and out of colonial outposts and missionary, medical, and government archives—coming out always slightly transformed. From Orientalizing marginalia to eyewitness accounts, new archival repertoires emerge, contributing to moving the discourse on choreomania along to new shores. These discursive choreographies—always linked genealogically by scientific writers to discursive precedent—transform the language of choreomania from a slightly awkward medieval hold-over into a dark, feminine, and archaic return. If Europe was moving forward, the rest of the world, it seemed, was dancing impulsively far behind. Choreomaniacs in the literature surveyed in the following chapters, however, do not just move too much or display too much enthusiasm, as in previous cases; they increasingly epitomize an antediluvian force of duplicity, an ungovernable propensity to shamming as well as to insurrection. Still jagged and erratic, apparently purposeless and unpredictable, the gestures of choreomania come with the new fieldwork to signal an ever more thrilling—and dangerous—Dionysian proximity to ancient times, suggesting foreign bodies served as imaginary access points to an ever-receding past: Europe met its own (dancing) history of misrule in the exotic ‘East’. * 171

Not all writers in this genealogy were European, though many were European-trained; thus while many bodies and narratives I consider moved from west to east and north to south, some travelling researchers offered observations far outside Europe, contributing to an increasingly transnational set of scientific narratives cross-pollinating between regions, systems of practice, and thought. Choreomania's discursive history thus further zigzags, picking up an ever more indiscriminate array of case histories to add to and to confound its paradigmatic scenario, its ur-example—the St. John's or St. Vitus's dances of the European Middle Ages.

Underpinning this travelling history of ideas about the dancing disease is a persistent cluster of myths about unintelligible others. In order to think through the fantasy of colonial and postcolonial unknowability, and its imbrication in discourses about disorderly bodies moving through the new scientific disciplines, I borrow from postcolonial feminist theorist Ranjana Khanna, who describes, after Said, Foucault, and Frantz Fanon (1925-1961), the colonial legacies underpinning the 'dark continent' of psychoanalysis. Reprising Freud's claim that woman is a 'dark continent'—mysterious, obscure, and other, like Africa—Khanna traces psychoanalysis's lineage back to colonial anthropology and archaeology, situating modern psychoanalysis at the heart of the colonial enterprise and, significantly, in a melancholic longing to return to a primeval womb-like state of comfort and unknowing. But modernity cannot unknow what it knows, and so the trauma of colonialism serves as a powerful 'specter', she writes, haunting postcolonial legacies and aspirations.

So, too, spectres of alterity and prehistory haunt choreomania, as disruptive others emerge onto the scene of scientific modernity as figures of the alluringly unknowable past. Choreomaniacs appear abstruse and uncannily familiar, perpetually erupting in a cacophonous display of vitality on history's stage. Modernity thus construes itself in relation to a past and an other conceived as dark, odd, and inchoate. This chapter situates colonial modernity's 'dark' other—African and feminine—in southern Italy and the African continent seen to lie at its door. It argues that nineteenth-century medical and ethnographic literature on tarantism crafts an Orientalist fantasy by which tarantellas, and their imagined African variants, notably the tigretier, signify ancient practices that could be observed and reconstructed over the course of colonial travel and fieldwork, by which 'primitive' bodies could be 'excavated' for the benefit of scientific and artistic reproduction in the present.

Continuing thus the previous chapter's reflection on reperformance, historiography, and visuality, this chapter shows a new brand of comparativism emerging in the nineteenth century as a choreographic process multiplying sites for comparison: across discursive fields (translatio studii) and geographic ones (translatio imperii), in the construction of an ever more disjointed modern body, subject to proliferating origins and recentrings. The history of colonial-era comparativism concerning 'dance' and disease moves Said's contention, via Foucault, that the West construes the East through Orientalist structures of knowledge and power familiar from traditional learning and government structures—including the classics, the Bible, philology; public institutions, trading companies, geographical societies, and universities; writing in travel books, exotic literature, and so on?—and towards a concept of comparativism taking place transversally, across fields and geographies. My argument is that comparativism in the age of torque emerges motionally, choreographically, as a perpetual decentring, rather than as the paradoxical transposition of 'new' spheres of knowledge gained from colonial administration in Africa and the East onto older structures of knowledge acquisition and power.

'The relative novelty of colonial modernity as an emergent globalism performs a slightly different paradoxical motion: that of the semi-haphazard collection of comparatives. Rather than suggest a structure of accumulation of knowledge about others, which are fitted into pre-existing categories, modern structures of knowing comparatively emerge through series of proliferating encounters, each of which maps only somewhat onto a pre-existing scheme. The paradigmatic quality of prior models (St. Vitus's dance, or the Italian tarantella, also described in nineteenth-century medicine as a form of St. Vitus's dance) thus shifts, perpetually displaced and replaced—in Roach's terms, surrogated—by new models that nonetheless reach back to the old. Surrogation, unlike repetition, or imitation, suggests the imperfect mapping of a present onto a displaced, lost, or abandoned past; with surrogation, the novel copy of the old removes what came before by merely setting it to one side rather than eliminating it completely.'

So whereas the 'old' structure (St. Vitus's dancing, or classical philology) remains, formally—if only in name—its coordinates also shift in the process. 'St. Vitus's dance' or the 'tarantella' comes to signal something quite different with repetition and does so by virtue of the series of encounters and translations performed through it. This suggests a vital model of concept formation by which terms, figures, and forms coalesce into conceptual or discursive nodes, things about which a certain collection of things are said. In this chapter, the 'tarantella' becomes paradigmatic of a whole subset of concerns about the dancing disease, namely fakery, forgery, and deceit (generally but not always among women), as well as a particular sort of 'madness': colonial depression, to use a term anachronistically in order to designate a whole complex of affects and conditions, including fatigue, listlessness, and a (right) sense of oppression.

Following Foucault's contention that the history of madness, and of the human sciences more broadly, is a 'history of the Other'—simultaneously construed as internal and foreign—as well as of the order imposed on things, that is, as a creation of sameness where there may be none, the chapter proposes a look at the tarantella as a concept that moves between orders of otherness and sameness without ever revealing a stable or unchanging core—an origin. The tarantella rather comes to be construed in nineteenth-century colonial medical and anthropological literature as a disorder broadly signalling modernity's alienation from a supposedly prior, carefree, classical dancing self that it tries to recapture; modern colonial travellers attempt to find the remains of what they read in classical literature in colonial backyards and are disappointed not to find it matching up. 

But in the differential relation between the imagination and the encounter lies a space of transfer, a translatio, the movement of the concept from classical reproduction to a different sort of theatre—the theatre of forgery and lies, according to which colonized and lower classes seemingly represent the classical past but fail to do so properly in their execution. ‘Choreomania’ then comes to signal the impoverishment of the classical past in a present too gauche, too poor (for most), to match up to it. Thus furthering Burt’s contention that the ‘alien’ body of early twentieth-century modernity sought roots in faraway places to empower a rootless and disenfranchised modern self—Katherine Dunham, for instance, travelling to Haiti to bolster her African-American community in the present°—this chapter shows broadly Western (mostly European) scientists and anthropologists, travellers, and administrators marking modernity out as a space between sameness and difference, self and other, also with respect to the imagined other contained within the supposed modern self. Writers, artists, and scientists found people and events in other places that could, they thought, deepen and enrich their present with an order many felt had been lost. This suggests the experience of modernity in the age of torque as diminished, materially and spiritually, yet seeking to augment itself with less alienated, more natural, and more authentic other places (in Foucault’s terms, heterotopias), which nevertheless revealed themselves to be frustratingly (to their observers) never quite right. Thus the rhizomatic history of an emergent global modernity suggests travellers imagining themselves in an ‘uncanny’ relationship to faraway places and other histories: neither at home nor quite not at home in them. Conversely, colonial subjects encountering travelling physicians may have doubled themselves in an attempt to remember what was asked of them to reperform, discovering an uneasy mismatch in their own concepts of self and other and their own situation as objects of desire and distrust. Increasingly in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, otherness became ‘uncanny’, Burt argues, inasmuch as modern bodies—those experiencing themselves in relation to and yet as being different from a past nonetheless still accessible, many thought, in other lands—sensed that the divide was not so great. And so the experience of modernity became that of reconciling differential relations—what Said has described in terms of contrapuntal negotiations. Gilroy writes: ‘the anti-modernity of these [black musical] forms, like their anteriority, appears in the (dis)guise of a premodernity that is both actively reimagined in the present and transmitted intermittently in eloquent pulses from the past.’® The contrapuntal movement, then, is double: simultaneously an insuppressible re-emergence, even eruption, of (typically darker and more ancient) alterities in a present never quite able to contain them and the wilful recu-peration, even restoration or (violent) repossession, of these alterities in a self-styled upright present that is perpetually anxious nevertheless to know (and to master) them.

Beginning with a discussion of the emergence of comparativism as a method of choice in the nineteenth century, first in medical geography and then in comparative literature, the chapter goes on to discuss Orientalist fantasies about the Italian South, widely perceived to be more ancient and dark than the North, closer to Africa and Greece, and thus ideal for comparative analyses and recuperations. The chapter then discusses travellers’ encounters with the tarantella there, and Nora’s tarantella in A Doll’s House (1879), by Henrik Ibsen (1828-1906), as well as Pearce’s encounter in colonial Abyssinia (present-day Ethiopia) with a dance, the tigretier, he thought reminiscent of the tarantella.

Attentive to the Orientalist marginalia in Babington’s translation of Hecker’s writing, the chapter traces the expansive and transformative movement of ‘choreomania’ on North African and ‘Arabian’ terrains. Finally, I consider more recent ethnographic recuperations of the ‘tarantella’ in Nigeria, similarly cast as forgeries and fakes. Medical and anthropological literature, all these cases show, increasingly associated the reperformance of popular dances with feminine and colonial deceit, marking a new turn in the literature on the dancing disease as a disorder of colonial duplicity and ultimately resistance to rule.

COMPARATIVISM AND COLONIAL RULE
Said points out the origins of comparative literature in a period of high imperialism, specifically the nationalisms emergent across Europe in the period between 1795 and 1830.° But far less salient in contemporary literature on comparativism is another history situating these cross-cultural interests in medical research. Thus, although comparativism had become by the end of the nineteenth century the de facto method of choice for literary and cultural analysis, this chapter shows that comparativism also began in medicine, specifically in medical geography and medical history, two fields that I argue sit at the heart of concerns now prominent in cultural, performance, and especially dance history and theory: concepts of movement and archiving first and foremost.

The translatio from a broadly medical to an anthropological and now a ‘performative’ and dance field suggests not only (certainly not primarily) a continuity between these areas of research, methods, and conceptual problems; but, more saliently, a fundamental mobility between discursive fields of analysis and therefore an important historicization and destabilization of the disciplinarity of our disciplines. Rereading the history of dance in medicine allows us to rethink both—as well as a host of affiliated—fields’ myths of origins, including any notion suggesting that these fields have as 6. See e.g. Said, Culture and Imperialism, 66-67. Said offers a further account of the ‘contrapuntal’ in Edward W. "Said, Freud and the Non-European (London: Verso, 2003), 23-24. Said, Orientalism, 41. Said, Culture and Imperialism, 43. 174 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES their primary task is not anything other than to read bodily movement and forms. In this sense, dance and medicine share a common heritage, and participate in a shared sphere of cultural prejudice, including suspicion concerning (and attempts to smooth out) jerky and uncontrolled movements, such as those that characterize what are now commonly referred to as movement disorders: conditions marked by tics, jerks, spasms, contractions, paralyses, and sudden, unbidden falls. So although some contemporary dance practice embraces such alterkinetic aesthetics, and the whole domain of hip-hop, krumping, and popping relies on quick contractions and highly controlled, virtuosic muscular spasms as well as improvisation, the relative marginalization of these movements socially coheres with what I describe as choreomania, a pervasive prejudice against sudden, irregular gesture.

Hecker saw choreomania as a 'disease of nations', one that arose out of specific times and places—often cataclysmic ecologies—but nonetheless shared traits across histories and cultures. This comparativism set the stage for further analyses and a new fashion for finding examples around the colonial world. Hirsch, who edited Hecker's essay on the dancing mania in an 1865 German edition, declared the need among the scientific class to study what he called 'public' or 'national' diseases from a comparative standpoint. He wrote in the preface to his Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology (1881-1886) that medical geography and medical history were gaining a new currency among his peers as commerce with colonial peoples was enabling physicians to grasp entirely new realms of research. In particular, his English-language translator noted: 'the English-speaking race are most directly interested in the subject of this book, and their observations in various parts of the world have supplied a large part of the materials for it'.

Indeed, although Germany had long engaged in worldwide exploration, and travel narratives gained a new currency in the wake of Humboldt's journeys through equatorial America between 1799 and 1804, the absence of any widespread colonial presence had typically oriented German scientific interests towards what was thought of as learning for its own sake (Bildung). Still, Humboldt was interested in what Hecker had to say, and provided the 1832 German edition of Die Tanzwuth with a short foreword that extolled the virtues of comparative medical research. By 1879, the German psychiatrist Ludwig Witkowski (1849-1927) argued that all dance frenzies should be studied from a comparative standpoint. Borrowing liberally from Hecker, Witkowski called St. Vitus's dance a 'psychic infection' 'analogous' to earlier cases of mental or spiritual illness (Geisteskranke) and 'melancholic delirium', from the Sufi brothers to the Jumpers in England.

Thus, Hirsch noted, English and American but also French physicians contributed to the publication of monographs, official reports, and journals, aiding in construing the expanding field of medical geography. The Health Reports of the War Offices of England and the United States and the Archives de médecine navale in France, among other state-run publications, offered medical professionals new platforms for acquiring and disseminating information on the medical anthropology of parts of the globe 'formerly unknown in these respects, or known imperfectly'." New research in epidemiology offered comprehensive coverage of diseases previously unheard of in Europe, through reports issued by the English Health Department, the Transactions of the Epidemiological Society of London, and the Official Sanitary Reports of Sweden. These labours have not only added on the grand scale to our knowledge of the distribution of diseases, but also revealed the causal connection between them and the human environment. Modern increase in world travel prompted comparisons of climate, diet, and disease. By the end of the nineteenth century, comparison was arising as a method of choice for literary and scientific endeavours.


Comparative thinking heralded a paradigmatic shift in the way people and nations related to and interpreted one another, particularly for those with the financial and technological means to do so: northern Europeans travelling, for the most part, south. Orientalism provided ideal grounds for pursuing this comparativism, linking sameness and alterity, Greece and the East. In Said’s terms, Orientalism was founded on a series of comparisons, ways in which, to the westerner, ‘the Oriental was always like some aspect of the West’.1° Orientalists, Said notes, make it their business to ‘[convert] the Orient from something into something else’:2° something strange into something familiar and then, one may add, back into something strange again, as the imagined negative of the imagined self. Orientals are created as objects of discursive interest, imagined by way of mimetic doublings: the other’s alterity is annulled, rendered same, and yet their alterity is highlighted as being like the self but, to reprise Homi K. Bhabha, ‘not quite’.1 All All this phantasmatic projection occurs through the mechanisms of professional and amateur societies and associations, presses, vocabularies, and the like. These mechanisms yield what Said sees as a process of ‘schematization’, though as I show of choreomania, this process also comes with a concomitant ambiguation, as choreomania passes through various associated and correlative spaces—spaces of recombination—encountering new material and disciplinary topologies within which it continues to move.2 Put in other terms, choreomania continues to be reconstituted through various encounters between disciplinary zones of intensity (colonial medicine, medical geography, etc.) just as it is inscribed in new scenes. Choreomania is always reconstituted;15

15. Hirsch, Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology, vol. 1, vi. See also an early account in Muhry and Davis, Observations on the Comparative State of Medicine in France, England, and Germany, who note that they are interested in ‘the conditions under which diseases are distributed over the world, or are confined to certain districts’, suggesting that ‘when the laws which regulate health and disease among the human family began to be elucidated by the facts of physical geography, combined with those of vital statistics’, a ‘new branch of medical etiology opened up’, ‘variously named medical geography or noso-geography’ 


BABINGTON'S MARGINALIA: GEOGRAPHIC THRILLS AND COLONIAL EXOTICA

Addition, annotation, and marginalia constituted some of the most fecund means by which choreomania expanded and moved. Babington in particular offered a growing cast of narratives freely appended to Hecker's own, opening the floodgates to further tales emphasizing Oriental others. Freshly back from his travels in India, as interest in colonial administration was buzzing in the medical halls of London, Babington, a widely read polyglot who dabbled in poetry, published a volume of sonnets, stanzas, and songs and translated folktales from the Tamil, as well as a Tamil grammar translated from the Latin. He integrated into Hecker's compendium a range of anecdotes and asides from England's imperial realm, adding a flavour of exoticism and thrill to Hecker's already outlandish mix.

Hecker himself had set the stage for such comparisons, employing a number of foreign sources to compile his study, notably Pearce's autobiography and travelogue The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, written by himself, during a residence in Abyssinia, from the year 1810 to 1819 (1831), published fortuitously as Hecker was composing his essay. Hecker used Pearce's story as 'testimonial', an 'eye-witness' account of the African 'dancing mania', the tigretier. Quoting from Pearce at length, Hecker employs the example of the tigretier to reinforce the notion that dance manias occurred everywhere: one had only to reach to the nearest edition of the local newspaper or the nearest reprint of a traveller's tale to find studies of wild and disinhibited dancing. In this respect, Hecker drew from the past, but also the exotic present, inviting more such exoticizing asides.

Babington was zealous in his use of footnotes and appendices, employing his status as translator to advance what had become an increasingly global comparative project. Besides adding bibliographic references and details—such as mention of wax figures (‘peri cunculas’) believed to have been used by witches at the time of Paracelsus's writing on St. Vitus's dance—Babington provided entire case studies of the condition. An eleven-year-old girl in Renfrewshire in 1696, whose account he has learned of from the Glaswegian physician Robert Watt (1774-1819), ‘had violent fits of leaping, dancing, running, crying, fainting, &c’. But, as Watt put it, because 'the whole narrative is mixed up with so much credulity and superstition . . . it is "impossible"', he lamented, 'to separate truth from fiction'. Watt's account, published in Edinburgh in 1698 as 'A true Narrative of the Sufferings of a Young Girl, who was strangely molested by evil spirits, and their instruments, in the West, collected from authentic testimonies', attributed this episode to witchcraft. A Privy Council held on 19 January 1697 had issued a warrant, Babington 23. Michel Foucault, Larchéologie du savoir (Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1969), 11. 24. Nathaniel Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, written by himself, during a residence in Abyssinia, from the year 1810 to 1819, ed. J. J. Halls, Esq., 2 vols., vol. 1 (London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, 1831). 25. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 94n1. 'Sicily Implies Asia and Africa' + 177 notes, on the 'grounds of suspicion of witchcraft in Renfrewshire'; the commission, signed by eleven privy councillors, issued a further warrant on 5 April 1697 'to try the persons accused of witchcraft, and to sentence the guilty to be burned, or otherwise executed to death'. This historical footnote, indebted to Watt's article, 'Cases of Periodical Jactitation, or Chorea', published in Medico-Chirurgical Transactions (1814), recuperated Watt's story of witchcraft and delusions into a comparatively new biomedical and biohistorical sphere, between dance, disease, and the history of 'superstition'. The girl's fits of leaping, dancing, running, and crying—erroneously, Babington reasoned after Watt, attributed to witchcraft—could now be folded into the arena of neurological science and the renewed science of epidemic disease: specifically, the dancing mania. Babington's examples, like Hecker's, appeared pell-mell.

This story was followed immediately by another lengthy example, which Babington appended to Hecker's mention of 'Lycanthropy', a phenomenon discussed, Babington suggests, by Burton in his Anatomy of Melancholy, as well as by Avicenna (980-1037), Pliny (23-79), and a wide range of other classical authors."' In the example Babington puts forward, a group of nuns reportedly began mewing like cats; one nun had begun this trend, and was followed by her peers. In Germany, a similar case of so-called zoanthropy occurred in which a nun 'fell to biting all her companions'; soon 'all the nuns of this convent began biting each other'. As 'the news of this infatuation among the nuns soon spread', it 'passed from convent to convent throughout a great part of Germany', reaching Holland and Rome." Babington saw this as a case furthering the scope of Hecker's interest in lycanthropy (belief that one has turned into a wolf), which had served as a particular example of pathological imitation not necessarily involving dance. Babington's comparative transcultural approach to events analogous to St. Vitus's dance extended Hecker's transcultural and transhistorical study to form a second history of the 'dancing mania' in the margins of Hecker's essay, providing readers with a taste of Orientalist exoticism largely absent from the original. In a footnote appended to Hecker's general comment about the existence of 'similar fanatical sects [exhibiting] among all nations of ancient and modern times the same [dancing] phenomena'—an implicit invitation to further Hecker's narrative with new case studies—Babington offered yet another example of his own. He described a case of 'religious fanaticism' in Cairo, narrated in Recollections of Egypt, by the Baroness Von Minutoli (1827). The narrative, which he reproduced verbatim, described a monk 'singing, or more properly crying . . . while dancing on his heels, the name of Allah, till, completely exhausted, he sank down insensible'. Wolfardine Auguste Luise von Minutoli (1794-1868), Babington noted, wrote that 'these unhappy visionaries . . . often expire at the end of this holy dance', prompting Babington to add, again 26.

Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 99-100n2. 27. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 101n1. The article is by Robert Watt, president of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons at Glasgow, physician to the Royal Infirmary, and lecturer on the theory and practice of physic at Glasgow, in Medico-Chirurgical Transactions 5 (1814): 1-23. Watt opens his essay with a brief story of dancing at St. Vitus's chapel, near Ulm, adding that although this tradition and 'the convulsive disease to which children are liable' may be 'considerably different' phenomena, 'yet the two affections are perhaps nothing more than different species or varieties of the same disease'. He proceeds to note that he had the opportunity to see 'one of these restless people', an account of which he submits to the Medical and Chirurgical Society of London, adding that this disease, which seems to have a range of subspecies and varieties, is always characterized by an 'ungovernable propensity to motion' and is always relieved by 'muscular exertion' (1).

 Further species of pathological con-tagion were noted by Hecker in cases describing the human imitation of wolves (lycanthropy). He wrote that it is 'an extraor-dinary species of insanity, which, having existed in Greece, before our era, spread, in process of time, over Europe, so that it was communicated not only to the Romaic, but also to the German and Sarmatian nations, and descended from the ancients, asa legacy of affliction to posterity'. Calmeil, De la folie, describes cases of lycanthropy from the annals of French history, 87-88, 279-283, 310, and 416-427. Esquirol cites cases of lycanthropy and cynanthropy (belief that one has turned into a dog) in Des maladies mentales (1838). For Esquirol, this behaviour was attributable to 'demonomania', a form of monomania descended from pagan cults in which animal sacrifice was a socially sanctioned way to give thanks to the gods. Esquirol, Des maladies mentales, 521-522. See also Jules Bernard Luys, Etudes de physiologie et de pathologie cérébrales (Paris: Bailliére, 1874); T. K. Osterreich, Possession, Demoniacal and Other, among Primitive Races, in Antiquity, the Middle Ages, and Modern Times, trans. D. Ibberson (New York: Richard R. Smith, 1930), 191-192. Georges Devereux, in 'Le diagnostic en psychiatrie primitive: Théorie générale du diagnostic' (1963), describes the 'chien fou' (mad dog) syndrome, a term used to designate behaviour accepted in Crow culture as a means to express anger. Georges Devereux, Essais d'ethnopsychiatrie générale (Paris: Gallimard, 1970), 286-316, 310. Exhausted and sweating profusely, they fell down in the middle of a crowd of pious onlookers, who gathered around them, quickly lifting them back to their feet. The ecstasies were dangerous, Babington wrote, for unsuspecting Christian onlookers, who were forced to witness these events because of their unhappy public location. But Babington was not too concerned with the Christians' moral sanity, simply noting the discomfort this enforced proximity produced in them; his stated concern was to depict cases of dancing manias and similar events around the world and thus to extend Hecker's already comparative project with illustrations further proving its global range.

In his 'Translator's Preface', Babington warned his readers that he had taken the liberty of adding footnotes to Hecker's text that he trusted would be 'not inapplicable' to his readers' interests and might shed further light on the cases described. His footnotes and appendices consisted 'chiefly of parallel accounts in illustration of what is set forth in the text'. An appendix, consisting of a detailed account of 'fits of dancing' from the Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal, excerpts from Felix Robertson's medical thesis (chapter 5 here), an article by Mr. Kinder Wood (1785-1830) published in Medico-Chirurgical Transactions, and other contemporary sources, completed his substantive contribution to Hecker's study.

But Babington was also not impervious to the entertaining quality of his stories for the curious modern reader. He remarked in his preface that the purpose of the compilation—by which 'the physician may enlarge his knowledge of disease, and the moralist may gather a hint for the intellectural improvement of his fellow-men'—also resided in 'leisure', a term he used repeatedly to characterize the activity that consisted of reading these accounts and the danger among those doing so to succumb to the 'disorders' the narrations described.

"There is no class', wrote Babington, 'even in this age of boasted reason, wholly exempt from the baneful influence of fanaticism. ... And instances are not wanting, in our own days, and in this very capital, to prove, that disorders (how can we more charitably designate them?) much resembling some of those described in the following pages, may make their appearance among people who have had all the advantages of an enlightened education, and every opportunity of enlarging their minds by a free intercourse with refined society'. This medical history served doubly to enlighten and to entertain—as well as to counsel—his readership, constituted, in Babington's view, as much by physicians as by 'moralists'.** His project was to caution as well as to please. Building on the legacy of 'polite' leisure that the eighteenth-century reader of geography had enjoyed, Babington noted that his own modern reader suffered a new sort of pleasure, a real frisson in the face of dangers—each more exotic than the next—looming on every page. This interesting science . . . [is] at once instructive and entertaining, by conveying the most useful information in the delightfullest manner, and giving to precepts of the utmost importance all the captivating graces of a refined amuse- ment.** Geography presented its readers with the spectacle of faraway lands peopled by extraordinary creatures, customs, and landscapes.

It was a tool for exercising the imagination, ‘by contrasting the manners of savage and civilized nations together . . . insensibly [to] [benefit] by the bright side of the comparison’.** But as Middleton writes, this sort of comparativism ‘fed’ and ‘grew rich’ on ‘captivating speculations’ born from the ‘polite’ contemplation of climates and revolutions, political and commercial interests of state, and the rise and fall of empires. It concerned the historian, the politician, the philosopher, the naturalist, the antiquarian, the merchant, and the literatus, as well as the ‘simply curious’ person.

By the nineteenth century, a far more sensationalizing approach to world geographies had gained ground as extensive colonial administration prompted physicians to disseminate their findings to audiences world-wide. Babington, after Hecker, was at the helm of this boat, which travelled on what appeared to be far rockier waters.

Babington’s most sensationalizing contribution to Hecker’s work may be an extensive footnote to a passing comment Hecker makes regarding the tarantella. Hecker describes the Persian habit of counteracting the ingestion of venomous substances—such as the tarantula’s poison—by drenching the wounded person in milk ‘and then, by violent rotary motion in a suspended box, [compelling] him to vomit’.% Babington argues in his footnote that among the Psylli of Egypt, ‘another illustration’ tells of a sect that, ‘according to the testimony of modern writers’, ‘continues to exhibit the same strange spectacles as the ancient serpent-eaters of Cyrene’. ‘A band of these seeming madmen’, Babington writes, ‘with bare arms and wild demeanour, held enormous serpents in their hands which writhed round their bodies and endeavoured to make their escape. These Psylli, grasping them by the neck, tore them with their teeth and ate them up alive, the blood streaming down from their polluted mouths. Others . . . striving to wrest their prey from them’ struggled ‘mightily’, offering the ‘populace’ (which ‘followed them with amazement’) performances ‘believed .______ Although the example otherwise bore little resemblance to the tarantella, the public spectacle of poison extraction warranted a lengthy comparison. Examples proliferated in Babington’s version of Hecker’s text. Serpent-eating, associated with dramatic performances of poison ingestion, constituted a marginal form of choreomania in Babington’s view. A recent explorer’s narrative provided by the French naturalist Charles-Nicolas-Sigisbert Sonnini de Manoncourt (Sonnini) (1751-1812) and published in Hunter’s Translation of Sonnini’s Travels (1799) offered a further eyewitness account, enabling Hecker’s scenes to resonate with contemporary history and once again offering medical practitioners and the general public a stimulating read.

Although Babington did not add any further gloss to Sonnini’s tale and merely integrated it into his marginalia verbatim, his decision to append it to the word ‘imposture’, which Hecker employed to describe tarantism, underscored the analogy of these events with reported practices in the Orient. Sonnini’s account, recuperated by Babington, likened the practices of an Egyptian sect and a late medieval Italian form of a so-called dancing mania exhibiting similar types of venomous ingestion and imposture. The tale underscored three variables: poison; convulsions and frenzy; and the theatrical imposture governing the whole affair, staged as a public event putatively to inspire terror and awe. There was notably little dancing involved.

But for Babington, the mise en scène of the expulsion of poison presented an occasion to describe what looked like contemporary remnants of an early modern phenomenon, especially dramatized in the flamboyant East. Sonnini was ‘not so fortunate as to witness a public exhibition of such performances’, Babington noted, but his account of a private encounter with members of the sect offered him ‘a remarkable specimen of the extravagance of man’, albeit orchestrated by himself.

Every year, Sonnini noted, the Saadi (serpent-eaters) ‘walk in procession through 35. Middleton, ‘Preface’, n.p. 36. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 119-120. 37. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 120-121n4. Von Minutoli describes the Psylli as a ‘separate class, descended from the ancient Psylli, mentioned by Pliny, Celsus, and other writers of antiquity’, further linking, as Babington and others would do, modern Egyptians to a broadly Mediterranean antiquity recuperated into the history of the modern (often northern) European West (in Recollections of Egypt, 67). 38. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 121n4. See Charles-Nicolas-Sigisbert Sonnini de Manoncourt, Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt, undertaken by order of the old government of France, by C. S. Sonnini, engineer in the French navy, and member of several scientific and literary societies. Illustrated with forty engravings; consisting of portraits, views, plans, a 180 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES the streets, each holding in his hand a living serpent, which he bites, gnaws, and swallows piecemeal, with frightful grimaces and contortions. Sonnini then ‘contrived to procure [himself] .. . in [his] own house [such] a spectacle’. As Babington recounts it, Sonnini tells of a Saadi coming to his apartment with a priest of the sect. This entailed the performance of a sort of snake-dance, in which the Saadi bit the snake’s head off, ingesting its poison, which caused him to writhe and convulse. Sonnini's words, translated by Rev. Henry Hunter (1741-1802), were reprised by Babington in the same footnote: With a vigorous hand the Saadi seized the serpent. . . . He began to appear agitated; his countenance was discomposed; his eyes rolled; he uttered terrible cries, bit the animal in the head, and tore off a morsel, which we saw him chew and swallow. On this his agitation became convulsive; his howlings were redoubled, his limbs writhed, his countenance assumed the features of madness, and his mouth, extended by terrible grimaces, was all in foam. . . . Three men endeavoured to hold him, but he dragged them all three around the chamber. His arms were thrown about with violence on all sides, and struck everything within their reach.* As the priest took hold of the 'madman' and 'recited some prayers', his agitation diminished, and subsided into a state of complete lassitude.

Sonnini went on to note that the Turks who were present at this 'ridiculous and disgusting ceremony' firmly believed in the reality of the 'religious fury'. He added that it might have been either 'reality or imposture', but conceded that it was 'impossible to see the transports of rage and madness exhibited in a more striking manner' or to have before one's eyes 'a man more calculated to inspire terror'.**

Poison ingestion produced theatrical convulsions—real or fake—and while these were clearly spectacular for observers in the East, their narrative recuperations in the medical literature on the dancing disease made them more spectacular still, examples of a transhistorical epidemic that could seize readers themselves unawares. This additive trope, suggesting the possibility of a near infinite number of further studies, provided the illusion of universality. Yet pathologists saw in the reiterations and repetitions of choreomania a sign of continuous change, indeed a type of surrogation or reperformance, by which choreomania always became itself—or something slightly different—again. Choreomania was, in its proliferating centres, mobile.

Challenging the idea that diseases were biologically fixed, the French pathologist and historian Charles Anglada (1809-1878) argued that new diseases often appeared just as ancient ones became extinct. Some diseases underwent resurgences but often transformed as they did so.** Choreomanias appeared to be as old as human history, or older—animal, geological—and as the particular purview of the time and place at which they arose. "SICILY IMPLIES ASIA AND AFRICA': LIVING RUINS AT EUROPE'S EDGE

In this sense, 'choreomania' emerged in the interstices between literature and medicine, performance and ethnography, as their imaginary empty middle, the chasm out of which global scientific modernity arose. But globalism was not homogenization; rather, it constituted myriad pockets and nodes, zones, and gulfs. No writer has been more credited with inventing a planetary scale of comparative literature than Goethe; yet even his analyses of Weltliteratur (world literature) suggest differential relations." geographical chart, antiquities, plants, animals & c. Drawn on the spot, under the author's inspection. Translated from the French by Henry Hunter, D. D., 3 vols., vol. 2 (London: John Stockdale, 1799), 38-43. 39. In Sonnini, Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt, 38-39. 40. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 121n4, See Sonnini, Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt, vol. 2, 40. 41. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 121n4, See Sonnini, Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt, vol. 2, 41. 42. Charles Anglada, Etude sur les maladies éteintes et les maladies nouvelles, pour server a l'histoire des évolutions séculaires de la pathologie (Paris: J.-B. Bailliére, 1869). Anglada argued that demonomania, lycanthropy, spectropathy, choreomania or St. Vitus’s dance (danse de Saint-Guy), tarantism, and convulsive theomania were not epidemics, as Hecker had thought, but neuroses originating in mental processes and propagated by what he called the instinct of imitation; they did not present real anatomical alterations among those affected, however intense the mental aberrations and sensorimotor troubles (50). 43. See e.g. David Damrosch, What Is World Literature? (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003). ‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’ + 181 In writing of his travels through southern Italy in the second half of the eighteenth century, Goethe wrote that for him, ‘Sicily implies Asia and Africa’.* The Italian South, as performance ethnographer Jerri Daboo among others has pointed out, was widely imagined as a land of exotic rustics, an Oriental backwater more closely associated with the ‘“dark lands” of the Indies’ than with Western Europe. It was a ‘ter- ritory of passage’, between east and west, north and south, yet in its relative isolation it bore a greater relationship to India than to northern Italy, according to Jesuit authorities who in the sixteenth century sent their missionaries there first to train for positions further east.” Jutting out into the Mediterranean at the southernmost tip of Europe, southern Italy bordered Africa to the south and the southern Balkans to the east. The Orientalist fantasy of the southern Italian peasant as a dark African or Asiatic other was counterbalanced only by the equally pervasive image of southern Italy as a land basking in clas- sical antiquity. Southern Italy and Greece, for cultivated northerners, stood not only for Africa but also for all that was ancient. The ruins at Pompeii and Herculaneum were being excavated throughout the nineteenth century after their rediscovery in 1748, and travellers wishing to gain a taste of the exotic past looked to Europe’s southerly backyard for an experience of ancient times. In this antiquarian and archaeological fever, European visitors similarly ‘discovered’ the dance of the tarantella as living human remains conjuring Dionysian bacchanals. As Daboo has suggested, travellers such as Goethe and Henry Swinburne (1743-1803) found in the free movement of women dancing to tambourines a form of excess and eroticism that recalled to them ancient Maenads.** The past had seem- ingly stopped in these arid lands, and antiquity, with some prompting, came into view. Writing Travels in the Two Sicilies, by Henry Swinburne, esq., in the years 1777, 1778, 1789, and 1780 (1790), Swinburne described his experience, like Sonnini, commissioning a performance of the tarantella for his own edification. Finding no peasants presently engaging in this ancient practice, he located a tarantata—a woman who had been bitten by a tarantula—and bid her ‘act the part’.*” She complied and, accompanied by a ‘great many musicians’ summoned for the pur- poses, offered what she could of the ritual—per- forming it, he was assured by ‘all present .. . to perfection’—until Swinburne finally terminated the event, judging it distasteful: At first she lolled stupidly on a chair, while the instruments were playing some dull music. They touched, at length, the chord supposed to vibrate to her heart, and up she sprang with a most hideous yell, stag- gered about the room like a drunken person, holding a handkerchief in both hands, raising them alternately, and moving in very true time. As the music grew brisker, her motions quickened, and she skipped about with great vigour and variety of steps, every now and then shrieking very loud. The scene was far from pleasant; and, at my desire, an end was put to it before the woman was tired.

This woman’s performance of the tarantella— ‘stupid’ and ‘dull’—was far removed from the fantasy he had of it. For Swinburne, the tarantella revealed the crude remains of ‘heathenish rites’ and, more gloriously, Dionysian ecstasies. Tarantella dancers were in his view ‘exact copies of the ancient priestesses of Bacchus’ whose ‘orgies’ provided ‘so darling an amusement’ to worshippers. The rites of Dionysus, Swinburne 44, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Italian Journey (1786-1788), trans. Elizabeth Meyer and W. H. Auden (London: Collins, 1962), 212; cited in Dabo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 20. 45. Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 15, 20. On the Jesuit missionaries’ imaginary of the region as an ‘Italian India’, see esp. Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 19-24; and de Martino, La terra del rimorso, 22-24. See also Jane Schneider, ed., Italy's ‘Southern Question’: Orientalism in One Country (Oxford: Berg, 1998). Daboo notes that the image of southern Italy as gateway to the past still holds. Conducting ethnographic research on the revival of tarantella music and dance practices, particularly with the Notte della Taranta festival held in the region since 1998, now attracting hundreds of thousands of visitors, she spoke to a man from Bologna (in the north) who admitted that ‘he loved coming to Salento to experience the ancient past, the traditional life that was no longer present in the industrial North, but which he could hear in the music of the pizzica, now captured on his [MP3] player’ (Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 232). 46. Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 32. 47. Henry Swinburne, Travels in the Two Sicilies, by Henry Swinburne, esq., in the years 1777, 1778, 1789, and 1780, 2nd ed., 4 vols., vol. 2 (London: J. Nichols for T. Cadell and P. Elmsly, 1790), 304-305. See also Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 152-154. 48, Swinburne, Travels in the Two Sicilies, vol. 2, 305. 182 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES wrote, though ‘memory of [their] ancient name and institution’ had been ‘effaced’ after ‘the introduction of Christianity [had] abolished all public exhibitions of these heathenish rites’, were recuperated into the southern Italian tarantella and translated into the worship of St. Paul, who by the early modern period had become widely adopted as the tarantati’s Christian saint. But Swinburne’s fantasy and the practices he encountered failed to mesh. Peasants seemed to be poor copies of the ancient past; even when bidden, they seemed not to be able to remember the ancient history he thought their primitive bodies and minds so perfectly preserved. The exalted image of the ancient dance of the tarantati carefully cultivated by foreigners poorly matched the reality of tarantella practices on the______ The southern Italian peasants' rituals seemed enigmatically to arise out of the past, preserving and performing antiquity, while disappointing the modern traveller anxious to catch a glimpse of what he thought he knew. By Swinburne's account, the Neapolitan tarantella, 'a low dance, consisting of turns on the heel, much footing, and snapping of the fingers', provided a 'holiday-diversion' for young women who, without knowing it, he contended, mimicked the 'ancestral' 'pictures of Herculaneum'.*° Yet the tarantella also participated at times in actual physiological disease, he surmised, and had not entirely left behind those traces.

Swinburne saw two types of dances: for the most part, the dances were, he wrote, religious and spiritual holdovers from ancient Greece, elegant and refined. But in rare cases, they still revealed a grotesque and rather pedestrian form of nervous disorder, which resembled but could not be equated with the religious rites of ancient Greece. 'If at any time these dancers are really and involuntarily affected [by the spider's poison]', Swinburne remarked, 'I can suppose it to be nothing more than an attack upon their nerves, a species of St. Vitus's dance.'*' St. Vitus's dance, in this usage, denoted chorea, later Sydenham's chorea (and eventually Huntington's chorea), terms ascribed to a range of spasmodic neurological conditions, as I have shown.

When it appeared as 'nothing more' than this nervous disease, the tarantella bore little historiographic or artistic merit in Swinburne's mind; it was an 'attack upon the nerves', the mechanical result of animal toxicity, involuntary and fitful. It did not reveal any special insight into the ancient past, he thought. But those cases were exceptional; and for the most part, Swinburne remarked, the tarantella offered a special sort of knowledge about the moving past.

It may be that some women and men did suffer from chorea. But this neurological disorder is relatively rare, and Swinburne's desire to find in the tarantella a key to ancient history suggests a colonial drive to plumb history by way of contemporary bodies. These bodies, he, like his contemporaries, believed, resided more closely to the past by virtue of their residence at the imagined hinterlands of modern industrialized space. Peasants in the south of Italy were seen to be doubly removed from northern European visitors—by their class and their geography. As such, they appeared to observers to possess a special capacity to perform naturally and artlessly what northern Europeans reproduced by scholarly design.

Reconstruction of ancient dances through the careful imitation of pictorial evidence from vase paintings and ethnographic narratives enabled some scholars, hobbyists, and artists to create imaginary versions of tarantellas or other 'ethnographic' dances. The figure of the tarantella, moving from southern Italy north, was by the nineteenth century becoming a crucible for phantasmatic imaginings of exotic alterity. Dancers took note. The Austrian ballerina Fanny Elssler (1810-1884) famously rendered a lithe and graceful tarantella for the stage in La Tarentule [The Tarantula] (1839), a ballet pantomime set in the exotic province of Calabria. In this story, a young man is bitten by a tarantula and attended by a dirty old charlatan. "51. Swinburne, Travels in the Two Sicilies, vol. 2, 306-307. ‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’ and 183 Omeopatico (Homeopath), who promises to cure him in exchange for the hand of the young man’s fiancée. Horrified, she feigns being bitten by a tarantula herself and in imitation of her lover performs a convulsive dance. Faking death at the end of her performance, she is then swept away by friends and relatives, soon to be reunited with her fiancé.** The themes of lovesickness, deceit, peasant life, and feverish pain, treated lightly on the operatic stage, conjugate high romance and comedic misunderstanding with the spectacu- arity of convulsive disorders. Elssler’s portrayal inspired Irish-born, self-styled ‘Spanish’ dancer Lola Montez (1821-1861) to render her own version of a tarantella-like dance in her glee- fully erotic performance, Spider Dance (1855), in which she notoriously lifted her skirt above her head to reveal that she was wearing nothing underneath. Both works articulated the taran- tella as a dance of seduction and femininity and, in Montez’s case, dangerous sexuality and taboo. The tarantella on- and offstage projected a host of fantasies about the sexual life of ‘savages’ onto the Italian South, also crystallizing the imagined connection between exotic dance, antiquity, and nervous disease.

ORIENTALIST FANTASIES: TABLEAUX AND ATTITUDES

Swinburne’s graphic imagination of the orgiastic Greco-Roman world derived from his encounter with classical literature and fanciful reconstruc- tions popular among northern Europeans in the late eighteenth century. Some of these recon- structions were choreographed theatrical events, performed not onstage but in everyday life. Clad in a Grecian robe, Lady Emma Hamilton (1765- 1815), wife of the British ambassador to Naples, Sir William Hamilton (1731-1803) and an expe- rienced actress and hostess, presented visitors to their Neapolitan villa with what she called attitudes mimicking—like Charcot’s hysteroepi- leptic maenads—Greek vase paintings, statues, and frescoes. She was depicted as a bacchante by the French rococo painter Louise Elisabeth Vigée Le Brun (1755-1842) (fig. 7.1) and as a tarantata by the English portrait painter George Romney (1734-1802) before returning to England to teach her version of the tarantella to young women of the upper classes.°* Lady Hamilton’s endeavour to mimic Grecian attitudes suggests a contrapuntal movement transforming the tar- antella just as these imitations sought to grasp it. Her exercises represented at once a north- ern European performance of antiquity trans- planted onto a modern Neapolitan context and the artistic and scientific research processes by which this mimicry enabled the fantasy of greater access to an ‘other’—portrayed as one’s own special colonial heritage and bequest. Literary and pictorial representations rein- forced the image Europeans had of the ancient, Oriental tarantella and its proximity to the Bacchic past. In the novel Corinne, ou I'Italie (1807) by Madame de Staél (1766-1817), the heroine dances a tarantella in a ballroom in Naples, suggesting by her ‘ritual steps’ and ‘sen- sual’ movements the ‘power exercised by the temple dancing girls over the Indian [sic] imagin- ation’. The ‘charming tableaux’ that her ‘grace- ful’ poses suggested would not be familiar only to De Staél’s readers, who might experience a frisson implied in the comparison of Corinne’s moves to those of voluptuous harem girls. The tableaux were also familiar to Corinne herself, who in her______ Corinne embodied the modern woman’s discovery of classical antiquity and her ability simultaneously to capture and to transcend the magic of ancient and modern art—sculpture, drawing, and painting—in her sensual moves. In Corinne, the power of imitation met an implicit prior knowledge of these forms in her erotic dance, underscoring her intellectual and carnal knowledge of antiquity and the East.

La Tarentule, ballet pantomime en deux actes. Par M. Coralli. Musique de M. Casimir Gide (Paris: Chez Jonas, Libraire de lopéra, 1839).

Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 32-34.

Germaine de Staél (Madame de Staél), Corinne, or, Italy, trans. and ed. Sylvia Raphael (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), 90-91. Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 35-36.

De Staal, Corinne, 90-91.

184 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES FIGURE 7.1 Portrait of Emma, Lady Hamilton as a Bacchante, by Louise Elisabeth Vigée Le Brun, c. 1790. Tarantellas throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were purported to serve, paradoxically, both as a means by which women could know the past and as a window onto an ultimately unknowably ancient other. Tarantellas, more than any other form of chore- omania, epitomized to their medical observers female knowledge and feminine deceit at once: animal automatisms and the careful ruse of the woman (as well as the colonial person) craft- ily ensnaring observers in her elaborate play. Wrapped into a medical discourse on hysteria, tarantellas corresponded to what Diamond describes as a ‘modernist hunger for “primi- tive” experience’ and to what she notes were the ‘accusations of fakery’ that accompany hys- teria of all sorts.°’ In Diamond's terms, ‘hysteria marks the eruption of the lower, the animal’, the dangerously sexual and, as such, the ‘inexplic- able’.** Hysteria, as a characteristic disorder most dramatically manifest among those understood to be intensely, even pathologically attuned to the ancient world through travel, imagination, or their own culture—implicitly tied to the geo- cultural territory associated with it—suggested a form of alterity that could be organized and described but, significantly, revealed resistance to the sort of knowing Said construes as character- istic of Orientalist structures of implicit power. The tarantella, widely understood in medicine and travel literature as a ‘hysterical’ form of dan- cing disease, presented to its observers a her- meneutic impasse, ultimately a performance of that which resisted scientific knowledge and thus 56. Diamond, Unmaking Mimesis, 39. 57. Diamond, Unmaking Mimesis, 9. See also Liidtke, Dances with Spiders, 42, 56. 58. Diamond, Unmaking Mimesis, 9. ‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’ + 185 compelled observers to collection and compari- son. Dancing diseases—like the Italian South, which played host to them—served as a litmus test, an imagined border, against which the fan- tasy of reason struck before tumbling into what (typically northern) Europeans perceived as child- like, animal irrationality: a force that was vaguely ‘African’, bodily, fitful, uncontrolled, and femin- ine in the ostensibly seductive impossibility of its being known. As Said has argued of the long nineteenth century’s Orientalist discourse, the imagina- tive distinction between ‘our land’ and ‘barbar- ian land’ ‘does not require that the barbarians acknowledge the distinction’.®® On the contrary, ‘modern and primitive societies seem . To derive a sense of their identities negatively, societies are defined primarily in terms of what they are not or, far more powerfully, what they imagine themselves not to be. More than this, Said notes, degrees of distance and proximity determine our sense of ourselves; and these too can be imaginary, fictitious. Our 'imaginative geography and history', Said writes, help us to 'intensify' our own sense of ourselves 'by dramatizing the distance and difference between what is close to it and what is far away'.* Sometimes, dramas depict tensions between imagined or felt senses of proximity and distance, sameness and alterity, kinship and foreignness, as in the many Attic tragedies that portray Oriental others: most prominently Dionysus, the emphatically Asiatic god whose excesses epitomized what may have been experienced as real threats from the ecstatic religions and mystery cults of Asia Minor and the Levant that were introduced into Athens during the Peloponnesian War.

Translated into nineteenth-century medical culture, southern Italy's status as a gateway to Africa excited and worried observers who were projecting nearly unknowable antiquity onto it. A Doll's House: Wormholes onto Modernity

Nora, in Ibsen's play A Doll's House, performs a symbolically curative dance at a hinge moment in her narrative, as she is poised finally to leave her husband, Torvald. Ibsen, like Goethe and Swinburne, was aware of the myth surrounding the tarantella. Travelling through southern Italy while preparing this landmark play, Ibsen found in the dance of the tarantella a wormhole to the past which might catalyse an alternative reality for his modern heroine. In her sexually charged dance of seduction, Nora reveals what we may understand, following Daboo's analysis of the tarantella, after ethnomusicologist Paolo Toschi, as a pizzica de core (also known as a pizzica pizzica), a pizzica of the heart; but Nora also symbolically purges herself of Torvald's poison in what may be construed as a pizzica tarantata, a term used to denote the tarantella as a dance of possession and healing.

For Torvald, Nora's dance was not nearly symbolic enough. She danced just 'a trifle too [realistically]' for his taste; her tarantella was 'a little more so than was, strictly speaking, artistically necessary'. His patronizing language fires her up further. Where he saw a 'wild and excitable' and 'childlike' temperament, signalling a discomfiting 'transformation' yet to come, she finds recourse to an ancient and foreign tradition, which she signals with her Italian shawl.

Though 59. Said, Orientalism, 54. 60. Said, Orientalism, 54. 61. Said, Orientalism, 55. 62. Said, Orientalism, 56. 63. On pizzica de core and pizzica tarantata see Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 24-29. Daboo notes that both originated in Taranto, in southern Italy. She also, after Toschi, notes a third pizzica, the pizzica scherma, typically performed by men and resembling a martial art representing a sword fight. According to de Martino, whose landmark study on the tarantella brought together a neuropsychiatrist, a psychologist, a cultural anthropologist, and an ethnomusicologist, in La terra del rimorso (and accompanying documentary film), harsh socioeconomic realities in the Italian south accounted for much of the persistence of the tarantella in the area. De Martino and his team noted histories of young women as well as men—particularly those working in the fields, more likely to be stung because of their economic precarity (their tendency to work long hours in the summer heat)—suffering from anxiety and depression, exacerbated by the real effects of socioeconomic stress and, resulting from this stress, difficulty maintaining self-esteem and securing love. In de Martino’s view, the tarantella transformed from a ritual performance into a symbolic one, serving effectively in the twentieth century as a social salve, with the music and dance enfolding sufferers—of real and symbolic spider bites—back into a supportive community. See de Martino, La terra del rimorso.

Nora is, Torvald says, his ‘little Capri girl’. . . his ‘capricious little Capri girl’, she understands that her world is lurching forward without him. It can do so, paradoxically, because she finds a way out of the inertia and alienation of her pre-sent condition by counterposing it with an alternative temporality (and geography)—in Burt’s terms, with an uncannily alien other, facilitating the arrival of another modernity. The West finds in its Orientalizing vision of the primitive other not only its own biocultural prehistory, which it imagines it has surpassed, but a means for achieving self-determination by reconnecting to a supposedly purer state. This suggests a reading of Ibsen’s work away from notions of modernism as radical break with the past. Ibsen’s plays are harbingers of modernism—in this case, modern feminism. But the tarantella scene shows this modernism dramatized by a contrapuntal movement ‘backwards’, connected to ancient and faraway modes of being erupting in a decisive moment of recurrence. Modernity, in this regard, moves forward and looks backward—as well as around—just as it seeks points of convergence between parts of the globe and points in history, ‘connecting dots’ on what Roach calls the ‘geohistorical matrix’.

EXUBERANT COMPARATIVISM: THE TIGRETIER, MEDICAL GEOGRAPHY, AND COLONIAL TRAVEL

The tarantella was imagined in medical literature as transhistorical yet tethered to the land out of which it arose. It was conceived as a disease of southern Italy and the African South, a colourful (often coloured) variation on a broader dancing condition, choreomania. The grounds for comparison were tenuous, often based on anecdotal evidence. The following section turns to a dance understood by Hecker to be reminiscent of the tarantella, even identical to it, in his ‘order of things’, his choreomania taxonomy. Although he eventually disavowed the connection, the ground for transposing early modern Italy onto the African continent was laid with his work, providing the basis for a further set of comparisons linking feminine and colonial duplicity and deceit. In the 1865 edition of his work on the dancing mania, much of the discussion of a so-called dancing mania in Abyssinia—the tigretier—disappeared, replaced with a cursory remark by the French physician Alfred Courbon (1829-1895). Courbon, in his 1861 Observations topographiques et médicales recueillies dans un voyage a l'isthme de Suez etc. [Medical and Topographical Observations Collected during a Voyage to the Isthmus of Suez etc.], denied the existence of the tigretier altogether, discussing instead what he called ‘superstitious practices used in Abyssinia with the goal of treating dis- eases indistinctly, and often employed profitably through the work of deceit [ruse]’.© Courbon boasted that he had performed many investigations into this putative disease—the same described by Pearce thirty years prior, reprised by Hecker—and discovered, he surmised, that it did not exist. "Everything that Pearce said of it is a fable, and most of the circumstances that he supposed, such as the bands of musicians and cold baths, are not even realizable in Abyssinia." His pronouncement, however off-handed, seems to have convinced Hecker and Hirsch to pull discussion of the tigretier out of Hecker’s study. Yet Pearce’s narrative had, both in Hecker’s work and Babington’s Orientalizing English translation, invited other writers I will discuss in the following pages to bring further comparisons to bear on dance-like diseases— and disease-like dances—from various parts of the world. Pearce’s tale of Oriental Corybantes in Abyssinia offered anecdotal evidence that Bacchic manias were alive and well in the present day. Dancers apparently mimicking the gestures of their ancient and medieval forebears in a ritual in which sufferers were bedecked with borrowed jewels in the cathartic performance of a public dance provided ethnographic evidence for comparative medical history: Europe’s past was to be found in its supposed African backyard. The truth-value of the tigretier was insignificant in this respect. Its story revealed the image of

Africa mimicking, reproducing, and preserving an ancient and medieval Europe. Yet with these mimicries came accusations of doubling and, more grievously, deception. The tigretier, Hecker noted, bore an indubitable resemblance to the late medieval and early modern tarantella, providing him—via Pearce’s travel narrative—with vivid evidence for his comparative study of the dancing disease. Anecdotal information, drawn up in scenes that could be collated and compared, provided the illusion of scientific universality. Diagnosis took shape through anecdotal accumulation. Even when cases were eventually dismissed, like the tigretier, the traces their narratives left in the discursive journeys of the dancing disease made of choreomania an increasingly global complaint. Evidence through travel narratives also made the dancing disease all the more patently transhistorical, transcultural, and urgently contemporary.

"Comparison is the mother of observation", Hecker wrote, "and may elucidate one phenomenon by another"—in particular "the past by that which still exists". Social and political conditions in medieval Germany and early modern Italy, he argued, "operate on the Abyssinians of the present day" in similar ways, so that "in regard to superstition", for example, "the conditions of the Abyssinians of modern times is . . . a mirror of the condition of the European nations in the middle ages". In Tigray province (what is now northern Ethiopia, bordering Eritrea and Sudan), where the Abyssinian "dancing mania" was supposed to be most widespread, two occurrences "completely in accord" with those of the European Middle Ages were observed: a type of Christian flagellation and belief in zoomorphism, "which presents a lively image of the lycanthropy of the middle ages". These analogies enabled Hecker to offer further generalizations about choreomania, although his objects of analysis were only nebulously similar: the Abyssinian tigretier resembled the tarantella and St. Vitus's dance was only notable because its 'victims' showed a spontaneous urge to dance. They also displayed signs of lethargy and listlessness, as in the tarantella, and executed their movements to music provided by hired hands. Hecker used various sources to compile his narrative account, drawing primarily from Pearce's freshly published autobiography and travelogue.

Pearce had introduced the strange tale of his wife's affliction by likening it to events depicted in biblical scripture. "There is ...a holy water at the church Oun Arvel', he wrote, 'which is greatly esteemed for the cure of persons afflicted with evil spirits'" (Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 290). However, he was aware that his readers might find his description unbelievable: "This is a very wonderful disorder", he noted, "which I cannot pass over in silence, though the reader may think it fabulous and ridiculous; yet we have accounts of something of the same kind in the New Testament, which the priests and learned men of Abyssinia believe to be the same complaint" (Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 290).

Although many dances are mentioned in the Old and New Testaments, including Aaron's sister's dance after the passage through the Red Sea, David's dance before the Ark, and Judith's triumphant dance after the defeat of Holofernes, what mattered to Pearce was the convergence of modern-day Africa with the ancient Judeo-Christian past, granting credence, he thought, to this otherwise outlandish tale. However, the comparison only highlighted the supposedly ancient status of the Africans, who met Europeans such as himself, he thought, in the performance of an uncannily reliveable past.

And though Pearce characterized this dance as 'wonderful', 'fabulous', and 'ridiculous', he also, like Swinburne when he encountered the tarantella, thought it unseemly. Pearce's description revealed an affliction cured by the public performance of a dance that relieved the dancers of their dispiritedness. He first experienced its effects on a female acquaintance, presumably white and European like himself, and then on his equally white wife—further proof, as far as he was concerned, that this was not just a local superstition confined to darker races but a potentially universal disorder and an ancient type of disease.

"This complaint", he noted, "is called tigretier". It "seizes the body as if with a violent fever, and from that turns to a lingering sickness, which reduces the patients to skeletons, and often kills them, if the relations cannot procure the proper remedy" (Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 290). The remedy, he added, consists of the victim's relations joining together to defray the expense of a cure by calling upon a doctor who reads the Gospel of John and drenches the patient in cold water daily for seven days, although this unfortunately often resulted in the patient's death. 

If this approach was not effective, the family hired a band of trumpeters, drummers, and fifers and bought liquor. “Then all the young men and women of the place assemble at the patient’s house to perform an extraordinary ceremony,” one of which he attended, not without some apprehension. The display of ‘wild’ behavior on the part of the gaunt and sickly young woman he observed at first surprised and appalled him, although he acknowledged the effects of the cure on her. She had been lying for three months in a ‘lingering state,’ her speech reduced to unintelligible stuttering, ‘seized with acute agony, and a flood of tears’ if a book or a priest were brought before her. She did not refuse Pearce’s medicines, though he noted that they had no effect. When his neighbor, whose wife this was, decided finally to ‘employ the usual remedy,’ a band of musicians was arranged and silver ornaments were borrowed from neighbors. Pearce sat near her as she lay, at first, very still; but within two minutes of the music’s start, she began to move very slightly, eventually sitting up and then standing, as if the rhythm of the music revived her. Pearce described the event’s progression from her initial state of lethargy to her concluding leaps and bounds in a dramaturgical arc that made the whole affair a captivating theatre of emotional recovery. The liveliness of his description in a scenario in which he stages himself as a slightly sceptical but duly observing character offers one of the clearest choreographic accounts of a so-called dancing mania, suggesting an overall rather controlled and even subdued affair, with little of the involuntary tremors, contractions, or paralyses characterizing the choreas and other neuromotor disorders that were continually likened to these cultural practices. But Pearce emphasized bodily disjointedness, excessive gesture, and (disdainfully) the appearance of egregious uncontrol. He wrote: The evening that the band began to play, I seated myself close by her side as she lay upon the couch, and about two minutes after the trumpets had begun to sound, I observed her shoulders begin to move, and soon afterwards her head and breast, and in less than a quarter of an hour she sat upon her couch. The wild look she had, though sometimes she smiled, made me draw off to a greater distance, being almost alarmed to see one nearly a skeleton move with such strength; her head, neck, shoulders, hands, and feet, all made a strong motion to the sound of the music, and in this manner she went on by degrees, until she stood up on her legs upon the floor. Afterwards she began to dance, and at times to jump about, and at last, as the music and noise of the singers increased, she often sprang three feet from the ground. When the music slackened, she would appear quite out of temper, but when it became louder, she would smile and be delighted. This account describes a woman stimulated by the sound of the music, progressing from a head, neck, shoulder, and chest nodding or shrugging motion to motion in the hands and feet, as she went from a lying to a sitting and eventually a standing position, soon dancing and springing around the space. He remarks that eventually the young woman’s strength overpowered the musicians’, so that they could not keep up with her and had to rest while she continued to dance and bound about the room, more and more stimulated when the music intensified. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 124.

If the home remedy was not sufficient, a third level of cure took place the next day, involving the whole town. In this third stage, the woman was again loaded with silver jewelry and stripped it while she danced; the pieces were returned to their owners by a helper. These performative loans may have offered a symbolic means for family members and friends to demonstrate their support for the afflicted person through a public show of support. She wore their jewels, gaining social and emotional recognition from the performance of material provision, before returning them, in a gesture of thanks. It seemed to work. But for Pearce, who was dumbfounded, it was also mildly insane. He describes the dance as an outlandish charade, a "strange disorder," in which the dancer displayed the "maddest postures imaginable":

Next day, according to the custom in the cure of this disorder, she was taken into the marketplace, where several jars of maize or tsug were set in order by the relations, to give drink to the musicians and dancers. When the crowd had assembled and the music was ready, she was brought forth and began to dance and throw herself into the maddest postures imaginable, and in this manner she kept on the whole day. Towards evening she began to let fall her silver ornaments from her neck, arms, and legs, one at a time, so that in the course of three hours she was stripped of every article. A relation continually kept going after her as she danced, to pick up the ornaments, and afterwards delivered them to the owners from whom they were borrowed.** The performance culminated in a sprint, after which the woman fell to the ground in a state of exhaustion, finally to recover her name and be rebaptized, "proof" that she was cured.™4 The expenditure of energy seems to have enabled her recovery, revitalizing her through the music, dancing, running, and performative demonstration of social and kinship support. But not all so-called victims or patients were responsive. Pearce wrote: "some are taken in this manner to the marketplace for many days before they can be cured, and it sometimes happens that they cannot be cured at all".*5 Were they suffering from a different sort of fatigue, not receptive to these practices? What sort of fatigue was this? In Pearce's editor's terms, this was mostly a "sham" put on by the Abyssinian ladies, who were "fond of decking themselves out with trinkets and finery of all sorts", the "lady's degree of importance" being "weighed by the value and number of the ornaments and attendants, furnished by her relatives and friends".®° Like soldiers who shammed anomalous disorders and like schoolboys, these ladies were, this editor argued, "malingerers", not suffering from actual disease.*' But as with the tarantella, the supportive spectatorship and dancing do seem to have relieved real states of boredom and depression; the dance was not a disease but, arguably, its cure. As Khanna argues, reprising Fanon’s analyses of colonial melancholy, ‘faking’ illness was a frequent accusation levied against North Africans believed to be pretending exhaustion in order to ‘swindle’ their way to a warm hospital bed. But as Khanna and Fanon rightly note, colonial conditions often resulted in real states of alienation and depression that colonial employers and doctors dismissed out of hand. The tarantella, like the tigretier, was in part a way socially to counteract the nefarious effects of such alienation. As a sort of therapy emphasizing music, dancing, and social support, the practice of dancing to music seemed to viewers to be absurd, beside the point. It ran counter to a more broadly scientific notion of disease that emphasized altered behaviors taken as signs, proof, of a disorderly state curable only through discipline or drugs. For Pearce, the listlessness and dancing were one dancing disease, governed by sham; but for the women whose stories he reported, the dancing seems to have provided real reprieve.

Pearce's wife, seized with the same affliction as the woman he had earlier observed, seems to have been struck by a not dissimilar sort of discomfort and caused him some embarrassment. She had, like this other woman, been listless and unhappy; he had, he admits, tried to whip her, thinking, he further admits, that it might help. She only fainted, and his attendants, hearing about her condition, called for some music, which he had been denying them for a while. That, Pearce was forced to observe, 'soon revived her'.

She underwent the same ceremony as the woman he had previously described, and although the cure took slightly longer in his wife's case, it was ultimately efficacious. 'One day I went privately, with a companion', Pearce wrote, 'to see my wife dance, and kept a short distance, as I was ashamed to go near the crowd. On looking steadfastly upon her, while dancing or jumping, more like a deer than a human being, I said that it certainly was not my wife; at which my companion burst into a fit of laughter, from which he could scarcely refrain all the way home'.

Pearce added: 'men are sometimes afflicted with this dreadful disorder, but not frequently'.

Pearce's wife may have been bored, lonely, and depressed in a colonial outpost where her primary companion was a man who thought little of whipping her. The tigretier offered a temporary theatre of re-collectivization, repositing her at the centre of another social circle and another concept of distress. The tigretier reconfigured her condition as shared, suggesting that her despondency merited routine public attention and care. So we have to imagine in the whoosh of her dance's shadow.

COLONIAL HYSTERIA: MANIA, DEPRESSION, AND FEMININE REVOLT

In the Tunisian postcolonial writer Albert Memmi's terms, the colonial subject's drama is to be never quite aligned with oneself. At the cusp of revolt, the subordinated subject identifies with the oppressor to the point of an uncanny doubling—uncanny because it is never entire, never consummated. The subject remains split, even while, in Memmi’s analysis, the colonizers eventually project themselves onto the figures of the colonized, needing the colonized’s subaltern status to assert their own economic, social, and political superiority, and their own seemingly illustrious work ethic, deployed in supposed contrast to the purported laziness of the colonized people. In this double portrait of two mutually dependent and monstrous beings, the colonial relation emerges as a grotesque mimicry, a farce that fails to reconcile colonial subjecthood with a perpetually alienating and alien reality in which both parties are continually displaced, reterritorialized, and never quite at home.

Colonial melancholy in this respect acknowledges the affective and performative rift that such displacement continually produces, resulting in what Memmi and Fanon describe as the colonized person’s eventual ‘neurosis’, treated—to disastrous effect—in psychiatric hospitals that fail to help colonized people for what is never properly diagnosed as perfectly justified rage. In Khanna’s analysis, women found themselves even more caught in the crossfire between psychiatric and psychoanalytic analyses of the ‘life of savages’ and ‘dark continents’ of colonial and psychoanalytic myth.

Imagined to be as enigmatic and unwieldy as the African continent as a whole, women presented colonial medical writers with the figure of a ticking bomb waiting to explode in a hysterical attack, just as women’s attempts to conform to oppressive structures fatigued them to the point of overwrought submission and bursts of acting out—singing, dancing, shouting, crying—that were branded as buffoonish and sick.

Political conditions sit at the heart of the so-called dancing disease. This does not mean that Pearce’s wife’s dance or Nora’s signalled direct political action. The tigretier, like the tarantella, appears in tightly controlled performances taking place within codified bounds, but these enabled participants to shift their places in a wider political ecology. The dances represented the controlled eruption of jubilant, socially 89. Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 295-296; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 126. 90. Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 296; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 126-127. 91. See Albert Memmi, Portrait du colonisé, précédé du Portrait du colonisateur et d'une préface de Jean-Paul Sartre suivi de Les Canadiens frangais sont-ils des colonisés, ed. revised and corrected by the author (Montréal: Les éditions l’étincelle, 1972), 125; Albert Memmi, La dépendance: Esquisse pour un portrait du dépendant (Paris: Gallimard, 1979). Bhabha, The Location of Culture, 122-123. See also Richard C. Keller, Colonial Madness: Psychiatry in French North Africa (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007). 92. Khanna, Dark Continents. ‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’ + 191 sanctioned corporeality following states of inertia and despair. Although these dances were cast as a dancing disease, the anger and depression of ‘choreomania’ represented the normal consequences of abnormal conditions and the relief that came from the performative recollectivization of social life. SHAKERS AND FAKERS: THE AFRICAN “TARANTELLA”

In spite of repeated narrative evidence that tarantellas in many cases helped those who were bitten by poisonous spiders or were otherwise engaging in social dances symbolically representing such injuries, what marked modern analyses was a decisive emphasis on the sh______ So while Baglivi influentially argued that some dancers—especially women—took advantage of the tradition to have a good time (chapter 3 here), later authors set this feint at the heart of their readings. In his article on the ‘African Tarantula or Dancing Mania’, in Eastern Anthropologist (1952-1953), the South African anthropologist and British senior district officer in Nigeria, M. D. W. Jeffreys (1890-1975), argued that the Italian tarantella was ‘feigned for commercial gain’. His argument, borrowed from an account by the British zoologist Sir Ray Lankester (1847-1929), drew on Lankester’s claim that the dancing was staged. No one suffered from spider bites, Lankester wrote in 1914. ‘The tarantella was put on for the sake of credulous travellers only: The whole story of the ‘Tarantula’ x x x [sic] is now discredited. It was believed that the bite of this spider caused a peculiar sleepiness and also painful symptoms in men and women, only to be cured by music, which set the bitten one dancing. The . . . whole thing was an elaborate imposture on the part of the Tarantese peasants who, for a fee paid by a credulous traveller, would be bitten, simulate apparent collapse, and then pretend to be restored by music and the violent dancing of the ‘tarantella’ which they declared they felt compelled to perform.” Lankester’s belief that there really was no tarantella—or none derived from a real impulse to dance or from any actual spider’s bite—folded a vehemently anti-theatrical prejudice into older accounts of this Apulian cure. So while we may surmise that peasants in some cases were very plausibly taking Lankester for a ride or, as in the case of the hapless woman Swinburne convinced to act out a tarantella for him, responding to the pressure to perform with a reasonable sense that this show would provide a financial opportunity for them, the exchange itself was seen as a sickness characterized, among others, by a tendency to sham. These travellers sought out a theatre of antiquity but balked when they found any theatre at all. They wanted naive acts, not creative opportunism. Lankester took his accusations further. “That there was no connection with this frenzied dancing and the bite of this spider’, he added, ‘could have been deduced from the fact that the habitat of this spider is widely spread and as a consequence has been in contact with the human race for countless years’. Only in Apulia, Lankester wrote, are humans bitten by this spider compelled to dance. They must, therefore, he concluded, have been shamming.°° Lankester’s anti-theatrical and choreophobic prejudice, recuperated in Jeffreys’s travel narrative, shifted the discussion on tarantelas from scientific interest in toxicity, convulsions, and contagion to a social scientific stance foregrounding incredulity: this was now to be understood as mere tourist theatre. At the same time, the story offered grounds for further comparison, as an account of a disorder that indicated colonial duplicity: the colonial peasant’s supposed pathological propensity to cheat. Once an indication of pathological spontaneity, the dancing disease now signalled its opposite: lies. Jeffreys found further evidence for this in the colonial peasant’s supposed pathological propensity to cheat. The tarantella's venomous etiology is not dismissed on the grounds that the same practice was not found elsewhere, suggesting that a few hundred years and thousands of southern Italians must have been lying about their urge to dance and counterfeiting their movements. This underestimates the complexity of the tarantella. For example, British epidemiologists Donaldson et al. wrote about the "Dancing Plague." They argued that the seasonal 192 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES in Nigeria. There, a species of tarantula was used for divination in events involving frenzied dances, but the connection between the two was questioned.

Jeffreys, in his essay, compared the African tarantula's supposed Italian counterpart. Both phenomena involved gyration, frenzy, dancing, trances, and epileptic (or epileptiform) fits. However, both were feigned, artificial, theatrical exercises put on for the sole purpose of beguiling naive travellers. Jeffreys's account, proffered at arm's length, took anxiously into account the uncomfortable colonial relation in which he appears as an interloper and possibly a fraud.

Jeffreys borrowed heavily from British government archives, including a 1938 Annual Report on the Bamenda Division by the district officer, Mr. Swabey. His description of the Nigerian 'tarantella', or Makka, was quoted by Jeffreys: "The Makka movement [in Nigeria] originated in the neighbouring area of Mambilla in the Gashaka district of the Northern Provinces. It manifested itself in a frenzied dance in which most of the population, men and women joined. The dancers would gyrate in a frenzy to the drum, waving their arms like a windmill. They would then begin to shake as in an epileptic fit: their eyes began to stare as in a trance and then some would fall to the ground, apparently senseless."

Just as Jeffreys employs a comparative structure to frame his tale, so too similes serve Swabey to connect behaviours performed by Nigerians to a language used in medical literature and popular culture to describe similar events. The epileptic fit, the frenzy, and the trance, as well as motion resembling a windmill, painted a poetic portrait of familiar but incomprehensible behaviours accessible only through the medium of comparison afforded the learned colonial man. In the four sentences reproduced here, four qualifiers remove the activity from its geographic location, compared with structures that might be recognized by Jeffreys’s readers: ‘like’, ‘as’, ‘apparently’, and the subjunctive (‘would fall’) portray the event—distant in place if not time—while explaining that the Nigerians engaged in such a performance only for commercial gain, like the Apulians, with whom readers were presumed already to be familiar. The Nigerian dancers, Jeffreys noted, ‘would be pelted by the onlookers with anini (nickel tenths of a penny)’. He glossed: ‘The reason for so doing was obscure but the money was apparently collected by a member of the society and subsequently spent on drink. Anyone who fell down in such a trance was admitted a member of the society’. He had difficulty penetrating this society, making the elucidation of such a practice challenging—but all the more vital for his attempt to write at the recurrence of tarantellas may be more than simply perpetuated by tradition or symbolism: a population of large venomous spiders thrives in the area due to its hot, dry climate and deforestation; more important, the venom’s presence in the victims’ bodies could account for its reactivation during periods of excessive heat, compelling them to engage in the curative dancing that Baglivi prominently described (202).

‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’ + 193 limits of scientific knowledge, which Britain’s imperial reach appeared to facilitate. Scientific knowledge was enabled by and was enabling the further collection of case histories, trophies for the colonial traveller and the emerging disciplines he endeavoured to cultivate—in this case, social anthropology, deriving from comparative medicine, drawing the contours of a relatively spurious psychology of feint abstracted from colonial cultural history.

‘The immediate purpose of the society’, Jeffreys noted, ‘was difficult to discover as the people were very reticent but it appears that Makka would purge the country of witches, cure all illnesses, increase the yield of the farms and even raise the dead from the grave. In the village of Mbem’, he added, ‘a boy of about 12 years of age, who had fallen in the dance became a medium and interpreted the orders of Makka and these the people obeyed. The people would dance sometimes for three days on end and during this period all farm work and other activities ceased. Bands of people went about crying that now they had a new God’.

Jeffreys explained that the function of these sorts of dances—everywhere in the world—was to achieve the ‘physical catharsis of nervous tension by dancing’. With this statement, he was effectively entering the social scientific ‘order’ of the dancing disease into the discursive realm of psychoanalysis and sexology: dancing, linked to sex, as its public sublimation, operated as a sign of the subterranean rumblings of primitive life within civilized bodies unable to contain their own animal forces. Dance, in this view, was an expression of disease, the eruption of automatic impulses into social space: dance in general—and excessive dances in particular (lasting three days, or involving visions and falls)—signalled the pathologically unspent energy of sex. This functionalist view of cultural life positioned ‘dance’ at the heart of society and politics, as the direct expression of their disorderly underside. 

Following Foucault’s line of thinking on biopolitics and governance, by which discourse on sex makes otherwise unremarkable sexual activity into an object of scientific analysis and control, I submit that dance comes to represent the sign of a nation’s biosocial underside: disorderly dancing signals that the nation is, under the surface, uncontrolled. Dance is thereby attractive and titillating to all those attempting to read and to diagnose cultures comparatively; it is subject to scientific fascination and vicarious pleasure, as well as to nominal reprimand.

Comparative analyses implicitly linked African and American expressions of sexuality, suggesting that both were equally disordered and similarly manifested as an excessive propensity to dance—dancing in both cases was a symptom of sexual abstention. Comparing Uyo dancing in Calabar province in southeastern Nigeria to American Shakers, Jeffreys argued, revealed a ‘great emphasis . . . laid on “sin,”’ usually ‘carnal or sexual sin’, present in both contexts, provoking a similar use of dancing to achieve ‘catharsis’.

Physiologists know, he added, that ‘if such repressions occur the nervous and muscular tension rises, rises until there is some form of catharsis, and violent exercise, such as prolonged dancing will discharge the pent up nervous and muscular energy and lower the threshold of the excitability of the psyche’. The denunciation of marriage among Shakers, like the introduction of the Christian God and emphasis on abstention in Nigeria, forced the redirection of energetic flows into this sort of dance.

The simple biological ‘fact’ of ‘an overaccumulation of sex hormones in the system’, explained in the 1930s by the army physician and sexologist F. A. E. Crew (1886-1973), Jeffreys noted, accounted for the similarity of frenzies in various parts of the world where extreme religiosity had altered the course of people’s regular source of physical release.’ Repressed sexuality, resulting in grotesque deceit, was in his view at the heart of the tarantella and its Sub-Saharan relations. Once again, the dancing disease served as a litmus test for knowing—and in doing so colonizing—an almost unreachable state of history and biology imagined to reside, in a cruder and more observable form, elsewhere.

Sex erupted in dance; or so the complex node linking the ‘dancing disease’ to colonial depression and unrest suggests. Dance, it seemed, had no life of its own; dancing energetically, in the nineteenth- and twentieth-century discourse on choreomania, described only pathological waste. But this waste, this surplus, was vital, ethnographers seemed to suggest, for helping to explain why revolts and revolutions occurred; why women and men acted out. As a way to draw out yet simultaneously to explain and to neutralize the alterity of cultural practices involving shaking, dancing, seizures, and songs, at a time when modern Europe was becoming, on the surface, ever more suave, torque-like, discourse on the dancing disease created an order of disorder, a trope that could be transplanted onto all sorts of foreign terrain. Yet as stories of the dancing disease traveled, picking up muck and dust along the way, getting battered, seeing different air and landscapes, their writers becoming malarial or conversant in various fields, the concept shifted, becoming more political. In the next chapter, I turn to another history of writing on African dancing and movement disorders teetering between medical condition and shamanistic practice, political upheaval and theatrical deceit. With the imanenjana in Madagascar, observed by colonial physicians from the 1860s well into the early twentieth century, and the Brazilian revolt among disenfranchised sertées, geographic movement, enabled by colonial medicine, provoked a translatio between medical and cultural discourses that pitted the ‘dancing disease’, choreomania, awkwardly in these fields' shifting middle. Fieldwork performed by Charcot's students in particular enabled a translatio between neurological observation and political diagnosis, wrapping instances of social insurgency into the sprawling language of epidemic unrest.

'Sicily Implies Asia and Africa' + 195 Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil 'New' national, international, or global emergences create an unsettling sense of transition, as if history is at a turning point; and it is in such incubational moments . . . that we experience the palimpsestical imprints of past, present, and future in peculiarly contemporary figures of time and meaning. —Homi K. Bhabha, 'Framing Fanon' (2004)

Being-outside, and yet belonging: this is the topological structure of the state of exception. —Giorgio Agamben, State of Exception (2005)

Politics are not located directly 'in' dance, but in the way dance manages to occupy (cultural) space. —Mark Franko, 'Dance and the Political: States of Exception' (2006)

PERIPHERIES, LIMITS, AND BORDERLANDS: DANCE AT THE EDGE

The discourse on choreomania became increasingly political. This chapter offers thick description of two case studies at the peripheries of Europe's colonial empire, both marked by legacies traced back to Hecker's writing as well as to Charcot's clinic in Paris, the latter a clearinghouse for research internationally in the nineteenth century: here, we discover cases in Madagascar and Brazil, saturated with the traveling culture of medical research that characterized colonial modernity. After the antiquarian version of choreomania articulated in Hecker's writing and Charcot's comparative tableaux, choreomania in colonial medical circles, drawing from these archival repertoires, came to appear darker, more dangerous, and urgently contemporary: it was now described as a disorder of present nations uprising. This chapter traces this symbolic darkening and historical quickening to argue that with case studies in Madagascar and Brazil, colonial and missionary physicians became acutely aware of choreomania's political effect (and potential effectiveness). The dancing disease was not just a crowd condition, an oceanic mob, or a slightly irritating but not particularly dangerous feminine or colonial form of deceit; choreomania now signaled an epidemic case of anti-European revolt. At stake, then, is the nineteenth-century language of choreomania harnessed by medical writers to describe social bodies performing public acts of political resistance. Choreomaniacs were increasingly described as the social underclass, restless and uncontained. They agitated their limbs and circulated throughout the land; yet their movements were not, some observers thought, entirely willed, even though these gestures may have been stimulated by a spirit of contestation. As such, the discomfiting contagiousness of these dark bodies' "contagious moves," to reprise a phrase employed by Barbara Browning to describe the supposedly epidemic spread of blackness in postcolonial music and dance, was countermanded, in colonial medical writing, by a discourse on involuntary motion. Emphasis on involuntary movements, hallucinations, and "possession" by ancestral spirits made the dancers seem less threatening because they were supposed to be suffering from automatic forms of neuromotor or psychiatric disease rather than the arguably more worrisome effects of political willpower. But the background of political contestation did not go unnoticed, and physicians in Madagascar, grappling with the coextensive appearance of spasmodic gestures and collective revolt, called this combination, after the European literature, "choreomania". Similarly in Brazil, I show at the end of this chapter, the disenfranchised sertées of northeastern Bahia gathered in self-administered colonies to extract themselves from a corrupt body politic and forge an alternative community against the logic of the nation state but were crushed in the process. They, too, like the Malagasy rebels, were branded "choreomaniacs". In both cases, social and political movements characterized by collective expressions of hope and discontentment suggest scenes of upheaval that reconstitute choreomania's archival repertoire along anti-colonial lines. In this chapter, choreomania becomes the modern scientific articulation of a convulsive body politic attempting to wrest itself from state rule.

ECSTASY-BELONGING: STATES OF EXCEPTION AND MONARCHICAL RULE

I borrow Agamben's concept of "ecstasy-belonging" to articulate this concatenation of possession—significantly, repossession—and revolt. According to Agamben, ecstasy-belonging is normally reserved for a monarch, who sits simultaneously outside of and within a community. As Franko points out, the monarch typically performs a "state of exception" in that he (or she) takes it as his (or her) prerogative to decide how his (or her) political representation occurs, including aesthetically. In reappropriating the "state of exception" for themselves, "choreomaniacs" instate a prior order of political rule and its political choreography. They perform their political representation beyond the current state embodied in the sovereign: in Madagascar, their ecstasy-belonging reinstates the monarch's ancestors, in a choreographic journey of iconographic recuperation that retraces ancient pathways and theatricalizes the older order's return. "Choreomania" thus shifts politics in the capital by returning to an order prior to that of the current monarch, showing that that order never disappeared; it has always continued to ghost the present. The so-called choreomaniacs enacted thus a choreopolitical act of restitution, a performance of their own (re)institution of state power conjuring the specter of a suprahistorical and supramonarchical figure. Although the "people" are not strictly autonomous, nor is the regime democratic—this is not a representative rule of law—power lies among those who participate in the possibility of a collective return to a status quo ante, one that can (herein lies its power) be called on to disrupt and realign state politics at any time. The rule of law is in this sense representational: as Taussig suggests of the "magic of the state", possession belongs to those who "[mediate] the spirit of the state with the body of the people". 

Death, Taussig argues, "accents the imaginative possibilities given in the shadow-play in the state of the whole; it provides the lurch of reality into the unknown" that characterizes "magical transformation from figure to figure of speech." Reinstitution of a prior rule of law—which never disappeared—sets "death" (symbolic or real) at the heart of state politics, constituted as the theatrical representation of a right and rite of return.

In Madagascar, "roots" and "routes" (in Clifford and Gilroy's terms) are conjugated with "rights" and "rites" to perform the slippages, the "magical transformations" "from figure to figure of speech," making politics disease; but also, as I show further, making invisible spirits into forms that seize power where it hurts: in the nation's arteries, its throughways, going straight to the heart (the capital).

The metaphor of the body politic, treated in previous chapters, comes further into focus as the body's "spirit"—the ancestral forces 1, Barbara Browning, Infectious Rhythm: Metaphors of Contagion and the Spread of African Culture (New York: Routledge, 1998). 2. Giorgio Agamben, State of Exception, trans. Kevin Attell (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 35. 3. Mark Franko, 'Dance and the Political: States of Exception', Dance Research Journal 38.1/2 (2006): 3-18, 11-12. 4, Michael Taussig, The Magic of the State (London: Routledge, 1997), 103.

Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil + 197 haunting secular power in the nation state—comes to be perceived as ill, the illness manifest in the apparently senselessly flailing limbs of the nation's subjects. Similarly in Brazil, a prior rule of law was called on by the sertées, who saw the present state of political rule as corrupt. In doing so, the Brazilian rebels instantiated a state of law outside the temporal order of the nation's state and so performed their own return to a prior rule ecstatically: by standing outside, and representing themselves.

Unlike the Malagasy, however, they enacted their state of collective ecstasy far outside the site of state power in the capital, while calling on it negatively (by virtue of their withdrawal) to be dissolved. Their claim to justice was constituted not in a representational politics by which they would instate a new figure of authority (by recourse to the old) but by extracting themselves from the centre and so refusing exogenous rule, thus denouncing and suspending its legitimacy.

Choreomanias, as states of exception in Madagascar and Brazil, suggest forms of government that replace regimes of state power with prior orders of self-governance. These orders appear in the paradoxically "shapeless"—misshapen, disfigured—shape of disorder: a disorder of heightened gathering, a collective occupation of common space.

Choreopolitically, "choreomanias" in Madagascar and Brazil thus mobilize states of ecstasy-belonging in the shape of a "disorder" that in effect reinstates a prior rule of law: that of the more ancient past and that of the land, which is felt to underpin—literally to contain or to house—it. The land in these "choreomanias" thus becomes a site of return, symbolically holding up (and holding) the demonstrators' claims to another political priority.

In this sense, as the epigraph to this chapter by Bhabha—conjuring Walter Benjamin (1892-1940)—attests, "choreomanias" articulate a messianic "now-time" in which past, present,______ 

Visible in the interstices of colonial correspondence, government and missionary archives, medical journals and ethnographic compendia—all the machinery of circulation that Said notes enables concepts like Orientalism and, I add, ‘choreomania’ to travel and grow—this ‘now-time’ appears on the medico-historical stage in the formless form of fitful movements. These are bodies gathering together, exercising what I call a politico-aesthetic (or choreopolitical) state of commotion. OF CHOREAS AND CRUSADES: MIGRATING DISORDERS AND DISORDERS OF MIGRATION

The choreomaniacs’ commotion occurred not only among bodies moving in space but also among bodies moving through space, bodies travelling together. In this regard, choreomania was constituted as a disorder of migration. Thus, although Muecke has recently argued that we can class the ramanenjana—perhaps ‘anachronistically’, he submits—as ‘demonstrators’,> medical writers in the nineteenth century emphasizing the ramanenjana’s stiff, spontaneous gestures and their tendency to gather suggests a discourse on epidemic disease cutting geopolitically across anthropological and medical lines. This view articulates choreomania choreographically, I submit, as a disorder not only of politics but of commotion—of movement-together, in a movemented nineteenth century, when movement and movements were thought (and written) in the same breath as movement disease.

Thus the specific-ally anti-Western agitation of the ramanenjana situates them as revolutionary agents operating within (and acting on) a distinctly biopolitical sphere, ecstatically. Conversely, the theatre of political ecstasy-belonging they enact enables power to be instituted again and again in the theatricalized return to a higher rule of law—not a state of exception in this case so much as a state of return—one that refuses the monarch’s individual exception. Medical analyses in the second half of the nineteenth century wrapped political protest into the sphere of the dancing disease, cast as a disease of movement, travel, and social unrest.

The Malagasy revolution of 1863 was a popular contestatory movement that aimed—and ultimately succeeded—at unseating the widely unpopular pro-European king Radama II (1829-1863). This movement was performed by 5, Muecke, ‘Choreomanias’, 8. 198 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES individuals known as ramanenjana—meaning ‘to be made stiff’ or ‘to stiffen’°—widely reported to be proceeding from town to town, jerking and twisting their bodies in convulsive dancing cortèges accompanying the spirits of dead royalty; the 1863 movement as a whole was known as imanenjana.” This chapter shows a genealogical link posited between the imanenjana and previous cases of the ‘dancing disease’. Colonial medical literature described these demonstra-tors alongside St. Vitus’s dancers and other paradigmatic sufferers of ‘choreomania’. But here, choreomania became for the first time distinctly current and contemporarily African, suggesting the common face of an epidemic dancing ‘disease’ welling up to haunt and displace Europe from within its colonies. This went beyond the tigre-tier described in the previous chapter, seen to be quaintly individual and symbolically ornamental to everyday life; here, whole groups gather to effect political change.

Other differences make the ramanenjana significant in the discursive history of the ‘dancing disease’. Dancers were described now for the first time distinctly in terms likening their movements to spirit possession (specifically possession by ancestors); and they were described as suffering from a particular neuromotor______ One can observe—in various eras, at intervals usually so great as to make scientific comparisons [rapprochement] between different cases difficult—that the tendency towards movement is universal among people. This notion suggests that all movement has the potential to appear as a movement disorder, and that motion, as a universal source of disease, is commonly human. The enumeration of various case studies may provide an order of things, but real scientific comparison between them is impossible without further study.

In summary, Boudin's analysis emphasizes the idea that the imanenjana, along with other choreomanias, reveals a worldwide tendency among humans to engage in motion. This movement, which affects individual limbs and significantly displaces whole groups of people across geographic expanses, is considered a mysterious and irresistible urge or need for travel and movement. Boudin believes that all movement has the potential to appear as a movement disorder, and that motion, as a universal source of disease, is commonly human. Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil + 199 the phenomena _ difficult—humankind seized with a mysterious and irresistible urge for travel [déplacement] and movement, an urge that in Antiquity resulted in the great migrations; in the Middle Ages, in the children’s crusades and the great epidemics of chorea, from the dancing frenzy along the Rhine (the Germans’ Tanzwuth) and the Tarantism in Apulia during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, to the Convulsions at the Saint-Médard cemetery, the Tigretier in Abyssinia, the modern con- vulsions of the Morzine and, finally, the current epidemic, known as Ramanenjana, which in 1863 struck a great part of the people of Madagascar.®

So whereas Boudin listed migrations and crusades alongside epidemic dance frenzies, he also highlighted the ‘mysterious and irresistible’ quality of all movement, a trait that, I argue, the discourse on choreomanias suggests they all share. Mysteriousness—near inexplicability— when collaged into scenes appears (theatrically) as if knowable. Seemingly strange tendencies become recognizable scenes, discursive zones of intensity. Following Foucault’s analysis of the discourse on madness as a nearly indistinguishable set of events putatively brought by science from darkness into light, choreomanias appear in a chiaroscuro as that which—gossip has it— can be seen ‘again and again’ if you squint. And what this squinting reveals is people moving— generally, a lot, and in disorderly, nearly shape- less, fashion.

As with all the cases I have described, attempts at definition were always superseded by recourse to the list. Boudin, indebted to Hecker’s paradigmatic collection of case studies, appears to prove ‘choreomania’ by recourse to the familiar set of examples. Yet in drawing also from new medical anthropologies of Africa and South America, Boudin extends Hecker’s repertoire, making choreomania even more contemporary and apparently universal. Boudin opens with an account of the ramanen- jana derived from reports published in the Annales de la propagation de la foi [Annals of the Propagation of the Faith] and the Moniteur universel [Universal Monitor], and goes on to ist a West African practice whose description he borrows from French physician Alfred Maury’s (1817-1892) crosscultural La magie et lastrologie dans l'antiquité et au moyen age ou étude sur les superstitions paiennes [Magic and Astrology in Antiquity and the Middle Ages or Study of Pagan Superstitions] (1860); early travel literature on the Dahomey (present-day Benin), whose dances Boudin summarily com- pares to Jurupari Indian dances in the Amazon reported by the naturalist and explorer Alfred Russel Wallace (1823-1913) in his Travels on the Amazon and Rio Negro, with an account of the native tribes, and observations on the climate, geology, and natural history of the Amazon Valley (1853); voodoo rites; and a host of further prac- tices characterized by dramatic gestures, con- vulsions, falls, visions, and trance states. This alliance of choreas and crusades radically cuts across ‘dance’, disease, and politics, including what are typically considered movement dis- orders today as well as the political grievances associated with mass migration. For Boudin, all movement reveals choreography and suggests what Franko has called the interpenetration of dance and (geocultural) politics.® ‘Choreomania’ in Madagascar, then, reveals a nineteenth-century habit of mind according to which movement of all sorts is of a sort; yet, as I’ve shown, scientific collectionism appropri- ates this movement and the fantasies (the hal- lucinations and visions) thought to underpin (literally to move) it, displacing the arguably more productive ent______ Choreomanias, then, signal a different order of political protest: that directed at the temporal order of the state—a ‘now’ time understood as secular and mundane, the exercise of geopolitical jurisdiction over the land. Choreomaniacs replace this temporal power with an order of power that signals a concept of belonging understood to precede and to supersede it. The power politics at play thus suggest a discursive process of translatio from a politico-spiritual to a scientific realm by which ecstasy-belonging, what I further describe as ‘repossession’ and utopian longing, become medicalized, even as writers witnessing scenes of upheaval recognize the ‘purely’ (though never 8. Boudin, ‘Chorées épidémiques de Madagascar’, 441; cited in Andrianjafy, La Ramanenjana a Madagascar, 13. 9. See esp. Franko, ‘Dance and the Political’, 14-15. 200 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES the ‘merely’) political force of these movements. Physicians and missionaries see the dancers’ commotion as political (politically motivated) but never as political movement: it becomes epidemic contagion spurred on by high affect and shared sentiment; but the bodies are emptied of political will, seen as excess and deficiency, in effect as the prime movers of epidemic disease but not as deliberately active agents.

DAVIDSON'S PROXIMITY: POWER POLITICS IN THE CAPITAL

Andrew Davidson, writing two years after Boudin in the Edinburgh Medical Review, brought medical discussion of the imanenjana squarely onto colonial terrain. Stationed as a missionary physician in Madagascar to tend to an epidemic of smallpox, soon appointed court physician, and a recipient of the medal of the Order of Radama on account of his successful treatment of the king's son, Davidson was situated at the heart of the nation's power politics. Unlike most physicians writing about the 'dancing disease', he witnessed events he described as choreomania firsthand. This led him to politicize Hecker's historiographic and biophilosophical 'armchair' stance and bring Boudin's relatively benign cross-cultural analysis into sharper national focus.'^ For Davidson, choreomania was a distinctly anti-colonial disease. In 'Choreomania: An Historical Sketch, with Some Account of an Epidemic Observed in Madagascar' (1867), he argued that it was thus of immediate practical concern to British authorities, who might wish to quell similar upheavals elsewhere. 'It would be foreign to the design of this paper', he wrote, 'to enter into any of the interesting psychological questions which suggest themselves in connexion with this subject; such as, the nature of the changes on the nervous centres, the primary cause of such changes, and the organic lesions resulting therefrom; inquiries such as these must be of deep interest to the physician, the philosopher, and the divine.' But because choreomania spread among like-minded people, 'this disease is of special practical interest to the magistrate and medical jurist'. 'Such an epidemic may occur again in India or other countries where British interests may be deeply involved', he cautioned, arguing for the missionary medical remit to speak to political power. Davidson's plea to administrators to take note appears to have gone relatively unheeded: authorities in London expressed some interest in the 'revolution' but not its psychophysical traits.'^ Only at the colonial frontlines did physicians such as Davidson see the shape that anti-colonial revolt could take: in this case, a dance-like 'epidemic' of circulation. At the cusp of the outbreak of 1863, Davidson was prepared. London Missionary Society archives suggest that he had just requested, in a letter dated 4 May 1862, that the totality of all previously published Sydenham Society volumes be sent to him and had thus encountered Babington’s translation of Hecker’s writing. Merely a few months later, Davidson experienced what he saw as a version of the same phenomenon. Assigning, like Hecker, a biomedical source to the dances, Davidson argued that they were, however, particularly nefarious on colonial soil. Because the dancing ‘was associated with national prejudices, religious and political’, it was especially liable, he argued, to contagion. Anti-colonial prejudices ‘afforded, as it were, the condition, or one of the conditions, of [the dancing’s] epidemic manifestation. These formed the bond of sympathetic union among the affected’, he argued, disturbing the ganglia at the base of the brain and the individual’s motor centres, provoking disinhibited and uncoordinated locomotion."

 Choreomania was thus caused by strong emotion which translated into disorderly movement, including ‘physical derangement’ and sometimes death. Defining choreomania, with Hecker, as a ‘psycho-physical disease’ and an ‘excited state’, Davidson further summarized its traits locally. Choreomaniacs were characterized by a feverish demeanour, stiffness in the neck, and pain in the back and limbs.”’ They were also characterized by strong sentiments regarding specific colours and objects (in the Middle Ages, red; in Madagascar, the missionaries’ black, pigs, and hats), shaking, frothing, falling, and, to varying degrees, social or political unrest. All choreomaniacs showed an uncontrollable impulse to dance, morbid love of music, speech impediments, and ‘moral mania’ primarily affecting young women and men of an ‘excitable’ temperament more liable to suffer from hysterical conditions—though the disease, he noted, by no means spared others. Choreomania was thus especially common among the ‘superstitious’ classes, unable or unwilling to curb their natural (animal) impulses. Further comparing the ramanenjana to children, Davidson argued that choreomaniacs were ‘capricious’,’* not only because they moved spontaneously together but because this tendency suggested a sort of pathological contagion that upright Europeans did not, in his view, share. The Malagasy ‘infection’, Davidson argued, was in particular reminiscent of the child pilgrimage at Erfurt in mid-July 1237 that involved over a thousand children. These children ‘assembled’, Davidson wrote, ‘as if by instinctive impulse, without preconcertion, and unknown to their parents’.'? Comparing the Malagasy demonstrators to these children, Davidson foregrounded the choreomaniacs’ similar ‘bond of sympathy’, which could be explained by the climate of ‘general excitement’ characterizing all cases of choreomania. Public sentiment in the Middle Ages had been directed against priests, who had failed to offset the plague; similarly in Madagascar, the ‘public mind was in a state of general excitement’ due to the rapid emergence of a ‘pretty strong anti-Christian, anti-European party . . . opposed to progress and change’.”° Christians were, he argued, thus ‘exempted’ from contagion, since their ‘sympathies were rather with those changes, political and social, which disturbed the masses’; he and his peers were thus safely ‘beyond the reach of the current’. Superior education, ‘mental and moral’, and a ‘firm conviction that the whole affair was a demoniacal possession of their heathen countrymen’ enabled Christians to view the events ‘as outsiders, with the interest of observers’, and ‘without the fear which, in such a malady, is one of the means of its propagation’.”" To become epidemic, Davidson argued, choreomania had to ‘seize some popular idea or superstition, at once so firmly believed as to lay hold of the heart of the people, and so generally as to afford scope for the operation of pathological sympathy’.” This slightly reconfigures Browning’s notion of ‘infectious rhythm’, what she defines as an African brand of polyrhythmic percussive movement and music ‘that has allowed for the characterization of diasporic culture as a chaotic or uncontrolled force which can only be countered by military or police violence’,²² and, I hasten to add, medicalization. So where Browning emphasizes contagious rhythm, Davidson attributes the viral spread of music and dancing to individuals’ heightened capacity for sympathy and strong emotional and intellectual bond. Contagion was not just visceral or rhythmic but sociopolitical and ideological. Browning’s analysis suggests that contemporary AIDS discourse has saturated images of contagious infection among often African and homosexual men through figures of biologically determined moral degeneracy. But virulence as a mode of intergenerational—and intercontinental—translation had roots in colonial medical practice that underscored dance and the performance of high affect long before. Davidson presented a dramatic scenario of the events he witnessed firsthand, underscoring political insurgency as a viral act of sympathetic union. The ramanenjana flowed into the capital in droves in February and March 1863, proceeding from the southernmost tip of the island, the Bara region, where they had first begun.

 The ramanenjana were accompanied by musicians and bystanders as they shook and frothed, performing various acts of mimicry. They were recognized for swinging their heads from side to side and moving their hands up and down. Davidson described the 'attack' or crisis particular to the ramanenjana as proceeding according to a distinct dramaturgy. They first suffered a pain in the chest and severe restlessness and then ran energetically towards any music they could hear, uttered deep sighs, with their gaze absent, and after dancing for some time, fell to the ground. The medico-political dramaturgy Davidson proffered extended to the ramanenjana's places of encounter and contestation.

The ramanenjana gathered in large numbers at symbolic sites, and their words were largely unintelligible to observers. Props helped their collective performance of disaffection. They were fond of carrying sugar canes and balancing water bottles on their heads in a precarious show of acrobatism. This all took place in the open air at a sacred stone eight feet high and twelve feet in diameter in a plain below the city, where many kings of Madagascar had been crowned. They danced there for hours on end and concluded by placing the sugarcane, as a sort of offering, upon the stone.

The Vatomasina was the chief among sacred sites in Madagascar and a natural rallying place for rebels to gather in their ecstatic enactment of sovereignty. The dances lasted for many days, in the countryside as well as in Ambohimanga, the former capital turned Madagascar's sacred city. En route between sacred sites, and while they sang, danced, and trembled, the ramanenjana shouted threats and curses to the accompaniment of hand clapping, drums, or whatever other musical instruments were available. They were rumored to be not only accompanied by but also still communicating with the dead, especially the former monarchs Andrianampoinimerina, Radama I, and the formidable Ranavalona I, "The Cruel." The ramanenjana were goaded on by spirit helpers to carry Ranavalona's belongings from the land of the dead, Ambondrombé, to the capital.

The affliction spread rapidly, as by a sort of infection, even to the most remote villages in the central province or Imerina.  Further contemporary accounts appear in "Missions de Madagascar" in Annales de la propagation de la foi. Recueil périodique des lettres des évéques et des missionnaires des missions des deux mondes, et de tous les docu- ments relatifs aux missions et à l'ceuvre de la propagation de la foi, vol. 

26. Davidson, ‘Choreomania’, 133. Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil + 203 where she would help them depose her puppet son.’ Ghostly keys, swords, soap, chairs, chests, mattresses, and silver cutlery were all mimetic- ally relayed from town to town, equipping danc- ers with a symbolic arsenal connecting them to the dead.”* By 12 March 1863, news of the commotion seized the capital; dancers followed, reaching Antananarivo by March 26. Along the way, those who had lagged behind were being chastised by helper spirits; they twisted and cried, writhing, as if being beaten. Many dancers’ eyes were sunken in, rolled back, or bloodshot, further earning them the designation ramenabe (‘all-red’).”° By the time the ramanenjana had congregated on the streets of Antananarivo, accompanied by ever-increasing scores of onlookers, the capital was in a state of heightened agitation. According to the Malagasy historian Emile Appolis. Paradoxically, the ramanenjana, like their medical observers, performed this interference by a movement of recursion, calling back to the past. Medical observers did this by calling on their own set of spirits—those of medical precedent, operating as props to buttress present theorization. But theory, like political conditions, moved along with these acts of recursion. In Madagascar, choreomania did not only denote a biohistorical upheaval seizing individuals' limbs as if they were caught in a gust of wind or a ferocious torrent. This was no longer the quaint tremor of the limbs observed, even admired, among medical subjects beatifically recalling bacchanals but a collective upheaval that signaled regime change. The stakes were higher than ever, and visitors, including Davidson, found themselves in the thick of a revolt in which they were directly implicated as associates of the loathed king.

REBELLION HOSTED BY THE SPIRITS OF THE PAST: THE DANCERS DEPOSE A PUPPET MONARCH

Traditional Malagasy law held that an unpopular monarch should be unseated. Radama II was thus ripe for being deposed; the ramanenjana merely reconfigured traditional practices to fit the colonial culture in the capital. The European presence had long been disputed on the Great Island. During the rule of Radama I, government sympathy towards missionaries had meant state protection, resulting in large-scale printing and translations of the New Testament and a rash of baptisms. Ranavalona I then instituted a sharp turn against the Christian church, eliminating nearly all European presence.²⁷ She was a notoriously powerful queen who dressed in Parisian fashions but maintained deep spiritual ties to the old Merina practice and to the old Merina pantheon.²⁸ When her son Radama II acceded to the throne, he immediately reversed her anti-European policies, replacing her counselors with his menamaso friends: the menamaso were pro-European, often Christian Merina nobility who broadly adopted European ways. Radama II was allying himself closely with British and French interests, offering them missionary and economic protection in exchange for material favors.

This turned the Malagasy people against him. Within two years of his accession to the throne, Radama II’s policies resulted in the near obliteration of Malagasy sovereignty on the island. Mutual courtship between the king and the colonial powers had intensified Christianization, angering the old nobility and the shaman class. More grievously, Radama II was widely considered to have sold the island to Europe, going against long-standing sentiment in Madagascar against foreign ownership of Malagasy land. All land was traditionally supposed to belong to the sovereign and remain under his or her sole jurisdiction. Yet Radama II offered the French Lambert Company possession of all rights over Malagasy territory between latitudes 12 and 16 degrees south, provoking local opposition so strong that a concession was soon made for the government to pay the Lambert Company $240,000 to rescind the claim. But the damage was done. The Caldwell Charter, which Radama II signed on 23 August 1862 with the English, similarly granted substantial freedom of commerce and land seizure to the British, as well as full rights to product exportation and mine exploitation, returning only 10 percent of their profit to the state.°” This surprised even the missionaries. Reverend William Ellis (1794-1872), a close associate of the king, remarked on the dizzying rate of Christianization, suggesting that there were now seven thousand Christians in Madagascar out of a total population in the capital of forty thousand (with 4 million on the whole island). Ellis attributed the ‘remarkable spread’ of Christianity to the king’s ‘favourable’ policies and strong support for missionaries and traders. Davidson, who counted four thousand Christians on the island in a letter of 2 May 1862, similarly boasted of the strong presence of Christianity in his dispensary.** But this turn towards Europe was also seen as disruptive and taboo by many Malagasy. Hats, swine, and the missionaries’ prized color—black—were all unwelcome and were derided by the ramanenjana when they took to the streets. The ramanenjana directed their discontentment against Europeans and against the king, who had let these foreigners in. When the revolt spread and hundreds of ramanenjana gathered around the Vatomasina to sing and dance in praise of his deceased mother, Radama II was ostensibly a highly lucrative African possession. Its situation on Britain’s commercial highway to India and China and its importance as a naval station for a Pacific squadron in case of war were not lost on journalists commenting on the events of 1863. In an article published on 11 July 1863 in the Illustrated London News, shortly after news of the imanenjana broke, writers noted that Franco-British rivalry for control of Madagascar had exacerbated political tensions, making this into an outright ‘revolution’. “The Revolution in Madagascar’, Illustrated London News, 11 July 1863, vol. 63, no. 1212. See Sonia E. Howe, The Drama of Madagascar (London: Methuen, 1938), vii. 35. Howe, The Drama of Madagascar, 173-174. On Ranavalona I's anti-European policies, see also Dandouau and Chapus, Histoire des Populations de Madagascar, 189-193. Among other laws instituted during her reign, Dandouau and Chapus note a ban instituted 1 March 1835 against association with European work and religion; forced self-denunciations and retractions for anyone converted to Christianity, on penalty of capital punishment; as well as a 13 May 1845 law forcing Europeans to conform to Malagasy laws on the same footing as locals, thus subjecting them to______ 36. Radama II gained a reputation for collecting gifts from European authorities eager to win him over in exchange for trading rights and protection of their economic and missionary presence. In a letter to the directors of the London Missionary Society dated 12 August 1862, the king's deputy Ra Hanrika wrote thanks for gifts sent to Radama II via Ellis, including a bound English Bible, a portrait of the king in oils, a copy of Ellis's History of Madagascar, a large pair of globes mounted on a mahogany tripod, a royal folios atlas, and a figured velvet table cover. Ra Hanrika to directors of the London Missionary Society, 12 August 1862, CWM/LMS, Madagascar Incoming Correspondence, box 6, 1859-1863.

37. See George A. Shaw, Madagascar and France, 86; Deschamps, Histoire de Madagascar, 173-175. Madagascar's history in the following decades continued to be checkered: it became a French protectorate in 1890 and was under military control of the French by 1895-1896, when the Merina monarchy was formally abolished. It gained full independence only in 1960, although the Malagasy Republic was proclaimed in 1958 and reforms were introduced in 1956. All this took place after Madagascar had passed back into the hands of the British during World War II for one year and after a bloody uprising in 1947 that resulted in the death of eighty thousand Malagasy.

38. Claiming the importance of his clinic for Britain’s mission, Davidson remarked that ‘more heathen hear of the gospel... [there] than in the churches’. Andrew Davidson to directors of the London Missionary Society, 2 May 1862, CWM/LMS, Madagascar Incoming Correspondence, box 6, 1859-1863. Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil + 205 delighted, not indicating any suspicion that their turn towards her might concomitantly indicate a rejection of his rule.*° In private, Radama II stated excitedly to Ellis that ‘the spirits of his ancestors were coming from the north in the most formidable array, even with muskets and cannon’. Although Ellis expressed some scepticism as to the propitiousness or even truth of the affair, ‘the king laughed and changed the subject’.*° Camille de la Vaissiére (1836-1887), a French missionary also close to the king at the time, noted that he seemed to be delighted that such an extraordinary event was taking place during his reign, as if it were a sign of its felicity rather than an omen of its impending conclusion.’ For the British missionary Robert Toy, Radama II had implicitly encouraged the revolt through routine mismanagement leading to outright anarchy.” The king seemed to be pandering to Catholics and Protestants, French and British, but feared the wrath of his subjects as well and pandered to them too. Although ‘[listening] with the most profound attention to the truths of the gospel’, Radama II would, no sooner than a priest was out of sight, turn to his ‘favourites’ and perform the sermon ‘in pantomime’, to their ‘delight’.*® He decreed on 24 April 1863 that all Europeans should take off their hats before the frenzied ramanenjana, who reacted violently to the sight of these hated imports; a fine of 5 pounds was imposed on anyone who failed to comply. ‘Of course we did no such thing’, wrote Davidson, ‘and at last the English were exempted from this proclamation’. Ellis remarked that encounters with the ramanenjana were vexing for Christian officials, who continued to wear their hats, such that some had to duck down side streets ‘rather than meet one of these vagrant dancers’. Yet by 1 May the king himself was going around the capital without a hat, offering another mixed signal to the Malagasy and Europeans alike. Overall, the ‘revolution’ of 1863, by which the king was deposed, was relatively pacific. Twenty thousand people stormed the capital in the week leading up to his removal, many having come from far away. But though the king had few troops in his service at the time and was, significantly, murdered in a skirmish, reportedly only about fifteen other people died, mostly menamaso members of his pro-European inner circle. The ramanenjana had successfully brought about regime change in a dramatic but overall peaceful demonstration—a seizure of power noted by Europeans for its con- vulsive, literally seizure-like form. The ramanen- jana twisted their bodies and in performing this deformation of the ‘body politic’ reinstated a rule 39.

Described in Appolis, ‘Une épidémie de Ramanenjana a Madagascar’, 61, who cites a letter from P. Finaz to P. Jouen. See Raison, ‘Les Ramanenjana’. 40. In Howe, The Drama of Madagascar, 228. 41. Le P. de la Vaissiére, Histoire de Madagascar, ses habitants et ses missionnaires, 2 vols., vol. 1 (Paris: Librairie Victor Lecoffre, 1884), 393. 42. Toy wrote: ‘While professing to despise the whole affair, everything [the King] . . . has done since its appearance has been to encourage it’. Robert Toy to directors of the London Missionary Society, CWM/LMS, Madagascar Incoming Correspondence, box 6, 1859-1863. 43. Writing to the directors of the London Missionary Society on 4 May 1862, Davidson noted that the king’s leniency was leading to trouble. He complained of Radama II's ‘foolishness’, ‘weakness’, ‘outrageous immorality’, and high susceptibility to flattery, which was ‘disgusting [even] the native officers’. Andrew Davidson to directors of the London Missionary Society, 4 May 1862, CWM/LMS, Madagascar Incoming Correspondence, box 6, 1859-1863. See also Deschamps, Histoire de Madagascar, 173-175.

Everyone seemed implicated in the political machinations. Ellis noticed that the dancers, carrying offerings to Radama II from the ‘land of the dead’, flattered the king's vanity. “The rumours of the voices and visions . . . seemed to be gaining increasing influence over [the king]. It was stated that his mother, the late queen, had appeared to some of these persons, and had said that she was disturbed and offended by the increase of the praying in Imerina, which she did not allow, and also at the swine being permitted to pollute the city. The bearers of the reports also carried presents to the king, which they said they had been directed by the spirits of his ancestors to bring’. William Ellis, Madagascar Revisited. Describing the Events of a New Reign and the Revolution Which Followed (London: John Murray, 1867), 265-266.

Yet Ellis himself, Davidson argued, was being plotted against by the ‘idol worshippers’ because of his apparent intimacy with the king. With ‘gifts’ of ‘death stones, fragments from graves, porcupine quills, herbs, rep- tiles, and others not easily named’, they were conspiring to kill Ellis, though they failed ultimately do so. Andrew Davidson to direc- tors of the London Missionary Society, 4 May 1862, CWM/LMS, Madagascar Incoming Correspondence, box 6, 1859-1863. One theory suggested that Ellis killed Radama II himself by strangling him with a silk scarf in retribution for the king’s supposed______ 

44, Andrew Davidson to directors of the London Missionary Society, 4 May 1862, CWM/LMS, Madagascar Incoming Correspondence, box 6, 1859-1863. See Howe, 229. 45. Ellis, Madagascar Revisited, 267. 46. Appolis, ‘Une épidémie de Ramanenjana à Madagascar’, 61-62. 47. P. Adrien Boudou, Le Meurtre de Radama II, documents et discussion (Tananarive: Imprimerie Moderne de L'Emyrne, Pitot de la Beaujardiére, 1938), 56.

206 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES sovereign to them, in which the monarch was a representation, not a state of exception; the state of exception was theirs to claim. The king’s wife, Queen Rabodo, crowned under the ancestral name Rasoherina (1814-1868), was now set on the throne, along with the prime minister (ousted a year later), and, ruling with an iron fist, as had Ranavalona I, implemented anti-foreign poli- cies isolating Madagascar from the West again. A few more skirmishes were reported the follow- ing year at around the same time, and again the year after, but they were quickly subdued. These, too, like the upheaval of 1863, were described by observers as ‘dancing manias’.° A further out- break was reported in the Betsileo region in the 1910s, again to counter colonial incursions, but it, too, was suppressed.°° Yet the ‘dancing disease’, as it came to be known by observers, had come to form an inte- gral part of anti-European practices curbing pol- itical power, particularly aimed against foreign intrusion. The ‘dancing’—the choreography of this event of deposition—was now part of a broader history of choreopolitical practices that visitors to Madagascar described in the medical language of ‘crisis’: acts of bodily transformation that signalled a complex mode of acting out not easily assimilated to dance or disease, politics, religion, or spirituality.

THE POSSESSION OF THE DISPOSSESSED: TROUBLING CHRISTIANITY

Gatherings in the provinces like those reported by Davidson suggested a choreopolitics of appearance that, when conjugated with polit- ical grievance, resulted in the king’s removal from the throne. But a host of smaller-scale practices were noted far beyond the skirmish in the capital. Bodily and spiritual exercises calling up the spirits of the dead were conjugated with the language of pathological sympathy, making these ghostly demarcations appear in the light of comparative medical science. Reverend Marc Finaz (1815-1880), a Jesuit missionary sta- tioned in Madagascar, like Davidson, described the ramanenjana’s uprising as a ‘crisis’ and the participants as ‘patients’, though, also like Davidson, he does not appear to have attempted to cure (or to exorcise) any.*' Instead, he seems baffled by the events, emphasizing the ramanen- jana’s overwrought mental states and apparent lack of control as well as his own inability quite to know how to explain them. The ramanenjana’s exercises were characterized by physical trans- formations and altered states of mind, mani- fest for the most part, he noted, as dancing but also as a whole host of extraordinary activities and abilities. The reification of these theatres of crisis into choreomania reveals a fraught rela- tionship in Western scientific writing between reality and appearance—in effect with______ In other words, medical language took these scenes fetishistically as signs of ‘nothing’ acting mysteriously on the body; it was that ‘nothing’ which—when it spread—became reified; made, in Taussig’s terms, into disease, where nothing but contagion itself was spreading.” 48. See Robert Toy to directors of the London Missionary Society, dated 30 June 1864 and 31 May 865, and R. G. Hartley to directors of the London Missionary Society, 29 May 1865. Hartley notes that a ‘distrust of foreigners is deeply rooted in the hearts of the people’. For Toy, there was a ‘growing hostility both to Christianity and to foreigners on the part of many in authority’. CWM/LMS, Madagascar Incoming Correspondence, box 7, 1864-1866. See also Raison, ‘Les Ramanenjana’. 49. As the British missionary R. G. Hartley wrote from Antananarivo on 29 May 1865: “The dancing mania which preceded the disturbances of 1863 has reappeared—this may portend nothing, it may however be the forerunner partly cause and partly consequence, of an excitement the results of which it is impossible to foresee’, as in 1863. ‘It has not yet appeared in the town and strict orders against it have been issued by the Queen’. Yet, ‘it still ... keeps breaking out though not’, Hartley added, ‘as yet to any alarming extent’. R. G. Hartley, Antananarivo, to directors of the London Missionary Society, 29 May 1865, CWM/LMS, Madagascar Incoming Correspondence, box 7, 1864-1866. 50. Pierre Boiteu, Contribution à l'Histoire de la nation malgache (Paris: Editions Sociales, 1958), 138n. 51. “The crisis is first evident by virtue of a violent pain in the head’, Finaz wrote; ‘blood flows to the upper limbs, the pulse is sharp and irregular’. Then, ‘the patient goes from a state of extreme agitation to one of total prostration. He is seized by sudden frights, his words and gestures are broken; he seems, given his gait, to be half-drunk, his eyes are glazed, and fix on nothing around him, as if he were totally unconscious of the visible world and preoccupied only with the invisible world with which he claims to be communicating’; cited in Appolis, ‘Une épidémie de Ramanenjana 4 Madagascar’, 61. See Malzac, Histoire du Royaume Hova, 346. 52. On disease as reification, see esp. Taussig, The Nervous System, 83-109. Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil + 207 The state of the ramanenjana was in every sense a state of exception: it transformed participants' bodies beyond recognition, granting them unusual knowledge, and overturned social hierarchies in order to maintain an ancestral rule of law, ecstatically. The ramanenjana's ability to communicate with the dead astonished Finaz. 'I have even heard of children only twelve or thirteen years old', he wrote, 'describe in the minutest detail traits, gaits, clothes of people they claim to see before their very eyes, and the elderly unanimously recognize one of these children's ancestors, or family slaves dead twenty or thirty years before the young visionaries were born'. What's more, the ramanenjana performed virtuosic feats in these states of possession or ecstasy-belonging: 'men who are not normally swimmers can suddenly swim, during these crises', Finaz wrote, 'though they lose this skill as soon as they have returned to a state of health'. Normal physiological functions were likewise supplanted by extraordinary abilities, often dancing, including in the most physically unlikely and socially taboo spaces. "The Ramanenjana can be seen dancing with as much ease on a______ They walk barefoot on prickly nopal and euphorbia without their feet showing any scratches. They express no fear nor fatigue, as girls, otherwise frail and fearful, go in the middle of the night to dance on their family graves, a terrible sacrilege in the eyes of the Malagasy. They dance on the tombstones until dawn. Everything suggested a choreopolitical upheaval of everyday life. The dancers succeeded in overcoming fear and emotional limitations, fatigue, and physical stress. In this sense, they were 'possessed' by some greater willpower, granting them an extraordinary transcendence of the everyday. They experienced the ecstatic dissolution of their present time with a performative communion reaching back to ancestors, bonding together through shared memories of the dead—their way to actualize a better future.

For the ramanen-jana, a host of taboos had been broken by the king's squandering of Malagasy land. Entering into altered physical and emotional states enabled men and women, girls and boys, to enact another rule of law, mobilizing the individual and social body through a performance of 'sickness' (ancestor possession)—effectively mobilizing all the technologies of self. Taussig writes that a host of lived realities are reconfigured, as much as they may also be reappropriated and rewritten through the 'fabulation of reality' performed by doctors imputing to them a whole other range of reality and falsity principles.

The discourse on 'choreomania' rewrote the imanen-jana as epidemic sickness, harmful to its hosts and almost equally to bystanders. In effect, the spectre of the consequences appeared, positing illness in the future anterior. Malagasy possession practices, including the tromba, the vazimba, the sampy, the Salamanga, and the Fitampoha, were all mapped by observers such as Finaz onto a Christian model of religious enthusiasm that derided intense gesture and disorderly congregation, suggesting instead a Christian model of gestural unobtrusiveness that saturated Western concepts of health and disease. Spiritual belief alone, rather than movement, should in this Christian-inflected worldview relieve aches and pains, anxiety, or spirit possession. Religion and spirituality had to be suave, quiet, still, torque-like; intense corporeal expression was misguided at best or diseased.

For the British missionary J. A. John Alden, writing not long after the revolt of 1863, the Salamanga tribe constituted a form of 'native shakers' who were deluded, he thought, in their attempts to use music and movement to drive a 'sickness' 'out of their bodies'. They hopped up and down to the sound of drums, oblivious to his injunctions. ... What with the foul air in the close place, and the long continued violence of their enforced exertion, perspiration was pouring from every part of the poor creatures' bodies, and they were ready to drop from exhaustion. Happily I succeeded in inducing these native shakers to desist for a time from their attempted cure, telling them it could do no good, and that if they went to the missionary at the nearest station, he would probably be able to relieve their sufferings. But the people did not settle
208 * COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES

Like Davidson and Finaz, Houlder was in the margins of a scene that refused modernity as he conceived it, while his colonizer's status as fady (taboo), hasina (supernaturally powerful), vazaha (alien to the island), and vahiny (alien to the clan) exacerbated the intensity of the spiritual conflict he witnessed.*¹ But for him, as for other European spectators, at once characters in the biopolitical drama of possession and standing warily on its side-lines, the shaking was intelligible inasmuch as it could be subject to comparative speculation that cross-referenced local events with scenes from the European past. Yet the events themselves were hybrid, recuperating Christian iconography to suggest the sort of 'circulatory system' that Gilroy alludes to in regard to the Black Atlantic and that we may apply to colonial bodies and practices more broadly at this time.

Jesus, widely considered among Malagasy the 'royal ancestor' of the Christians, was believed to perform his own annual return on 5 April, at the end of the Christian Holy Week (Easter). This coincided with the height of the dancing 'epidemic',** which can thus be understood to have staged an iconic battle between Christian and Merina deities. The dancing enacted a culture war. In this sense ghosted with the spectre of political uprisings, choreomania epitomized the modern colonial condition: 'pathological' movement was described among the disenfranchised and lower classes. Colonial physicians moved around the world yet appeared in these accounts to be individually 'still', torque-like, not possessed by unnecessary shaking or congregating. Yet when men and women in situations of political dispossession moved their bodies and circulated throughout the land against the grain of administrative power, this came to be described as an epidemic disease of disorderly locomotion. 'Choreomania' came in colonial medicine to describe a disorder of the inappositely moving underclasses.

CIRCULATORY SYSTEMS AND GEO-CHOREOPOLITICS
The 'possessed' performance of dispossession suggests an order of dance cutting across cultural, geographic, and aesthetico-political lines. Following Franko, I argue that, choreopolitically, movement (and dance) enacts a relationship between choreographic procedures and mass movements, including administrative procedures and protest.°² Dance and popular movements are thus also public acts of choreopolitical mobilization. Dance, Franko writes, 'may perform protest, a direct and local way of upsetting a power balance'. Thus 'epidemic choreas' are instances of state power becoming publically imbalanced or, as in Madagascar, becoming balanced again. In the process of disembalancing and rebalancing politics in the capital, the 'disorder' of dance becomes apparent as disorder (in effect as disease)—and concomitantly now of choreography. This is significant not only for the history of dance—as of the scientific and the political (in Franko's sense, inasmuch as dance and the political co-constitute one another 'intradisciplinarily'°³)—but also for the broader work of writing history: a history that is in effect always of motion, of the way power shifts and moves so that ways of seeing disorder (including 'disorderly' bodies) emerge. This zone of indeterminacy—these processes of translatio—displace ‘choreomania’ onto new zones of intensity and indigeneity—articulating new choreopolitics—representing the interplay of sameness and difference that characterizes the ‘palimpsestical imprints of past, present and future’ that are constitutive, in Bhabha’s terms, of political emergence and change.” ‘Choreomanias’, then—their discursive history—help us rearticulate ‘dance’ in relationship to the performance of state politics, specifically as the politics of prior orders of down very quietly, and, ever and anon, we heard the noise of the drumming and shouting’. J. A. Houlder, Among the Malagasy: An Unconventional Record of Missionary Experience (London: James Clarke, 1912).

Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil + 209 history reappearing as formlessness in the present. Thus this discursive history (this genealogy) of choreomanias in Madagascar and Brazil also helps us reconfigure the ways we understand movement figured in cultural theories, as a discursive force primarily allied with ‘normally’ moving bodies. Movement, theorized by Bhabha, Clifford, Gilroy, Roach, and others, typically describes the transcultural movement (or displacement) and attendant intermix—the intercultural encounters—between bodies across geographies and historical eras. These include all sorts of bodies but generally foreground ones that are black or white, mestizo or hybrid: bodies marked by race but not necessarily by intracorporeal states of disruptive motion.

Interestingly, Boudin’s entanglement of inter- and intracorporeal movement, furthered in Davidson, Finaz, and others’ narratives, suggests a slightly different set of concerns, one I propose we use to supplement cultural theories of circulation. With Boudin, movement corresponds to the choreographic notion of bodies moving in space, whether they are shaking (in place) or travelling (across space). His alliance of choreas and crusades sets the choreographic at the heart of a concept of human nature (and history), offering a twist on the ‘travelling culture’ or ‘circulatory system’ that Clifford, Gilroy, and Roach put forward.

For Gilroy, following Clifford, concepts of travel and circulation help to explain the perpetual re-hybridization of black, mestizo, and European bodies and ideas in transatlantic trade, highlighting the journeys that intellectuals, colonials, and slaves alike underwent, cross-pollinating one another's narratives and cultural practices (music, carnival, etc.).% Conversely, Boudin’s emphasis on the relative singularity of cultures—in spite of their apparently universal tendencies to move—suggests a ‘circulatory system’ founded in cross-cultural comparison but not yet an intermixture that was material and bodily, conceptual and narrative. Yet, for Boudin, another cross-section of movement occurs, affiliating bodies and spaces. With Boudin, bodies move across, with, and through but also in place. This perspective forecasts the dual emphasis on ‘roots’ and ‘routes’ that Clifford and Gilroy highlight and that characterizes the ramanenjana’s circulation through Madagascar; and it forecasts Clifford’s notion of movement, designating the fact of ‘people going places’. But Boudin’s emphasis on people ‘going places’ coming to be ordered in a medico-anthropological taxonomy alongside twisting and jerking, hallucinating and dancing, suggests choreographic disorder signaling an aesthetico-political state of exception, a choreography of repossession.

‘Politics’, Franko writes, ‘are not located directly ‘in’ dance, but in the way dance manages to occupy (cultural) space’. With Boudin, the dancing disease is a state of exception intra- and intercorporeally. ‘The ‘circulatory systems’ in place in the nineteenth century by which men and women from the colonies went to Europe to study, returned with European ideas, and rewrote them at home, contrapuntally informed by local case histories, suggest continuous processes of rearticulation—the retheorization of movement and bodiliness—not only in the periphery of the colonial empires, but in the circulating literature that they produced. In this sense, following Gilroy and Bhabha, I submit that choreomanias reveal a rhizomorphic and palimpsestical literature according to which circulating histories are continually rewritten in an emergent, scientific global modernity that thinks about the ways bodies move ecstatically.

‘Cultural’ space with the ramanenjana suggests something more than political or state aesthetics shaping new forms of national identification or monarchical rule: the ramanenjana perform a transversal occupation and inhabitation of space as their ancestral inheritance and bequest. Dance is what (politically) occupies cultural space inasmuch as this occupation brings about the continuation of politics tied indigenously to sacred sites. The same is true for the sertées, who claimed a nearly natural order of politics antedating the nation state; for the sertées, however, remaining in place allowed them to escape the vortex of power in the capital and so reconstitute themselves along other (ex-centric) lines.

COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES TROMBA, BILO, RAMANENJANA: POSSESSION IN MADAGASCAR AS ‘MEMOIRE COLLECTIVE’

The ramanenjana were making political history through a performative recourse to the dead. Meanwhile, Davidson, Boudin, Finaz, Houlder, and others tapped into another sort of ancestor worship to grace their own discursive ends. Colonial writers’ efforts to link the imanenjana with earlier forms of choreomania mapped contemporary possession practices and political unrest onto one another as an epidemic dancing disease. Yet the complex of possession practices the ramanenjana participated in suggests choreographic precedent, a variation designed to oust foreigners from Malagasy land. The range of pre-existing practices underpinned the ramanen-jana’s movements when they took to the streets. Henry Rusillon (1872-1938) argued that the 1863 imanenjana was grounded in the tromba, a traditional Malagasy possession practice. His thesis partially rehearsed Davidson’s account, reproduced in an 1889 issue of the Antananarivo Annual, and was supplemented by writings by the missionary Antoine Abinal (1829-1887), de la Vaissiére’s Vingt ans à Madagascar (1885), and other eyewitness accounts. Rusillon described the tromba as a convulsive, gesticulatory, performative ‘malady’, a type of possession like St. Vitus’s dance and the tarantella, noting, like Boudin, however, that further study should be pursued before more accurate comparisons could be made.1

But comparisons offered the allure of transcultural diagnosis buttressed with historical hindsight, and for Rusillon the tromba of the Sakalave and the bilo of the Betsileo region spread, like the imanenjana and other choreomanias, like a ‘plague’. The imanenjana, just like the bilo and tromba, was in effect a type of choreomania and a routine possession practice in Madagascar, he argued: all described ‘a nervous disease that affects everyone, men and women, young and old, but especially the young’.

Significantly, Rusillon outlines a dramaturgy different from other accounts: those who suffered, he wrote, ‘claim that their head aches, they leave their homes suddenly, go wandering, sometimes naked, by the hills and valleys, usually near the tombs. They are agitated, shaking their limbs and their whole bodies nervously’; he adds that they also have ‘their hands sometimes held behind their backs as if they were tied up, then releasing them suddenly, they cry, through all of this, haltingly, “Hiaka, hiaka”’: a cry of defiance and victory. This suggests that the ramanenjana were engaging in a rehearsal for liberation, a performative pre-enactment of colonial oppression’s undoing. They theatricalized their liberation in the symbolic gesture of clasping and releasing their hands behind their backs.1

This slightly reconfigures Franko’s discussion of the ‘rehearsal’ of monarchical power according to Foucault and philosopher Louis Marin (1931-1992): as Franko pointedly notes, Foucault’s analysis of monarchical power rests on the presentation of power as suffering, in a spectacle of pain that constitutes the king’s ritual bio-superiority again and again, whereas for Marin, the king’s power lies in representation. The king in Marin’s view becomes powerful by virtue of theatricalization, specifically in courtly ballets. The king is in effect symbolically powerful, and his power rests on this symbolism. The king in this regard transcends the super-powerful body able to withstand pain that Foucault’s analysis highlights, becoming instead abstracted from earthly reality.1

In the ramanenjana’s case, the performative pre-enactment of colonial oppression’s undoing transcends the super-powerful body able to withstand pain, becoming instead abstracted from earthly reality. F. Siordet's biography, compiled from Rusillon's correspondence with the directors of the Société des Missions, Henry Rusillon: Missionnaire à Madagascar (1872-1938), vol. 1, Le Pionnier (1872-1913) (Paris: Société des Missions Evangéliques, 1940). 68. Rusillon, Un Culte Dynastique, 13-14. Rusillon's pioneering work on the tromba influenced generations of writers in his wake. Raymond Decary, Meurs et Coutumes des Malgaches, avec cent un dessins de Vauteur, describes the tromba in terms of 'affections choréiformes' ('choreiform affections') and the 1863 imanenjana as a 'chorémanie vraie ou manie de la danse' ('real choreomania or dancing mania') and a 'grande folie collective' ('great collective madness'). Raymond Decary, Murs et Coutumes des Malgaches, avec cent un dessins de lauteur (Paris: Payot, 1951), 225-231. 69. On slavery and the ramanenjana, see esp. Raison, ‘Les Ramanenjana’. 70. Mark Franko, ‘Figural Inversions of Louis XIV's Dancing Body’, in Franko and Richards, eds., Acting on the Past, 35-51, 44-46. Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil + 211 rehearsal posits a form of recuperation of power; a power that was temporarily lost, poorly han- dled by the monarch serving as its guardian. The ramanenjana in this case rehearse their reprise of power, their 'rehearsal' as a 'taking back'; in the French, a prise de pouvoir is literally a taking or seizing of power, and in this case the ramanen- jana perform the seizure, fittingly, in a seizure- like way—though I would venture to say that the homonym offers a tenuous relationship at best. With this seizure, in effect a re-seizure, a 'reprise de pouvoir', the ritual performance is not so much symbolic as affective and structural: the ramanenjana take back what has always been theirs, a power moreover grounded not in supra- corporeal abilities (though as I showed earlier, they exercised extraordinary corporeal feats) but in evoking genealogical precedence, grounded in the earth, where the dead lie. The rehearsal for liberation the ramanenjana perform enacts a shared heritage and future in the 'now' time of distributed monarchical power, wherein the monarch is powerful only through the body politic that acquiesces to him. Power is being made to be powerful; this requires a body politic that gives, and has the power to take back, from a monarch, power that lies neither in images nor in spectacle but in the subjective relation. The relationship of the imanenjana—as a rehearsal for wide-scale emancipation fore- grounding ancestral returns—to other posses- sion practices bears further noting. The tromba, still practiced in Madagascar, fétes the spirits of dead royalty. The term tromba refers at once to those possessed by the royalty and to a state of possession involving collective gatherings, drumming, dancing, states of inebriation, and a spirit of excitement and anticipation. The bilo emphasizes deliverance from spirit possession, but not deceased royalty." Sacred sites and rit- ual practices in the imanenjana, as in the tromba and bilo, antedated colonial rule, presenting spaces and choreographic models for exerting control over the present through a collective, performative appeal to the past, in effect a way of enacting a geocultural choreography of pro- test: ancestors and ancestral sites would guide and support those wishing to drive foreigners and their acolytes out. In anthropologist Gillian Feeley-Harnik's analysis, 'the dead, as inter- preted by______ "Following Roach, the living 'perform themselves' 'in the presence of others' (including the dead) by enacting what they believe they have been and what they con- sider that they are not. In this way, identity formation and power politics are always relational, always in Roach's terms surrogative: the new take on a mantle of the old which they travesty and translate. The productive relation between an imagined (or felt) prior self and a future becoming enables productive surrogation in the 'now', where protest (for example) theatricalizes a process of coming-to-be-again, even if this enactment of a return is partly fiction or fantasy.

Actually, as Roach points out, mythic origins circulate, transformed (what I call translatio'd) along the way. Although Davidson noted the dancers' proximity to tombs, Rusillon thought he had not gone far enough in highlighting the centrality of these relations to the imanenjana as a whole: the tromba, like the bilo, required dancers to be possessed by the dead.

Following Taussig's concept of Western science as reifying social relations, making implicit associations (and their disorders) into 'things'—which can then be ordered, cured, and most of all phantasmatically described or redescribed as objectively reconstituted”— I argue that the imanenjana, like the tromba, emerges as a practice of political and social rebe- coming in Madagascar, through ecstatic representation, grounded in a claim to the land. 

COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES 

"Colonial Europeans were unwanted foreigners, and with the help of ancestral spirits, they had to be removed. Hostile Europeans saw the Malagasy rebels as reincarnations of their own supposed medieval selves, while the Malagasy conjured their dead to oust the Europeans and their adherents. The ramanenjana's practices came into the choreomania repertoire as a disorder of heightened, pathological sympathy. But disease, Taussig insists, must necessarily be understood in 'synthetic' terms.

Disease is mutual, relational; it happens between two or more bodies or between a body and its environment, its ecology. 'Disease', Taussig writes in The Nervous System (1992), appears in the chasm between bodies and the worlds that surround, describe, and inscribe them. Disease is not independent but contingent, constituted by social contexts and described as such through particular discursive lenses. Events described as 'disease' are spurred on, provoked, and determined by a range of ecosophical factors: discontentment, excitement, pain, hope, and political unrest all make bodies appear as disorderly on a public stage. Here, the close proximity between twisting bodies and expressions of political commiseration served as grounds for a fantasy of contamination, as political intensities were expressed—and translated into—the choreopolitical movements of a collective revolt.

The 'continuous coming-into-being of the state', Taussig further suggests (of a fictional Latin American country), 'rested on the continuous passing away of the body of the Liberator into the body of the people, and this constant passing-away itself depended on a capacity not merely to continuously resurrect his image, but to be possessed by his spirit by virtue of that image.'

The nation becomes itself through the theatricalized appearance of a ruler, instantiated as the people ecstatically become possessed—thus making appear a national body politic. The 'people' continually reconstitute themselves in the ruler's seemingly stable image, an image that becomes the nation's representation, even performance. The monarchical (or otherwise stately) body is abstracted and, in the Malagasy case, singularly suggests a whole (here anti-European) politics that antedates and supersedes the present. It performs future anteriority, a coming-to-be that is ghosted (palimpsestically) by the past.

As a variation on older themes involving the return of the dead, convulsions, agitation, dancing, and singing, the imanenjana, like other possession practices, though more intensely political than some in its effects, recuperated extant Malagasy practices in an effort to confront and outplay the icons of the West. Meanwhile, the comparative medical language of the dancing disease offered eyewitnesses, such as Davidson, a means of exegesis that biologized and so, too, implicitly neutralized the show of self-determination demonstrated in this political revolt. What we find is a medical theatre in which the doctor-observer, physician, and priest diagnosed a range of attitudes from the standpoint of what Taussig calls a 'doctor's model of illness',© by which illness is reified as a narrative and set of scenes, including political disaffection but eluding politics in any discussion of a cure. Notable, in fact, along with the choreomania diagnosis, is the extent to which physicians and priests withheld intervention; virtually none of the literature suggests an attempt at therapeutic resolution, though across the spectrum of 'fields' engaging in the discursive concatenation of 'dance manias' into a 'thing', medical language 76." Sharp, ‘Playboy Princely Spirits’, 76. See Renato Rosaldo, Ilongot Headhunting 1883-1974: A Study in Society and History (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1980); Lambek, “The Sakalava Poiesis of History’. 77. Lesley A. Sharp, ‘Wayward Pastoral Ghosts and Regional Xenophobia in a Northern Madagascar Town’, Africa: Journal of the International African Institute 71.1 (2001): 38-81. 78. Taussig, The Nervous System, 83-109. 79. Taussig, The Magic of the State, 101-102. 80. Taussig, The Nervous System, 106. Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil + 213 prevails: patients, fevers, crises, and so on.®! In the next section, a Malagasy physician offers one of the most medicalized versions of the imanen- jana, situating his reading in conversation with French theories of chorea, epidemic chorea, and hysteroepilepsy but offering a local twist to the events emphasizing malaria and lies. THE SHAMANS’ DECEIT: ANDRIANJAFY’S REREADING Dr. Andrianjafy, a Malagasy physician and neur- ology student at the Université de Montpellier in France in the 1890s, furthered European theo- ries of epidemic chorea with a case study from Madagascar, extending the scope of the choreo- mania diagnosis and further medicalizing pre- vious analyses, simultaneously reinscribing the imanenjana into a European discourse on nervous pathology and movement disorders and offering a more central role in the ‘disease’ to sociocul- tural and micro-political factors. Paradoxically, perhaps, Andrianjafy’s status as a Malagasy national did not make him more sympathetic to the revolt; instead he occluded state politics almost entirely, signalling his effort to distance himself from current narratives and showing that the European physicians were most keenly invested in the politics of the dancing disease as directed against the (Europhilic) state. Andrianjafy’s concern was the first to engage with local ecologies. He argued in his M.D. thesis, Le Ramanenjana & Madagascar (Choréomanie dorigine palustre) [The Ramanenjana_ in Madagascar (Choreomania of Paludal Origin)] (1902) that the ramanenjana who took to the streets in 1863 actually suffered from a type of chorea major (choreomania) different from that known to European doctors, including St. Vitus’s dance—still the paradigmatic case to which all other choreomanias were referred—insofar as the Malagasy type was not caused by hysteria, as Davidson and others held, but, Andrianjafy maintained, by a subtype of epidemic paludism (malaria). This was, he argued, a form of malaria common in the rainy season known locally as mena vary aloha, or rice harvest.®* Andrianjafy remarked that this sort of malaria was largely unknown to European medical doc- tors and was poorly understood by European missionary physicians, who tended to reside in the coastal regions of Madagascar near the capi- tal, where it rarely occurred. But Andrianjafy, whose father had been a physician, had observed such cases firsthand, and Andrianjafy now applied his European-trained knowledge to argue that European efforts to draw parallels between choreomanias had misconstrued the disease and underestimated the variety of disease categories on the ground. For Andrianjafy, different nations may play host to similar diseases, but local geog- raphies, cultures, and customs shape these, pro- ducing distinct subtypes.** Nervous paludism in Madagascar, in particular, Andrianjafy argued,______ While briefly acknowledging the context of political rebellion in which the ramanenjana moved, Andrianjafy maintained that the possessed dancers’ role in the eruption was attributable primarily to the backstage work of shamans, or mpisikidy. As in Charcot’s clinic, Andrianjafy might have noted, it was the doctors—here, spiritual doctors—who prompted and orchestrated the course of the attacks. Dancers were stripped of their agency; they were merely pawns in a larger political game. Andrianjafy’s diagnosis echoed Davidson's but, drawing from Charcot’s emphasis on hysterical acting out, complicated existing portraits of the dancing disease.

With Andrianjafy’s account, we see that ‘choreomania’ in Madagascar referred symptomatically to political unrest, but also described convulsive malaria and, Andrianjafy pointedly notes, malarial symptoms (convulsions, bloodshot eyes, etc.) involuntarily or voluntarily feigned by 81. See also Muecke on medical language (‘patients’, ‘praecordia’, or epigastrum) saturating the first eyewitness accounts, which emphasized, he argues, a social body in distress—what he calls the ‘collective singular’. Muecke, ‘Choreomanias’, 7.

Andrianjafy, Le Ramanenjana a Madagascar. For a more recent Malagasy medical account of the ramanenjana, see Randriamaro, ‘Le Ramanenjana a Madagascar’. 83. ‘Si chaque pays présente des maladies semblables, une foule de circonstances relatives aux meeurs et aux coutumes des habitants donnent un cachet particulier aux formes les plus banales de la maladie, le paludisme de lespéce’. Andrianjafy, Le Ramanenjana @ Madagascar, 14. 84. Andrianjafy’s analysis reprises tropes familiar from Davidson's writing. The ramanenjana first complained of malaise, stiffness in the neck and chest, and pain in the spine and limbs. They usually experienced weight and pain in the epigastral region, and a 214 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES ‘patients’ for various reasons: primarily because they wanted to escape working or because they accidentally or purposefully imitated those who did genuinely suffer from malaria. In this sense, Andrianjafy reprised Charcot’s argument according to which ‘hysteroepilepsy’ referred to the voluntary or involuntary feigning of an epilep- tiform seizure; and Andrianjafy’s taxonomy borrowed from later approaches to choreomania, applied primarily to the tarantella, according to which individuals suffering from the so-called dancing disease were feigning their symptoms for social or economic gain.

Andrianjafy thus organized his reading of choreomania in Madagascar into four categories, according to which there were: (1) the true ramanenjana (‘ramanenjana “d’emblée”’; true spontaneous ramanenjana), who were simply malarial; (2) true ramanenjana by imitation, among victims of nervous malaria (true mimetic ramanenjana); this condition also had a malarial origin, but patients’ symptoms were further stoked and manipulated by opportunist shamans; (3) ramanenjana by imitation among non-malarial victims of neurosis, such as children in hospitals, where real cases of chorea were rampant (ramanenjana by suggestion); and (4) ramanenjana among slaves who did not want to work during the rice harvest (ramanenjana by simulation). Andrianjafy argued that in true cases of imanenjana, fever was symptomatic, revealing a nervous disorder resulting in the patient’s rhythmic agitation of the shoulders, arms, fingers, and toes and the swinging of the head from side to side, although the attendant dancing to music these patients performed was, he insisted______ I have often observed patients suffering from simple convulsions or choreic affections, he wrote, who were invited, and even forced, by their family members, to perform rhythmic dance motions in order to satisfy the malevolent spirits said to love the music and dance. This strong social pressure to dance when confronted with nervous symptoms resulted in the over-inflation of the numbers of actual sufferers of choreomania in the so-called epidemic of 1863, in his view. Although some patients genuinely suffered from neuromotor disorders, others simply rode the wave of local revolt, coupled with a common curative practice according to which any combination of neurological or neuropsychiatric disturbances might be assuaged by a theatre of movement and sound bound to the old political hierarchy—that of the shaman class. Andrianjafy's account is in many respects compelling. Although he seems too readily to dismiss real political protest as mere theatre, his portrait of patients being compelled to dance to ward off spirits (in effect pandering to the power politics of extended families and shamans) accords with standard accounts of nervous disorders explained by recourse to cultures of witchcraft. Indeed, Andrianjafy deftly reads the subtle politics at play in these instances of orchestrated acting out.

Noting sensation of burning, tearing, or bilious vomiting, their pulse accelerated, then weakened, and their temperatures rose to 38 or 39 degrees Centigrade. After this feverish stage, they were moist and sweaty, their eyes red and their gaze blank. They would then start to rotate their heads—the true sign of the ramanenjana. This usually lasted one or two days. Then, the ramanenjana were seized with nervous agitation and "great excitement". From that point, at the slightest indication of music or sound, they lost control, ran to the source of the music they heard, and started to dance, usually for hours, at a "vertiginous" speed. They would swing their heads from side to side, rhythmically, and wave their hands up and down with equally rhythmic regularity. The dancers never joined in the singing but emitted periodic sighs that showed that they were suffering. They were dazed, and their whole physiognomy took on an indefinable expression of loss and disorientation ("égarement"), as if they were strangers to their surroundings. They would, moreover, regulate the rhythm of the dancing to the music, which was always played as fast as possible; the dance thus often degenerated into mere foot-stomping. The patients danced thus, Andrianjafy argued, to the great astonishment of those present, as if they were possessed by some wayward spirit ("esprit malin"), with an almost supernatural endurance, exhausting the musicians until finally dropping to the ground "as if dead". See Andrianjafy, Le Ramanenjana a Madagascar, 14-15.

Andrianjafy, Le Ramanenjana a Madagascar, 33. Andrianjafy's description offers some information as regards the use of music in the "cure". "Patients", he noted, usually relapsed after a few days, sometimes two or three times, always at the slightest sound of music or at the slightest provocation, in spite of a usual period of "convalescence". They were usually spurred on by drums, though other instruments, such as the valiha (a kind of guitar), and lokango-voatavo (a type of violin), also helped provoke the curative fervour. When those in attendance could not find any instruments, they clapped and sang rhythmic songs, such as: "Oay lahy e! Oay lahy! / 'r'izy '7' izy / Andriananahary lahy / 'r'izy 'r' izy. 

'Masina hiany, Veloma hiany / There he is! There he is! / He is there! He is there! / Andriananahary (spirit of the sickness) / He is there! He is there! / Bless him! May god be with him!" Andrianjafy argued that the mpisikidy thus considered the musicians to be the means of the cure—literally, the agents (‘agents curateurs’)—while they themselves acted as masters of ceremonies, accompanying the ‘victims’ to sites bordered by sacred stones, enjoining them to dance for hours while they divined the proper remedy. Mpanoady (charmers) and some family members also took part in cortages leading to Ambohimanga, further testimony to the mpisikidies’ stakes in the revolt. See Andrianjafy, Le Ramanenjana a Madagascar, 36. Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil + 215 strong kinaesthetic similarities between the ramanenjana and other choreics he studied at the Université de Montpellier in 1894, Andrianjafy nevertheless argued that hysteria was an epiphenomenon only, not a primary cause or symptom of the disease.® Instead, the Malagasy choreomania was influenced by superstitious belief in and fear of sorcery. While wealthier urban citizens might show some choreic symptoms, including tics or other dyski- nesias, and consult physicians, poorer residents of the countryside, who had recourse only to the mpisikidy, were subject to the whole cere- monial theatre of music and dance that the sha- mans imposed and that exacerbated, he argued, their malarial condition.® In this regard, the imanenjana was a corrupt type of choreomania, whose spread should be attributed to the per- nicious influence of the mpisikidy. It could thus be eliminated with proper enlightenment and progress, he noted, and the eradication of mos- quitoes, whose negative effect on the victims’ physical and mental states produced conditions ripe for the shamans’ picking. This explanation suggests, reasonably, that environmental condi- tions exacerbated routine disorders of the ner- vous system but does not sufficiently account for the sociopolitical context of the 1863 revolt outlined above. Taussig points out that concepts of disease often arise out of the reification of a subtle range of interrelated emotions and events, reduced to the biological and the singular. The therapeu- tic process, Taussig submits, thus requires ‘an archaeology of the implicit’ so that ‘social rela- tions . . . mapped into diseases’ may be ‘brought to light’ and ‘de-reified’, ‘[liberating] the poten- tial for dealing with antagonistic contradictions and breaking the chains of oppression’.®* This suggests that counter-diagnosing medical claims to ‘disease’ involves peeling away what may be described as such from a complex of social and political relations, so that these in turn may be revealed. In the case of the Malagasy ‘dancing disease’, Andrianjafy claims to be revealing a political cast of shamans scheming to get peas- ants on their side, using the peasants’ naivety, trust, and potentially real malarial states (as well as their duplicity or laziness) for political gain. The peasants, we may surmise, may also have gained politically from this alliance, whether they performed their choreic roles entirely wil- fully or not. The imanenjana then served as a means for the mpisikidies to reach out to village people to disrupt politics in the capital, and vil- lage people, in turn, may have willingly com- plied. The representational politics the danc______ The imanenjana, then, constitutes a complex of events, some malarial, some political. But the reification of this complex into a ‘disease’ reveals not only a mixture of implicit social relations but also a process of discursive abstraction that is beholden to outside conversations and aims. In this case, Andrianjafy’s reading (not unlike Davidson’s) reaches over to Europe to integrate this case study into a conversation going on over there. This gesture of abstraction seeks to wrap these events into a discourse on epidemic hysteria, in effect globalizing a scientific conversation and so consolidating a further class of shamans—here, physicians—orchestrating the discussion on the ‘dancing disease’. Although they were not orchestrating events on the ground, Davidson, Andrianjafy, and others were wrapping the ramanenjana’s practices into a conversation that made this complex politico-medical theatre—this discursive choreopolitics—into a diagnostic one; and that made, by this gesture of abstraction, a transnational class of professionals reading events for one another ecstatically, outside the body, in a sense to serve another sort of transnational state. Andrianjafy appears to be tethered to a conversation that serves his own professional ends. The Malagasy disease became an occasion for him to differ slightly, on expert grounds, with master neurologists in France. Just as physicians and missionaries read the political events of 1863 as taking place between shamanic ritual, neurological disorder, and ‘psycho-physical’ epidemic, the ‘disorder’ seems to have constituted a mixture of routine 86. Andrianjafy in particular followed clinical lectures by Professor Joseph Grasset (1849-1918), a student of Charcot and pioneer neuropsychiatrist as well as ardent enthusiast of occultist and spiritualist philosophies. Grasset may plausibly have been especially galvanized by Andrianjafy’s efforts to tie contemporary neurology to spiritual practices in Madagascar. On Grasset’s occultism and study with Charcot, see Martin Bock, "The Power of Suggestion: Conrad, Professor Grasset, and French Medical Occultism", Conradiana 39.2 (2007): 97-112. 87. Andrianjafy, Le Ramanenjana a Madagascar, 36. 88. Taussig, The Nervous System, 93.

The dancers meanwhile suffered; but not, for the most part, from neurological or psychiatric disease. As in previous cases of so-called choreomania, some participants in the revolution of 1863 and in ritual curing ceremonies may have been choreic; many seem, in Andrianjafy's account, to have been seasonally malarial. But many protestors also performatively sought solace in a past time that would usher forth a new—extra-colonial—future. Colonialism was the disease, but 'choreomania' its increasingly global diagnosis. While the medical study of political revolution, charismatic shamanism, and nervous disease prompted Boudin, Andrianjafy, and Davidson to cast the ramanenjana as choreomaniacs—malarial and hysterical—the next section suggests the recuperation of chorea and collective political revolt into psycholegal medicine in Brazil. This section draws the study of choreomania out to the Brazilian borderlands. Two distinct case studies emerged in the Brazilian literature on choreomania, both radically different. One described sightings of relatively benign psychomotor disorders in Itapagipe, in northern Brazil, attributed to a resurgence of choreomania by Dr. José Dantas de Souza Leite (1859-1925), who earned his doctorate at the Salpétriére under Charcot. The other, more arresting case was supposed to have occurred epidemically among the disenfranchised sertées or backland peasants of Bahia, which Dr. Raimundo Nina-Rodrigues (1862-1906), also well acquainted with Charcot's work and current sociological theories, attributed to messianic psychopathology.

In Brazil, 'choreomania' referred to intensely kinematic revolt, but with the new literature, it also encompassed widespread insanity: collective delusion and social ferment. Choreomania was now described by physicians and social scientists in psycholegal terms as the disorder of a deluded, dismissible minority. It also came to be a disorder of the distinctly lowest classes. In Nina-Rodrigues's view, the sertées were mad to follow their messianic leader to spiritual and political redemption: choreomania, in this case, no longer signified strange bodily gestures revealing antiquity or biological autom- atisms, or even the event of revolt, but a mass outbreak of irrational behaviour far removed to the most remote parts of the country.

Unlike the dancers in Madagascar, the sertées did not appear directly to threaten central powers in the capital, although they irritated the principles and structures of the modern nation state. However, as in Madagascar and previous cases of choreomania, the sertées were viewed as a threat to the stability of the nation state. This included chapters on choreiform abasia epidemics in northern Brazil ("A Abasia Choreiforme Epidemica No Norte do Brasil") and epidemics of insanity ("A loucoura epidemica de Canudos") as well as, significantly, a lengthy appendix titled simply "Choreomania". Events Nina-Rodrigues characterized as indicative of choreomania, occurring in Brazil in the 1890s, were attributable, he argued, not to organic lesions but to the magnetic presence of an exalted spiritual leader, Antonio Conselheiro, whose religious delirium prompted thousands of disenfranchised peasants or sertées to follow him towards spiritual redemption in the 1893-1897 Canudos revolt. See Raimundo Nina-Rodrigues, As Collectividades Anormaes (Rio de Janeiro: Civilizacao Brasileira S.A., 1939); "Epidémie de folie religieuse au Brésil", Annales médico-psychologiques: Journal de V'aliénation mentale et de la médecine légale des aliénés 8.7 (1898): 371-392; and La folie des foules: Nouvelle contribution a l'étude des folies épidémiques au Brésil (Paris: Fonds Lacassagne, 1901).

Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil + 217 the "dancing disease", this revolt mobilized the romantic image of a return to a past time that would catapult participants into a new future. This romantic figure was shared by participants and observers, as if nostalgia were at once the cause of the "disease" and its method of diagnosis. As I will show in subsequent chapters, utopic aspirations would increasingly dominate the literature on choreomania in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, indicating the increasing alignment of the choreomania discourse with decolonization movements in the mid-twentieth century.

BRAZILIAN BACKLANDS: CHOREA, CHOREOMANIA, AND THE CANUDOS REVOLT

A new legacy of Brazilian writing on the dancing disease amalgamated political uprisings, messianic leadership, and everyday choreic gesture on the politically ambiguous terrain of legal psychopathy, as the Brazilian liberation movement known as the Canudos revolt was recuperated into a psycholegal discourse on pathological crowds mixed with a neuroscientific discourse on unwieldy individual gesture. As a type of choreomania, Nina-Rodrigues argued, the Canudos revolt was like involuntary choreas readily observed in city streets. But the choreotopology and choreopolitics of the large-scale Canudos movement—the intensity of the action instantiated by the sertées' self-removal from everyday state-governed life—warranted assigning the Canudos revolt a special place in the globally growing repertoire of epidemic psychiatry. Nina-Rodrigues's discursive medicalization drew from the clinical observation of tics and gaits as well as political events, just as he was articulating a new field of inquiry between psychiatry and social science. In this sense, the interdisciplinary emergence of the modern choreomania concept revealed an intertextual field describing the pathologization of irregular gestures and performative expressions of high affect worldwide, extending Franko's notion of the intradisciplinary alliance between politics and dance to a further intradisciplinary sphere. All sciences and arts pertaining to the movements of bodies become political in this deep archaeology, this genealogy of "dance" or of dance studies—specifically, they become political inasmuch as these entangled fields articulate a representational politics (and a politics of representation) by which certain forms of motion and their appearances on a public and discursive stage suggest the figuration of norms and their displacement. 

Movement becomes scientific, wrapped into particular genealogies of discourse; but it also fritters and spreads, circulates and shifts, across disciplinary arenas to become choreopo- litical in a different sense. Bodies do not just upset power balances by showing ideologies at play, ‘performing protest’; they also upset power balances by rehearsing a conjunctural sphere that is disjunctive. The pol- itics of and in ‘dance’ are not just contained in what Franko terms the coincidence of political becoming or ideology, nation and state forma- tion, with aesthetic forms (modes of moving onstage first and foremost)” but also show the aporias between bodies moving and regimes of observation, ‘scopic regimes’. A scopic regime, in film theorist Christian Metz’s terms, signals the 91.

The choreic episode in Itapagipe, in northern Brazil, had been reported to Nina-Rodrigues by a Brazilian physician trained in Paris, Dr. Affonso Saulnier de Pierrelevée (1830-1910). De Pierrelevée, Nina-Rodrigues reports, had noted that starting in 1856 and increasingly in the 1870s and 1880s an ‘epidemic’ of ‘choreic affections’ had appeared in the streets in northern Brazil. ‘It is often possible these days’, wrote De Pierrelevée, ‘to encounter in the city’s streets many patients whose singular gait draws the attention of all those who pass by’. Some, he wrote, drag their feet and behave as though they are suffering from paralysis of the legs; others appear to suffer from progressive muscular ataxy (the loss of full control of body movements). Others walk haltingly, irregularly, and even perform small jumps. All perform fantastic genuflexions, as if bearing the weight of their bodies with great dif- ficulty. These choreiform movements were visible particularly in the upper part of the body, occasionally in the trunk, never when patients were sleeping or otherwise lying horizontal. De Pierrelevée noted that most of those afflicted were women suffering from anaemia but not fever; their breathing was irregular and after a few days degenerated into dyspnoea, a strong and difficult breath- ing, with palpitations in the heart area.

It seems probable that this ‘epidemic’ amounted to a coincidental increase in the visibility (to him) of choreic disorders in the streets of Brazil in the period succeeding De Pierrelevée’s encounter with chorea minor through his Parisian studies. Yet the notion of the epidemic was also appealing, and the strangeness of these physical demeanours—a thea- tre of urban tics and tragicomic gaits—suggestive to Nina-Rodrigues of more widespread social dysfunction. Nina-Rodrigues, As Collectividades Anormaes, 27-28.

On the ‘conjunctural’, see Franko, ‘Dance and the Political’, 4. 218 * COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES absence of the thing seen in the act of seeing;°° what is seen is a phantasm, a projection caused by temporal delay (montage, collage). Between the act of conjuring another possible world, an ancestral spirit or a new politics, and the act of witnessing lies a chasm, and that is the choreo- political gulf that ‘choreomania’ inhabits. The temporal gulf is not just that of secular time, because often dancers and observers inhabited the same spaces, but an experience of time and temporality, an articulation of what is possible in terms of what came before, suggesting incom- patible regimes of political becoming by which one form of visibility becomes another. One form of conjuration becomes an appearance—a ghost, a phantasm—transformed into the lan______ Choreomania thus appears at the threshold where politics disappears from the act of observation. Politics takes the shape of ‘mere’ dance or ‘mere’ theatre, as well as ‘mere’ disease: forms understood as containers of formlessness, as the representation of abstract gestures not designed to go anywhere, even if they may appear to perform acts of circulation. It is this appearance of gesturelessness—of the putative meaninglessness of the choreic gesture—that constitutes the relative violence of choreomania’s biomedical articulation, as the ultimate neutralization of self-organized commotion.

According to Nina-Rodrigues, the self-styled messianic leader Anténio Conselheiro (‘Anthony the Counselor’) (1830-1897) led the rural sertées into ‘epidemic madness’ because he suffered from religious delirium. His delusions of grandeur—including his messianic belief in his role as the spiritual leader of the disenfranchised mestizo population of Bahia—triggered, in Nina-Rodrigues’s account, a pathological uprising. Thousands of disenfranchised mestizos had followed Conselheiro in creating a spiritual community in the decade following the 1889 proclamation of the Brazilian state on the model of the European ones. By 1897, the peasants were violently suppressed in a series of bloody military actions that pitted a ‘civilized’, ‘modern’ nation state against the rural sertées.

Offering a timely politico-legal analysis of these occurrences on the fringes of the new nation’s disciplinary regimes of state power, Nina-Rodrigues’s article ‘Epidémie de folie religieuse au Brésil’ [Epidemic of Religious Insanity in Brazil] appeared in the 1898 volume of the Parisian journal of medical psychology and law Annales médico-psychologiques. Nina-Rodrigues argued that Conselheiro’s ‘psychosis’ was shaped and catalysed by his environment: the ‘socio-logical’ factor contributing to the deployment of his psychotic state resulted in a magnetic force which he exerted on the people in whose midst he dwelled.

The thousands of followers he accrued in the period following his arrival in the Brazilian sertão in 1876, and his rebaptism as Anténio Conselheiro, (relinquishing his birth name, Anténio Maciel), signalled, according to Nina-Rodrigues, the intensification of his delirium and the epidemic events it occasioned. Conselheiro’s For a ‘subaltern’ interpretation of the Canudos revolt and Euclides da Cunha’s ‘national bible’ Os sertões (1902), see Adriana M. C. Johnson, ‘Subalternizing Canudos’, Modern Language Notes 120.2 (2005): 355-382. Slavoj Zizek reads the Canudos ‘outlaw community’ as a ‘utopian space’; Slavoj Zizek, ‘From Politics to Biopolitics ... and Back’, South Atlantic Quarterly 103.2/3 (2004): 501-521, 511-512. See also Ernesto Laclav’s discussion of the Canudos revolt in Judith Butler, Ernesto Laclau, and Slavoj Zizek, Contingency, Hegemony, Universality: Contemporary Dialogues on the Left (London: Verso, 2000), 82-83. Brazil has had its share of messianic movements, including the Tupí-Guaranj, first noted in the sixteenth century. See for example Alfred Metraux, ‘Les Messies de l'Amérique du sud’, Archives de sociologie des religions 5 (1957): 108-112; and Vittorio Lanternari, The Religions of the Oppressed: A Study of Modern Messianic Cults, trans. Lisa Sergio (New York: Knopf, 1963), 171-181. Patricia R. Pessar offers a discussion of a later millenarian episode in Brazil in the 1930s, in Patricia R. Pessar, From Fanatics to Folk: Brazilian Millenarianism and Popular Culture (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2004). Mario Vargas Llosa’s novel La guerra del fin del mundo (Barcelona: Editorial Seix Barral, 1981), depicts the Canudos revolt in particularly harrowing terms.

Nina-Rodrigues, ‘Epidémie’. Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil + 219 beatific approach to poverty and crime in that part of the country (he was often considered to be a saint and a Christ) eventually mounted into a climax of ‘epidemic religious delirium’. The delirium evidenced by Conselheiro had found grounds, Nina-Rodrigues argued, in the psychology of the era and its environment, which were propitious for lighting a ‘wildfire’ of epidemic insanity (‘du combustible pour alimenter Vincendie d'une véritable épidémie de folie’). Nina-Rodrigues understood this event as a politicized brand of choreomania still genealogically linked to St. Vitus’s dance and to Hecker’s eccentric cast of ecstatics; but the disorder achieved new medico-legal proportions. In As Collectividades Anormaes [Abnormal Collectivities] (1939), particularly in his appendix on ‘Choreomania’, first published in the Gazeta Medica da Bahia (1883), Nina-Rodrigues likened the Canudos revolt to other choreomanias, including the tarantella, the tigretier, and the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, all examples that would have been familiar to his readers. But Nina-Rodrigues’s indebtedness to the growing literature on national cases of the ‘dancing disease’ also recast this condition in terms of individual psychopathology and the psychopathic imitation of a leader-god. This marked a departure from what would become the standard interpretation of the Canudos episode, according to which spiritual rebellion had led to revolt, cast in romantic nationalist terms. In Os Sertões (1902), Euclides da Cunha (1866-1909), the Canudos revolt’s most influential historian, offered a vivid eulogy of Brazil's ‘backlands’, whose ‘extraordinary native sons’ were rushing, he wrote, headlong towards ‘extinction’,______ The self-styled 'romantic naturalist,' he, like Rousseau contemplating his childhood village dance, highlighted the beauty of apparently spontaneous movement. Patriotism colored every page of his work, with fervent depictions of the land and beatific descriptions of its inhabitants. In his view, the Canudos revolt was an uprising from the land and, as such, a just, native, and natural upheaval waged against political wrongs. But with the Canudos revolt, the social and political marginality of the peasants and their off-center uprising also threatened state power by virtue of the pull they seemingly held back to the earth, at the nation's edge.

In da Cunha's analysis, the backland sertées were to be celebrated, revered, for their primitive naturalness, their essential purity. Yet in this respect, like Nina-Rodrigues, da Cunha also argued that their movement as a whole was pathological. This was because it was so seductive and infectious, it resulted in a 'backlands lawlessness' tantamount to disease. In da Cunha's terms, the revolt was, though natural and romantic, 'little more than symptomatic of a malady which, by no means confined to a corner of Bahia, was spreading to the capitals of the seabord.'

Da Cunha's ambivalence, ranging from passionate defense to tender caution, hardly sufficed to overturn far less genteel denigrations of the Canudos revolt waged by government forces. Estimates suggest that fifteen to thirty-five thousand sertées were killed in the military campaign waged against Conselheiro's followers. This was the result of a government attempt to stamp out resistance to the new republican policies of assimilation and political unity and to a new positivist regime touting 'order and progress' on its flag, mandated when a military coup overthrew the monarchy in 1889 and instituted the First Republic. The killings, justified through mediatized denunciations of Conselheiro's 'psychotic' pseudo-messianic presence, such as those put forward by Nina-Rodrigues, were further fueled by government paranoia and a gross overestimation of the sertédes' power. As sociologist Maria Isaura Pereira De Queiroz argues, the sertées were illiterate and destitute Catholics without the resources for large-scale resistance to the military state beyond their collective withdrawal. Like many other millennialist movements, theirs sought a communal life of peace and brotherhood and articulated a sense of communal bonding before the hope of a new world. They looked forward to the arrival of a ‘golden age’ heralding the return of the Brazilian Empire, and the cessation of all crime and warfare and all requirement to work for material goods.‘ Borrowing eschatological motifs from the state-sanctioned Christian religion but positing a temporal aporia, a messianic ‘now-time’ that suspended capital production and state control, the sertées presented a theatre of counter-mimicry with a twist. Their mimic game differed too radically from accepted conventions of messianic religion to warrant assimilation into the governing regime. Instead, as an atopic organization—staged in the nearly uninhabitable backlands—and an extra-temporal system on the ‘other side’ of ‘historical progress’, as Zizek maintains of the Canudos revolt, the sertées tripped up the choreography of difference that anti-colonial shows of mimicry usually occasioned.‘ Difference was con- jugated with a motif of escape and extraction rather than excrescence; instead of performing an upheaval in the centre of the public sphere as the ramanenjana did, the sertées withdrew, disappeared. Their self-erasure from the body politic instantiated a magnetic black hole, a powerful force of messianic imagining that contravened the self-importance of the nation’s capital. As such, the sertées and their leader had to be eliminated, according to state policy, not because they threatened to invade the biopolitical centre, but because they weakened it by ignoring its rule. Thus the Canudos revolt entered into the extended medical archive—the archival repertoire—of choreomania, now defined as psychosis, religious delirium, and epidemic delusion. This expanded definition mistranslated millennial expectation, making political unrest a disorder of mass misbelief. Brazilian studies of choreomania also continued to ally widespread social disorder with neurological jerks and tics. Choreas, as Brazilian neurologists saw it, were visible remains of large-scale movement disorders; more so still than in Europe, they appeared on city streets as signs—ciphers—of social distress, indicating that society was unwell. According to Souza Leite, a contemporary of Nina-Rodrigues who, like him, had studied with Charcot, diseases were universal; only different states of scientific knowledge determined the accuracy of their clinical description.‘ Like Andrianjafy translating neurological teachings from France back onto his native terrain, Souza Leite argued that individual body tremors in the streets of Bahia represented neuromotor disorders that were like those he had studied under Charcot and were not recognized as such by local inhabitants. Observing men and women in June and July 1887 in the north of Brazil, Souza Leite suggested that the locally employed nomenclature was misguided: these rural occurrences, typically described as carudra (witchcraft, evil eye, torpor) and treme-treme (shaking, trembling), were actually neurological disorders. Indeed in many parts of the world, epilepsy, chorea, and other involuntary movements have been misattributed to witchcraft, ostracizing their sufferers. But Souza Leite's analysis is surprising: whereas physicians have typically named disorders traditionally thought to be caused by witchcraft in neurological or psychiatric terms, arguing that these were mechanical disorders and thus treatable, removing stigma (or replacing it with a stigma of another sort), Souza Leite Pereira De Queiroz, ‘L'influence du Milieu Social’, 10-12. On the government's misjudgment, see also Darién J. Davis, ‘Review of Guerra de Canudos (1997 Film) by Sergio Rezende and Passion and War in the Backlands of Canudos (Paxao e Guerra no Sertéo de Canudos) (1993 Film) by Anténio Olavo’, American Historical Review 104.5 (1999): 1807-1809.

Zizek, ‘From Politics to Biopolitics’, 511-512.

Souza Leite, Etudes de pathologie nerveuse, 52. A number of theses on chorea minor (Sydenham’s chorea) were published in Brazil in the following decades, including Normando Alonso, Corea de Sydenham (Buenos Aires: A. Guidi Buffarini, 1910), Tomas $. Molina, Corea de Sydenham (Buenos Aires: N. Marana, 1909), and Miguel Ochoa, Consideraciones sobre algunas coreas (Buenos Aires: A. Etchepareborda, 1909).

Leite suggests that the events he observed were not individual instances of neuromotor or psychiatric dysfunction. While they might be mistaken for chorea minor (including Sydenham’s chorea), he argued that they actually represented paradigmatic cases of chorea major, the ‘real’ chorea—choreomania, the dancing disease. Disorder in this case was not first of all individual but plural, collective; in the cases he observed—people shaking their bodies in the streets of northern Brazil—a collective dancing disorder was apparent among individuals, in fragmented form. The social body was broken: a previously collective form of disorderly corporality now occurred individually, he submitted. This episode of choreomania represented not gestures spreading by imitation ‘like wildfire’ through an entire people but an underlying state of collective corporeal disjunction appearing sporadically in isolation.

This radically reversed the view of choreomania prominent since Hecker’s day, which suggested that choreomania appeared during times of crisis and spread; here, choreomania was already omnipresent, and the isolated cases observable in city streets were its publicly visible remains. In Souza Leite’s analysis, as in Nina-Rodrigues’s, choreomania was everywhere: in the North among individuals and in the South among crowds of peasant revolutionaries. Viewed through Charcot’s students’ chorea-tinted glasses, the world was full of choreomaniacs: people moving too awkwardly, too jerkily, too much, and in the wrong places.

As with the imanenjana in Madagascar, Nina-Rodrigues and Souza Leite’s descriptions of types of chorea referred as much to sociopolitical upheavals as to individual jerks and tics, diagnosed as neurological disease. When untreated, chorea provided a spectacle to passersby, just as leprosy had haunted streets and villages in the Middle Ages. But underlying this was a sort of ‘madness’ signalling collective revolt. This ‘madness’ was what was written against the grain of a disappearing centre, a black hole, the appearance of a nothingness cast as something which could be ordered and compared.

In this chapter, I have described how Charcot’s students and acolytes travelled to Africa and South America, carrying his ideas about chorea and choreomania with them. The extended spheres of influence of the Salpétriére thus came to be felt as far away as Madagascar and Brazil. But this is not simply a case of Charcot’s colleagues and collaborators taking his or Hecker’s ideas with them wholesale. New processes of translation (translatio), repetition, and recuperation emerged as Malagasy and Brazilian neurologists rewrote European schools of thinking on hysteroepilepsy, chorea, and choreomania in para-colonial terms,______ 

Practical problems of shamanism, nationalism, and political uprisings took on a new urgency and political hue, as fitting, falling, and spas- ming bodies appearing in public space across the world seemed to confirm but also shifted the European discourse on the dancing dis- ease. This chapter, then, has foregrounded peripheries in a whole different sense; not only the limits and peripheries of bodies flailing (arms, heads, eyes) but also the far reaches of European geographic space have come back to haunt the political centre. Colonial choreomanias thus represent reverse cases of possession: ‘choreomaniacs’ bodies are not just inhabited by the ghosts or spirits of ancestors but perform a sort of political spectrality, inasmuch as they enable ancient histories and other political realities theatrically to appear. In the next chapter, dance manias nearly sub- side. Barely a textbook case of choreomania, with its jerks and twitches, the Ghost Dance among Native American Indians in the 1890s lends itself to discursive analysis because its first and most influential ethnographer likened it to the medieval St. Vitus’s dance and other religious ‘cults’. This tenuous genealogical link nevertheless highlights a persistent comparative thrust, positing a discursive relationship between instances of heightened collective activity and the performance of political gain. Imagined as a distant cousin of medieval European and biblical dances, the Ghost Dance, in James Mooney’s estimation, importantly revealed the orgiastic European past on American soil: the Ghost Dance served as a window onto pre-industrial, antediluvian humanity. But the public mobilization of Native American bodies for political effect in the Ghost Dance also showcased a new sort of colonial violence: the violence of ethnocide and 10S.

The Ghost Dance shared choreomania’s broadest symptomatic traits—collective corporeality revealing heightened states of emotion, rapidly proliferating spheres of influence, hallucinations and falls—but the Ghost Dance was also a pacific movement, a ‘dancing disease’, inasmuch as settlers and U.S. Indian agents (locally deployed government officials) termed this expenditure of energy flaunted by starving Indians as careless and perverse. The Ghost Dance in this final nineteenth-century formulation was termed pure excess, pure waste, with bodies shuffling against a backdrop of outright war, crushed in the cogs of advancing industrialization and the bureaucratic follies of a heightened capitalist age.

A truly military society is a society of enterprise . . . whose end is given in the future, and excludes the madness of sacrifice. —Georges Bataille, La part maudite (1967)

THE GHOST DANCE may constitute the least clear ‘case’ of a ‘dancing disease’. Neither a regular contender among medical encyclopedias and compendia that rehearse spurious but familiar connections between bacchanals, St. 

John's and St. Vitus's dances, the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, tarantellas, epilepsies, and choreas, among others (as well as a growing repertoire of 'choreomanias' overseas, as previous chapters show), nor subject to a properly medicalized literature on epidemic dancing or fitful gesture, the Ghost Dance among Sioux and other Native Americans in the late nineteenth century nevertheless shared with these other cases the language of a dancing 'craze' and, importantly for the discursive history I tell, a genealogical link traceable to Hecker's writing on St. Vitus's dance. Significantly, also, this chapter shows, the anthropological and government discourse on the Ghost Dance, which compared this native uprising to religious ecstasies, deployed, as with other so-called choreomanias, a language of excess, exaggeration, escalation, duplicity, barbarism, and insanity, as well as—to complicate things—natural, ecstatic connection with the earth and all things premodern. Ghost Dancing was at once volcanic and contagious; as such, it had to be curbed, many thought, at the cost of deadly military intervention. The Ghost Dance thus represents a genealogical offshoot in the rhizomatic story of the 'dancing disease', yet it significantly shows the extent to which the discursive politics of anti-colonial revolt hinge on the language of epidemic disorder—in this case, waged in the terms of cultural war. As Jacqueline Shea Murphy has argued, colonialist policies against Native Americans in the 1880s revolved around antidance legislation that set dance—and, most powerfully, ideas about dance—at the heart of the U.S. government's attempts to annihilate Native culture and Native claims to indigenous land.'

The government did so by assimilating Native American men, women, and children into white culture: 'attempts to "other" and subsequently erase Indians', Shea Murphy writes, depended on strategies that tapped into pre-existing myths about Indianness that were articulated in early European literature and iconography. But dance, she argues, was the decisive borderline against which the difference between the Native and the white American was articulated, setting Natives on the side of dancing and white settlers on the side of not dancing. Dancing was described as a debauched, wasteful expenditure of time and energy; not dancing was in contrast pure, responsible, reasonable, and efficient in labour terms. Settlers who did not dance had plenty of energy left over to work. They were productive agents of economic power. Irresponsible Natives, by squandering their energy in all-night ceremonies, were seen as un-American and unpatriotic—stigmas that remain, though, as Shea Murphy reminds us, reprising Native American activist Leslie Marmon Silko from Almanac of the Dead (1991), 'the [Native American] people' actively and cunningly resisted government attempts to suppress their dancing; indeed, they 'never stopped dancing'. In considering these anti-Native and antidance policies in light of the discursive history of the dancing disease, this chapter argues that government agents not only set Natives against whites in terms of a border between 'those who dance' and 'those who do not dance' but also, more ambivalently, imagined Natives as primitive ancestors of the whites, and attempted to eradicate dance as a way to eradicate their own ancient histories and thus enter full throttle into modernity. 

Dance, as a practice ‘indulged’ in by Native Americans, became a contested measure of cultural difference and sameness, pitting modern settlers against a depraved but also familiar and childlike way of being that was no longer acceptable in the new, industrial, and industrious political and moral regime. But while religious puritanism had long ago set American settlers against many dance practices, telegrams, letters, and other official correspondence in the holdings of the National Archives and Records Administration further suggest that settlers also in fact danced. What set Native American dancing—and specifically Ghost Dances—apart, however, as that which provoked panic among settlers and U.S. Indian agents in the closing decades of the nineteenth century was its perceived excess. Native Americans not only danced, they danced too much, for too long; and, I also show, they were described in government correspondence and the popular press as dancing too jaggedly, too energetically, too disruptively. Their arms and knees jutted out at impossible angles; their faces contorted in anger and pain. According to these hyperbolic depictions, the dances spilled out of bounds, striking fear into the hearts of the Natives’ self-avowedly quiet and industrious neighbours. The dancing was figured as a contagious and life-threatening expression of cultural defiance—threatening to the dancers and to those who lived near them. But whereas Europeans in Madagascar felt immune to the dancing mania, witnessing it mostly with some annoyance, settlers in the American West asked repeatedly for government intervention on their behalf. White settlers felt they were vulnerable, not so much because they might ‘catch’ the dancing but as stated targets in an environment openly hostile to them and to their government representatives—effectively to the American state. Yet most dancers were not openly hostile to the state, only to its failure to meet prior agreements. In this regard, the Ghost Dance was a reasonable affair and the government’s counterattack rash and impulsive—precisely the qualities attributed to ‘dance manias’. Genealogically linked in early anthropology to St. Vitus’s dance and other dancing manias, the Ghost Dance thus presents yet a new turn in the genealogy of the dancing disease: one in which the panicked circulation of news about the ‘mania’ resulted in real casualties, real repression, and the violent transposition of the dancers’ ecstatic visions onto a canvas signalling real war. As a discursive zone of intensity in which concepts of history, antiquity, and alterity were played out, discussion surrounding the Ghost Dance thus epitomized a groundswell of debate on the right to dance and on various contingencies’ rights to dispose of their energy and time as they saw fit. Native Americans, increasingly branded as unfit to dance or to circulate throughout the Plains as they wished, were ostracized from a regime touting, as in Brazil, order and progress. In the ‘intradisciplinary’ space of politics and dance, ideas about the Ghost Dance, then—ideas that were, as Shea Murphy suggests, conjured up for the most part by antidance critics who did not directly witness the dancing (which they perceived to be too ‘heathenish’ or evil to merit a direct encounter)—articulate a correlative space in which dance and politics, anthropology and government policy, collide. 

Unproductive Expenditure: The Biopolitics of ‘Waste’

Thus, this chapter argues that negative ideas about the Ghost Dance rested on settler and government criticism of the dancers’ apparent energetic excess and waste, in spite of the beatific and pastoral setting against which this ‘waste’ was supposedly performed. Just as in Africa and South America, dancers were considered primitive, not yet modern, participating in a system of value and exchange predicated not on energy conservation or material accumulation but on dilapidation. In this case, the Ghost Dance represents what Bataille has called ‘unproductive expenditure’, acts going against the logic of capital accumulation. Bataille sees ‘unproductive expenditure’, including non-reproductive sex, dancing, death rights, and potlatch as constitutive of an alternative economy derived from the collective employment of time or goods against (or ecstatically beside) bourgeois rationalism.

So, whereas ‘capital’ indexes the value of goods against an abstract common denominator always on the move, potlatch, dancing, and death rites emerge as indices mapped onto events that dramatically enact moments of exchange promising or concomitantly annulling debts rather than accumulating them with a view to the individual achievement of greatest power (or wealth) later. In this regard, death functions symbolically to actualize this alternative economy: the symbolic ‘mini-deaths’ performed by Ghost Dancers enact fissures in a current ‘now-time’ rent through with messianic promise. Time, then—its expenditure and direction—was at stake, as Ghost Dancers asserted their own chronotopy in a landscape that was moving forward (without them).

The spectre of ethnocide, thus, appears for the first time with the Ghost Dance, which performs a state of ecstasy-belonging, according to which the dancers claim back another form of sovereignty from the state of exception that the government calls forth. Natives in the American West articulated a paradoxically productive practice of ecstatic sovereignty whereby calling on deceased ancestors in a collective repossession rite would help them, symbolically and through a renewed sense of self-worth, to repopulate tribes decimated by systematic government misrule. And they did so significantly by focusing inward—to the centre of a circle (and sets of circles), claiming sovereignty here. The Ghost Dance thus countermanded anthropologists’ visions of Natives as natural resources, doubly ancestors of the whites and a people passing into the past, with the dancers’ own claims that their ancestors would come back to oust the white colonial invaders. Modern historical time would be annihilated by a return to indigenous temporalities and modern space (significantly, plundered land) would be returned to the Natives, and to the Great Spirit.

An ‘Intensity of Circulations’

At the same time, structures of counter-mimesis came into play, as I will also show further in the ensuing chapters. Indian agents witnessing the dances discovered that they were not so different from white leisure practices. Ghost Dancers similarly recognized this similarity and invoked white settler rights by claiming their own right to enjoy the same. The whites and Natives were ‘almost the same’, in this formulation; not as different as they were uncannily proximous in space and in their corporeal exercises, if not in the uses to which they put them. Discourse surrounding the Ghost Dance by observers and participants, available for the first time (in the genealogy this book traces), suggested a zone of negotiation delimiting an imagined modernity from an equally imagined premodernity in emphatically use value terms. The choreography of this struggle for representation—articulated for the most part in dramaturgies of circulation—gave shape to the fears and anxieties of the age: particularly concerning the acutely felt scarcity of resources and their (mis)distribution. This chapter, then, like the previous and the next, highlights a choreography—and choreotopology—of circulation, what Foucault characterizes as a quintessentially 'modern' concern, as dancers and messages about them moved through vast expanses of the American Plains, often accelerated by new technologies, including recently installed telegraph wires, which contributed to exacerbating fears of and rumours about the movement and intensified the speed with which (often faulty or exaggerated) news spread.

The mobilization of ideas and resources in the Ghost Dance renders this a particularly intense case of 'choreomania', where, following Foucault, the 'intensity of circulations' makes, but also breaks, a movement which effectively appears through and against biopolitical power conceived in terms of capital. This 'capital' is exercised in every sense as the site and mode whereby administration of 'productive' time and space occurs: the city where power is focused and the 'capitalizing' ideology by which this power works, notably through the exercise of subtle or not so subtle regulations administering resources towards an exogenously 'productive' end (an end often not given to those engaging in 'productive' labour).

The Ghost Dance thus stages a battle between competing economies of circulation: on the one hand an economy emphasizing bands of dancers travelling between tribes to share information, gathering locally to pool energies and (human) resources (towards collective self-regeneration), and on the other long-range telegraphic wires and a detached military arsenal exercising controlled dispersion, aiming ideologically towards a cultivation of selfish individualism that ties individuals back into identification with the state and its system of biopolitical control.

'NOTHING IS NEW UNDER THE SUN': MOONEY'S DANCE BETWEEN BUREAUS AND TRIBES

Mooney, commissioned by the American Bureau of Ethnology to study the Cherokee tribe in Indian Territory in the fall of 1890, wrote the first decisive history of the Ghost Dance in the American Plains. His report, based on fieldwork conducted over a period of a few years and augmented by an examination of documentary material held by the Indian Office and the War Department of the United States, "The Ghost-Dance Religion and the Sioux Outbreak of 1890", was published in 1896 (by the Government Printing Office) in the Fourteenth Annual Report (Part 2) of the Bureau of Ethnology to the Smithsonian Institution, 1892-1893. His fieldwork extended from the Sioux to the Arapaho, the Cheyenne to the Comanche, and the Paiute to the Kiowa and the Caddo, and included records of songs, costumes, and local beliefs. His report also compared what he described as the Ghost Dance 'religion' to Hebrew, Christian, and 'Mohammedan' practices whose dances and stories offered him thematic and formal 'parallels'.

Mooney described the 'convulsive ecstasy' practiced among Ranters, Quakers, and Fifth-Monarchy Men in particular as a deliberate insanity which, according to the 1877 history of Christian Nonconformism by Robert Barclay (1833-1876), had a 'singular power of producing a kind of sympathetic madness or temporary aberration of intellect'. "The Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge, translated from German in 1888 and informed by Hecker’s work ‘The Dancing Mania’, offered Mooney further resources for comparing the Ghost Dance to other religious and spiritual movements, including the long history of choreomania."

Ghost Dancing 

Convinced that ‘nothing is new under the sun’, Mooney argued that these outlandish practices had a common ancestry, describing a geneal-ogy to which the modern West was inextricably linked. “The systems of our highest modern civilizations’, he wrote, ‘have their counterparts among all the nations, and their chain of parallels stretches backwards link by link until we find their origin and interpretation in the customs and rites of our own barbarian ancestors, or of our still existing aboriginal tribes’.1 Once again, as in previous cases of the ‘dancing disease’, the European past and indigenous present were conflated; linked by religious ‘abnormalism’. Implicit in Mooney’s reflection was that the West, which viewed these abnormalisms, was immune from them.

Following Canguilhem, pathology is implicitly that which is described as ‘abnormal’ in a given culture. Fittingly, the tendency towards a utopic desire for the collective return to a Golden Age that Mooney observed in cultures around the world comes to appear as pathological, just as Boudin’s bemusement at the universality of ‘movement’ suggests the discursive appearance of an order of things (effectively an order of abnormalisms) that was choreographic. ‘Disease’ as the reification of abnormalism—what Taussig, as I showed in the previous chapter, further calls the concatenation of events into a singular thing abstracted out of the implicit relations or ecologies that produced it—signals noteworthy alterity: in effect the alterity of a (purportedly delusional) belief in what has become apparently invisible, including spirits or ghosts, or a lost Atlantis (a prior political or cultural state). The discursive appearance of this ‘delusion’ is the ‘disorder’ of choreomania, in effect the choreopolitical theatricalization of a fantasy that science would purportedly correct, if not by reasoning it out of its adherents then, as with the Ghost Dance, by the exercise of force.

Drawing further comparisons from newspaper articles, the Old and New Testaments, and travel narratives, such as The Dervishes (1868), by the secretary and dragoman of the American legation at Constantinople John P. Brown (1814-1872), Mooney noted that the field of enquiry into these ‘abnormalisms’ was vast: ‘it would require a volume to treat of the various religious abnormalisms, based on hypnotism, trances, and the messiah idea, which have sprung up and flourished in different parts of our own country even within the last twenty years.’ Nonetheless, like Boudin, Mooney listed some of them, focusing on the beatific ‘precedence’ these examples suggested to the modern (Western) observer. Mooney’s language was tender and grandiose, intimating that he looked paternalistically on the people whose utopias he dutifully catalogued. ‘What tribe or people has not had its golden age’, he wrote, in the first chapter of his report, titled ‘Paradise Lost’, before Pandora’s box was loosed, when women were nymphs and dryads and men were gods and heroes? And when the race lies crushed and groaning beneath an alien yoke, how natural is the dream of a redeemer, an Arthur, who shall return from exile or awake from some long sleep to drive out the usurper and win back for his people what they have lost.

The doctrines of the Hindu avatar, the Hebrew Messiah, the Christian millennium, and the Hestinanin of the Indian Ghost dance are essentially the same, and have their origin in a hope and longing common to all humanity. His aim was to invite sympathy with the plight of Ghost Dancers by suggesting that they too were like modern whites—his implied readers. All cultures, he argued, had at the outset a prior state to which they sought longingly to return; some had merely surpassed this.

Methodologically, Mooney’s approach was to combine participant observation with study of ‘precedents’ to the Ghost Dance in other cultures. His work was intensive, allowing a degree of immersion not paralleled by other authors writing on the ‘dancing disease’. Significantly, Mooney’s account attempts least of any to ascribe a medical etiology to the events he witnessed first-hand, though he linked the Ghost Dance thematically and genealogically to St. Vitus’s dance, completing a provisional translatio in the discursive history of choreomania from medical to anthropological discourse, instantiating a new regime of ethnographic veridiction.

“The field investigation occupied twenty-two months”, Mooney noted, “involving nearly 32,000 miles of travel and more or less time spent with about twenty tribes.” What’s more, and in contrast to other authors considered so far, Mooney danced, minutely recording the scenes he encountered in every detail: “to obtain exact knowledge of the ceremony, the author also took part in the dance among the Arapaho and Cheyenne. He also carried a kodak and a tripod camera” and spent several months “consulting manuscript documents and printed sources of information in the [Office of Indian Affairs and the War Department] ... at Washington.”

Personal correspondence with informed people across the country provided Mooney with additional source material, as did communication with two dozen or so ‘Indian’ informants and interpreters, including Standing Bear (1868-1939) and American Horse (1840-1908) of Pine Ridge, South Dakota; Black Coyote (d. 1890); Sitting Bull (1831-1890); and the Arapaho police of Darlington, Oklahoma. But his use of comparison between this and other dance-like uprisings, and the climate of political tension characterizing the Ghost Dance events, suggest that his work continued the comparative project of cataloguing dance frenzies, shifting the conversation provisionally onto ethnographic terrain. My own method has been to emphasize archival research, drawing in particular from records held in a collection named Special Case 188 in the materials of the National Archives and Records Administration at the Library of Congress—an unwieldy set of telegraphs, letters, and files kept in a degraded condition, possibly suggesting wilful neglect of the material traces of one of the more devastating episodes in U.S. military history on Native land. On one occasion, as I suggested in the introduction, I found a trace of the choreography and got up to dance. But for the most part, records of the event are ‘still’, dusty, full of the sort of circulation proper to dust: ‘dust’, the verb, historian Carolyn Steedman writes, suggests taking away and sprinkling, as on a surface.'® The movement of dust reveals a ‘grand circularity, of nothing ever, ever going away’,' so that the historian’s work is that of ‘finding things’ in this dust; not just breathing bodies back to life metaphorically, in a great performance of ventriloquism or life resuscitation, but in the minutiae arrived at by combing through reams of other-wise useless statements conserved at times haphazardly by governments and administrators.'* Yet this offered me what historian and anthropologist Ann Laura Stoler further describes as an ‘ethno-graphy’ of a different sort, emphasizing the discursive uncertainties and anxieties with regard to taxonomical and administrative procedures contained in these files; as well as the ‘historical ontologies’, in Hacking’s terms, emerging in the interstices between what was written and what I could only surmise was left unsaid."° Like Stoler and Hacking I have been interested to consider the discursive (and ontological) systems characterizing new modes of seeing—scopic regimes—revealing ambivalence with regard to what may lie ‘beneath’ the faint appearance of dance frenzies in modern scientific and anthropological literature.

Ghost Dancing entirely set into disciplinary systems but moved across disciplines and fields; they were always described as strange or obscure, eluding scientific, anthropological, or political finality and containment, even while dancers themselves were (as I will show) limited in their freedom to move. A tendency towards clarification thus takes place instead. The 'epistemic anxieties' Stoler describes plagued scientists perplexed by the heterogeneity of events and their undecipherability; their ultimate ungraspability. Dance manias were not objects one could hold, though many attempted to describe and to collage scenes in this form. With the emergence of professional ethnography and anthropology and their institutionalization in the late nineteenth century, new approaches to collective ecstatic dances situated them in relationship to historical precedents and discursive genealogies of the dancing disease, as had medicine and colonial medicine before them, but also increasingly in a relationship to environments or milieus, the oikonomies—the systems of local governance—within and against which they emerged. With the Ghost Dance, transhistoricity gave way increasingly to comparative regionalism, so that the ethnographic traces left behind by writers reveal material as well as methodological changes taking place in the scientific world. Concern was now less theoretical and more applied, even prescriptive; ethnographers such as Mooney, coming into Native territory a few years after the Ghost Dance peaked, spoke to participants in an effort to offer the government—and wider anthropological profession—a clear view of narratives that had been anecdotally trickling in. Security rather than historiography was paramount, and the efficient government of U.S. territory the final aim. The antiquarian curiosity that had saturated previous discussions of choreomania receded to the sidelines, now merely framing a discourse aimed primarily at the efficient deployment of biopower grounded in specialist local knowledge.

DROMOGRAPHY AND THE BIOPOLITICS OF THE 'CAPITAL'

Thus the ethnography emerging from the archives also gives rise to choreographic histories that trace the movements of texts and bodies across the American Plains, revealing the circulation of 'energies', for lack of a better word, that characterized them. Often, these were patent in the urgency of a scrawl—particularly by one inexperienced Indian agent, D. F. Royer, known as Lakota Kokipa-Koshkala (Young-Man-Afraid-of-Indians), whose panicked telegraphs to Washington suggested that on his agency (the Native territory he administered) the dancing was spiralling out of control. He requested military intervention, while other agents sat back, confident that the Ghost Dance was a mild and contained affair. But his alarm triggered requests for reports from Washington, DC, setting in motion a heightened sentiment that the United States was under attack from within its own margins. As in the imanenjana, the nation's capital came to stand at the heart of the affair, but here it operated its power exogenously, in the regions where upheavals were taking place. What Foucault has described in his 1977-1978 lectures at the Collège de France, "Security, Territory, Population," as the 'capitalization' of nations in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when governments exercising biopower began systematically to control processes of life and death, as well as natural and biological resources (mountains, trees, the quality of the air) from a noble and aloof central location, figured here as a centralizing power focused on Washington, DC. Washington was a place that was far removed from the locus of the Native American uprising but controlled the spatialization of the territory by focusing activity back into and through this centralizing power. Thus, the increasingly rapid circulation and criss-crossing of lines of communication between the regions and the capital exacerbated a sense of anxiety and uncertainty in the Plains, as settlers, agents, and Natives alike tried to figure out the extent and gravity of government neglect of Native populations—and potential intercession.

What these traces and partial scenarios reveal was a mood shift, an intense zone of change, in the history of the American West, showing anger and fear among Native Americans and settlers and competing concepts of land, agency, and space, as well as energetic and choreographic normalcy. Durkheim would describe the notion of anomie in the decade following the uprising, 20. See Foucault, "Security, Territory, Population," esp. 27-38.

230 ° COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES pinpointing a sense of lawlessness and rootlessness of life among 'moderns'; he described degeneration into a-regulation ('irréglementation') and a 'sad spectacle' ('triste spectacle') attributable to the rapid speed of change in life everywhere, as modern economic modes of production alienated interpersonal relations and shifted concepts of energetic expenditure, reconfiguring social bonds."' This set the stage for what Virilio would later define as dromology, the science of speed and circulation that gave faster nations the upper hand: the rapidity of their movements and their ability quickly to mobilize opinion through mass media and other technologies of communication gave them power over slower entities, whose speed of interchange, movements, and response times lagged." In the case of the Ghost Dance, Native American rebels accordingly increased interpersonal contact in efforts to counteract government suppression of their basic living needs but did so at a different pace from that of their surroundings. The speed and expanse of Western Union's telegraph lines, introduced in the wake of the Civil War, overpowered the Natives' modes of circulation, mostly movement on foot or horseback. Yet the intensity of circulation and gathering among Ghost Dancers created a rhythmic and geocultural choreozone by which dancers found new routes towards ecstasy-belonging. The drama of distance then constitutes a new spatial (and spatializing) turn in 'choreomania', as the sort of rumours and repetitions that characterized narratives of 'dancing manias' in the previous cases I have offered occurred for the most part at an intellectual distance; no action took place. Here, the biopolitical dromology operated against dancers whose movements were paradoxically too slow, though characterized as frenetic. The choreopolitics of their revolt conversely emphasized social solidarity and topology, or choreotopology: the gesture of gathering, closely and tangibly, not in the centre (the capital), nor in the furthest margins, like the Brazilian sertées (who sought to disappear entirely from the nation state), but within the Indian agencies where they resided, in order to make their claims heard where they were and so to dance emphatically in place. The circulation they performed was instrumental to this ecstatic affirmation of being-here. MENTAL GEOGNOSY: ANTHROPOLOGY, AND THE METAPHOR OF A LOST ATLANTIS

Native Americans were understood to be of the earth and thus to be plunderable, domesticable, like the earth. The new American worldview, based on Christian precepts, saw the natural world—in which were included ‘Indians’—as its endowment. Anthropology aided in this task. For Mooney, anthropology was born out of an antiquarian impulse to ‘see’ forgotten antiquity and ‘nature’ in the struggles of the present. Metaphors of archaeology and myth, history, geology (or geognosy) and geography had already been influentially articulated by the American ethnologist Henry Rowe Schoolcraft (1793-1864) in his 1846 address to the New Confederacy of the Iroquois and to the non-Iroquois men of Rochester, New York—including the soon-to-be ethnographer, Lewis Henry Morgan (1818-1881)—he was urging to take up a pioneering role in the development of a new American ‘tradition’. In this view, Natives were at once central to the new American way and precedent to it; they could thus logically be surpassed, as their ‘impress’ on the soil was supposedly in this exalted sense indelible. ‘No people can bear a true nationality’, he declared, ‘which does not exfoliate, as it were, from its bosom, something that expresses the peculiarities of its own soil and climate’. America, he argued, had to extract its ‘history’ ‘from the broad and deep quarries of its own mountains, foundation stones, and columns and capitals, which bear the impress of an indigenous mental geognosy’, effectively a science of rock formations and minerals equated more or less metaphorically with the indigenous mind, distinguishing America implicitly from urban, civilized Europe.

This discursive juxtaposition 21. Durkheim argues that the division of labour in modern economic life is often ‘normal’ but, ‘like all biological facts’, presents ‘pathological’ forms. These occur where social solidarity gives way to its opposite and a chasm grows (between co-workers or between them and their employer); it is also exacerbated by the disintegration of family life and the replacement of ‘communal’ by ‘adversarial’ social and professional structures and activities. Durkheim, ‘Préface de la seconde édition’, in De la division du travail 22. Paul Virilio, Speed and Politics (New York: Semiotext(e), 2006). 23. Cited in Hinsley, Savages and Scientists, 20. Ghost Dancing + 231 of the indigenous, the intellectual, and the geological in the scientific deployment of local knowledge of terrains and territories heralded the new scientific culture of America with pomp, folding the ‘indigenous’ into American natural history. In the terms used by anthropologist Margaret Mead (1901-1978), Native Americans were symbolically ancestral and so were like the American settlers (‘but not quite’): they too had been ‘immigrants to the great empty continents of the New World where, like later European immigrants, they began a life without historical precedents. In the imagination of those who came from Europe, these earlier dwellers became a different kind of ancestor.”4 Significantly, the difference was precisely the measure of contestation acted out in the Ghost Dance: a ‘difference’ suggesting that the Natives were no longer as different as they had once been and were thus subject, as I will show, no longer to a certain sort of exceptionalism by which they had been granted rations. They had to enter themselves headlong into modernity, and so become 'white' right away, if not by reason then by force. Natives sought to counter this 'fictitious state of exception', what Agamben calls the construction of a scenario by which the suspension of laws is meted out, by returning to their own 'mental geognosy'—their own dwelling in and with the land—what I have elsewhere described as a dancing-place, a site embedded with genealogical and affective weight, through which kinship lines pass. The Ghost Dance was a performance of and on a dancing-place, a site saturated with alternative historicities, in which affect-laden acts and messianic longings for a new future, saturated with relivings of the past, accumulated and were deployed, enabling a deep sense of collective self to emerge against state control. Yet this concerted choreography of protest was unsettling for settlers unaccustomed to the lofty aspirations of ethnographic science and confused by the messianism that Natives displayed, a sort of religiosity at once too close to and too far from their own.

Ultimately, the spectacle of an indigenous choreopolitics creolizing indigenous and Christian symbols of redemption and return catalysed the government to act: troops intervened on behalf of Indian agents who were worried about the spread of the dancing 'craze'. The massacre at Wounded Knee on 29 December 1890 resulted in the death of more than 300 Lakota Sioux by government fire, including some of the most prominent Ghost Dancers, and over 250 women and children.

Alarmist discourse surrounding the Ghost Dance emphasized the dancers' irrationalism, the sense that what they did to represent their claims was abnormal, wrong, and so negated the very claims put forward. One special agent, E. B. Reynolds, argued in a letter to the commissioner of Indian affairs in Washington, DC, T. J. Morgan, that the dancers did more than eschew economic rationality; they actively counteracted the government's costly attempt to 'wean' them from the 'customs of their ancestors'. Only military action, Reynolds surmised, might stop this, 'unless the cold weather accomplishes this end'. The government in that regard viewed its role as tantamount to that of a natural force—doubled with the technological and military power that might supplement and surpass it. Both sides of the spectral war operated cultural economies that occluded the other; likewise, both staged narratives rent through with antinomies, finally to produce a dialectics at a standstill, until the U.S. war machine eradicated its own imagined past in a wilful drive towards a 'productive', mechanistic future. This drive was governed by the supposed rational workings of capital and land distribution to the exclusion of freedom of movement and what Bataille in the epigraph to this chapter describes as the madness of sacrifice exercised among Natives—a prodigious irony, as Native Americans were 'sacrificed' in their turn by this machine of war. A useful, comprehensive history of the Wounded Knee massacre and events leading up to it can be found in William S. E. Coleman's "Voices of Wounded Knee" (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2000). For an understanding of the Ghost Dance, one can refer to the records of Special U.S, Indian Agent E. B. Reynolds, Pine Ridge Agency, SD, to T. J. Morgan, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 25 September 1890, in the Ghost Dance, Special Case 188, Special Cases, Entry 102, Record Group 75, National Archives, Washington, DC.

The Ghost Dance movement was a response to the stresses of acculturation and a means to access spiritual power to help Natives 'achieve revolutionary purposes'. The movement was a theatrical zone of intensity that meshed genealogies of corporeal, affective, and performance practice. It served as a suspension of breath, interrupting cultural degeneration and starvation, allowing participants to imagine new forms of collective desire grounded in a memory of the old.

Russell Thornton's "We Shall Live Again: The 1870 and 1890 Ghost Dance Movements as Demographic Revitalization" (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986) provides an in-depth analysis of the movement. Thornton argues that the Ghost Dance was a revitalization movement, aiming for demographic regeneration. The dancing and gathering in the movement produced a theatrical zone of intensity that meshed genealogies of corporeal, affective, and performance practice, serving as a suspension of breath, interrupting cultural degeneration and starvation.

Thornton's work, as well as the records of Special U.S, Indian Agent E. B. Reynolds, provide valuable insights into the Ghost Dance movement and its role in the Native American struggle against acculturation and ethnocidal policies. Pierre Clastres, La Société contre l'État: Recherches d'anthropologie politique (Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit, 1974), 72. Ann F. Ramenofsky, Vectors of Death: The Archaeology of European Contact (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1987), and K. Dietz, 'Epidemics and Rumors: A Survey', Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, series A, 130 (1967): 505-528. A. L. Kroeber, in Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1963), and H. Dobyns, Their Number Become Thinned: Native American Population Dynamics in Eastern North America (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1983), provide low and high estimates, respectively, of the Native population at the time of the first sustained European contact in 1492, from Kroeber's 0.9 million to Dobyns's 18 million. See also Michael G. Davis, Ecology, Sociopolitical Organization, and Cultural Change on the Southern Plains: A Critical Treatise in the Sociocultural Anthropology of Native North America (Kirksville, MO: Thomas Jefferson University Press, 1996).

Thornton, We Shall Live Again, xi. Disease had been running rampant at some Indian agencies. Indian agent James McLaughlin writes of 'the real causes of the late outbreak' and that 'in the autumn of 1888 measles broke out among the Indians and was epidemic at all the Sioux Agencies throughout the following winter. "Le Grippe" and "Whooping Cough" followed in the winter of 1889 & 90, and an unusual number of deaths resulted. The severe droughts rendered all efforts of agriculture a failure for the past three years, and many of the Indians' stock cattle died of black leg'. James McLaughlin, Indian Agent, United States Indian Service, Standing Rock Agency, to Hon. T. J. Morgan, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 10 March 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

Roach, Cities of the Dead, 25-26. Ghost Dancing + 233 President Benjamin Harrison's (1833-1901) government had decreed the year before, in 1889, that 'Indians' were to lose their special status and right to cultural autonomy: 'First, the anoma- lous position heretofore occupied by the Indians in this country can no longer be maintained. Second, the logic of events demands the absorp- tion of the Indians into our national life not as Indians but as American citizens. Third . . . the relations of the Indians to the government must rest solely upon the recognition of their indi- viduality [i.e. as legal persons]. Fourth, the indi- vidual must conform to the white man's ways, peaceably if they will, forcibly if they must'.** On 10 February 1890, five reservations were estab- lished on roughly half of the former Great Sioux Reservation of South Dakota; the other half was sold to non-Natives 'at bargain prices', as anthro- pologist Alice Beck Kehoe notes.*® Railroads were built through the reservations, and families had to live on individual allotments rather than in shared camps or villages______ Children were sent to boarding schools and made to speak English, subject to punishment if they failed to comply. Yet these policies ran counter to a prior agreement, known as the Fort Laramie Treaty, reached between Sioux leaders and the government in 1868. The agreement had ceded the majority of the Sioux hunting lands to the government in exchange for the right in perpetuity to the Great Sioux Reservation. However, the discovery of gold in the Black Hills portion of the reservation prompted the government to rescind the agreement without a vote.

In a letter to Washington, DC, dated 10 April 1891, Indian agent A. P. Dixon, of the Crow Creek and Lower Brule Consolidated Agency, noted Congress's failure to "make the appropriation, recommended by the Indian Bureau, of $187,039.00 to compensate [the Indians] for the loss sustained in receiving less land per capita in their diminished Reservation than is received by the Indians occupying other diminished reservations."

They are unable to comprehend clearly the distinction between Congress and the Government, and unable to recognize with satisfaction just why Congress should have a different opinion in regard to their claims, than that recommended by the Indian Commissioner, as promised them by the Sioux Commission.

Arbitrary rule with respect to land—and land seizure—catapulted displaced Natives into the reasonable experience of spiritual anomie. Rations were, moreover, cut to less than half—on account of the Natives' perceived laziness—causing many to suffer from starvation. Although food had earlier been provided on reservations in compensation for ceded land—until Native Americans could sustain themselves through farming—a semi-arid climate, heat, and drought in 1890 caused crops to fail that spring.

The measles in 1889 and the grippe in 1890, as well as recurring bouts of whooping cough, weakened those already malnourished from crop failure. Restrictions on travel meant that Natives could not seek other means of subsistence on adjacent territories as they had done in the past. This left most highly vulnerable to the crop failures and bad weather, conditions that were exacerbated by widespread negligence on the part of Indian agents.

In July 1889, during the farming season, the Indians at Sioux Falls, South Dakota, were called to the local agency and kept there for a month by the Sioux Commission. Bishop W. H. Hare (1838-1909) noted that "during their absence, their cattle broke into their fields and trod down, or ate up, their crops. The Indians reaped practically nothing."

Commanding Major General Nelson A. Miles (1839-1925) noted in a letter to the adjutant general of the United States Army in late January 1891 that the Natives "claimed that they could not live on promises not fulfilled and half or two-thirds sufficient. On debates among Indian agents regarding the role of hunger in the Ghost Dance, see also n45 here. 42. Bishop W. H. Hare, Missionary District of South Dakota, Sioux Falls, SD, to Secretary of the Interior, 7 January 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 234 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES food. It is useless to suppose that they can support themselves when compelled to remain on their reservation where the crops have for the last year been a total failure.’ He recommended that the government assure them of its good faith by carrying out the terms of the treaties. But the government failed to respond; agreements were broken. Sioux leaders who protested against these measures were branded as agitators. Most tribal leaders simply wanted their provisions met: American Horse (1840-1908), Fast Thunder (born circa 1839), Spotted Horse, Pretty Back, and Good Lance (born circa 1846) remarked at a council held at Indian agent D. F. Royer's quarters at the Pine Ridge Agency in South Dakota that ‘they are every year cutting down our rations and we do not get enough to keep us from suffering’. But Agent Royer dismissed the situation, explaining in his telegraphs to the commissioner of Indian affairs in Washington that ‘some of the Indians were trying to account for this ghost dance craze by saying that the Government has not fulfilled the promises made’. The degree to which Natives at different agencies used the Ghost Dance as a platform for organizing varied. In the aftermath of the massacre at Wounded Knee, Natives at the Standing Rock, Cheyenne, and other neighbouring agencies began regularly to visit the graves of those killed in the skirmish, crying, howling, and working themselves into what one report described as a ‘sad state of mind’. But at Fort Sill, Oklahoma Territory, the attitudes were more placid. Lieutenant H. L. Scott (1853-1934) noted in the context of ‘a small dance near the agency [that the whole excitement concerning the Messiah] was observed to be largely an affair for amusement for the young people’. It was a new sort of dance, a new variation on older forms, and not, in this case, he argued, a program for venting anger or banding together to fight.

"MINI DEATHS’: OF VISIONS AND SYNCOPES Although doctrines differed, some aspects of the Ghost Dance were unvarying, particularly the shuffling sidestep to the left and dancers’ falling to the ground in a state of exhaustion or syncope, described as a ‘mini death’. These were not trances per se, one informant ventured, speaking to anthropologist Cora du Bois (1903-1991) in the 1940s: ‘dancers might fall over in faint [sic]; revived by fanning with sagebrush twig. Was not a trance so far as informant knew; fainted simply from dancing too hard’. Another participant, 43, Nelson A. Miles, Commanding Major General, Headquarters Division of Missouri, to Adjutant General of the U.S. Army, 27 January 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 44. Kehoe, The Ghost Dance, 15-17. 45. D. E Royer, Indian Agent, United States Indian Service, Office of Indian Agent, Pine Ridge Agency, SD, telegraph to R. V. Belt, Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 27 November 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. Bishop W. H. Hare, Missionary District of South Dakota, Sioux Falls, SD, to Secretary of the Interior, 7 January 1891, states that ‘among the Pine Ridge Indians, at least, hunger has been an important element in the causes of discontent and insubordination’; Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 

Indian Agent A. P. Dixon concurs: "It is without doubt that there existed, previous to the outbreak among the Indians, a feeling of dissatisfaction growing out of failure to receive regular and full rations, and the delay in shipment of Annuity clothing, owing to the dilatory manner with which the Indian Appropriation Bill was handled by Congress." A. P. Dixon, Indian Agent at the Crow Creek and Lower Brule Consolidated Agency, to Hon. Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 10 April 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

Nelson A. Miles, writing to the adjutant general of the army, reports the same: "They claimed that they could not live on promises not fulfilled and half or two-thirds sufficient food. It is useless to suppose that they can support themselves when compelled to remain on their reservation where the crops have for the last year been a total failure." Nelson A. Miles, Headquarters Division of the Missouri, to Adjutant General of the U.S. Army, 27 January 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

Penny, Acting Indian Agent, Pine Ridge Agency, SD, telegraph to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 8 April 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. Indian Agent George Wright said the same, adding that Indians from his reservation had gone to Pine Ridge for this purpose and that those visiting the graves were doubtless relatives from Cheyenne River. George Wright, Indian Agent, Rosebud Agency, SD, telegraph to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 9 April 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

However, Indian agent Perain P. Palmer wrote to the commissioner to state that none of the Indians at Cheyenne River had visited Wounded Knee, as instructions had been given for all to remain at their homes, and that policemen were stationed at all the camps and were instructed to report any absences. He added that the Indians were generally 'well disposed' (and 'satis- fied') and 'would remain loyal to the government'. Perain P. Palmer, Indian Agent, Cheyenne River Agency, to Hon. T. J. Morgan, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 10 April 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

H.L. Scott, 1st Lieutenant, 7th Cavalry, Fort Sill, Oklahoma Territory, to Post Adjutant, Fort Sill, Oklahoma Territory, 30 January 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

Cora Du Bois, 'The 1870 Ghost Dance', in University of California Publications in Anthropological Records, vol. 3, no. 1 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1946), 1-152, 6. Ostler notes that 'after a while—an hour or two, sometimes less—some Ghost Dancing + 235 who had escaped from school in 1890 with about fifty other children to participate in the Ghost Dance, told Sioux anthropologist Ella Deloria (1889-1971) that sheer exhaustion served to catalyse visions, producing an altered state of consciousness and dreams heightened by the intensity of the dance: 'Occasionally someone thoroughly exhausted and dizzy fell unconscious into the center and lay there "dead"'. This participant recalled. 'After a while many lay about in that condition. They were now "dead" and seeing their dear ones. As each one came to, she, or he, slowly sat up and looked about, bewildered, and then began wailing inconsolably'.

These exhausted visions reimagined life in the Plains, peopled by deceased ancestors, buf- faloes, and a sense of joy and security past. According to Deloria's interlocutor______ ... Waking to the drab and wretched present after such a glowing vision, it was little wonder that they wailed as if their poor hearts would break in two with disillusionment.’ The visions were further provoked by fasting and were often preceded by running, moaning, and what Major Wirt Davis (1839-1914) called ‘nervous prostration’.* Davis, who attended a dance at Boggy Creek in December 1890, described the event as a controlled and largely peaceful affair: a religious gathering, not a war-dance.™ The dancing area was carefully delineated, with sentinels prowling the outskirts, keeping dogs out (since they were said to break the spell of a trance and prevent visions), and making sure no fires were lit inside the ring. Wagons, buggies, and teepees were arranged around the outside, with an abundance of foodstuffs that reminded him of ‘old-fashioned Methodist or Baptist camp-meetings’.** Davis’s detailed description of the dance, addressed to the assistant adjutant general of the War Department, merits reproducing at some length:

The Indians were dancing when we arrived and we were spectators until they stopped for dinner about 5 p.m. The dance was resumed about 6 p.m. and continued during the night and until 8 o’clock a.m. Usually the night dance begins about sunset and lasts until the Pleiades are in mid-heaven. I was present at the dance till 10 p.m., and also in the morning from 6:30 a.m. until 8 a.m., when it stopped. At one time 140 Indians—men, women and children—were in the ring dancing and singing the Messiah songs. The step in this dance is different from the step in the other Indian dances. The movement is to the left and is a glide with the left foot, followed by the right foot, and a bending of both knees, the right knee more bent than the left. There are at least six Messiah hymns of invocation and supplication. The Indians join hands, the fingers interlocked, dance in a circle while singing a Messiah hymn for fifteen or twenty minutes, then rest and again resume the dance. While resting they smoke and chat.

When the ‘power’ seizes an Indian, there ensues a swaying of the body, a spasmodic jerking of the muscles, he leaves the circle of dancers, moves wildly, sometimes running, around the interior of the circle, gesticulating, singing and moaning, and finally falls to the ground worn out from nervous prostration, exhaustion and dizziness. In this trance-like condition the Indians claim to have visions and, upon recovery, some dancers “became affected” (ececa) and “fainted” or “died” (ta). Others ‘“went to the land of the spirits” (wanagiyata ipi)’.

Ostler, The Plains Sioux, 258. 49. Cited in Ronald Niezen et al., Spirit Wars: Native North American Religions in the Age of Nation Building (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000), 133. See Peter Nabokov, Native American Testimony: A Chronicle of Indian-White Relations from Prophecy to the Present, 1492-1992 (New York: Penguin Books, 1992), 254-255. 50. In Niezen, Spirit Wars, 133. 51. Wirt Davis, Major, 5th Calvary, Inspector of Small Arms Practice, Headquarters Department of the Missouri, Office of the Inspector of Small Arms Practice, St. Louis, Missouri, to Assistant Adjutant General of the Department, 23 December 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 52. Wirt Davis to Assistant Adjutant General of the Department, 23 December 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 53. Davis writes: Jake, the chief of the Caddos, remarked that he had been to Methodist camp-meetings______ 

Wirt Davis to Assistant Adjutant General of the Department, 23 December 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

Colonial and Postcolonial Stages

They go to their tepees and tell their relatives and friends what they have seen. At 9 o'clock p.m. I counted ten Indians, most of them women, lying on the ground and under the ‘influence’. When the dance ended in the morning there were three lying on the ground, two of them were motionless and apparently insensible, and the other, a Caddo woman, was moving her arms and exclaiming as it was interpreted to me by a Shawnee who spoke English: ‘It is so—it is true’. When the dance stopped at 8 a.m., the dancers shook their blankets and quietly dispersed.

For Davis, the dance was indebted to Christian iconography, deserving, as Lieutenant H. L. Scott had noted in a letter that eventually made its way to the secretary of war in Washington, the same protection afforded to all personal liberties and the freedom to engage in the pursuit of happiness.

These recommendations were not heeded, and although Davis stated plainly that Natives’ anxieties had been exacerbated by conditions of want and were thus reasonable, noise coming from other quarters underlined the Natives’ misery as fodder for unwarranted revolt.

Wovoka: Making It Snow in the Summer, Making the People Dance

Adherents of the Ghost Dance believed the spirits of dead Indians would come back to life and the earth would turn back into an Indian paradise. All whites would be cast out, and the Indians would live eternally. Many versions forecasted the abundant return of animals, fish, and other foodstuffs. Some merely predicted changes in the Natives’ relations to whites. But as anthropologist A. L. Kroeber (1876-1960) has argued, the main thrust of the teachings was the return of the dead.

Two movements were effectively described as Ghost Dances: a first, smaller movement, emerging in 1870, and then a resurgence of similar teachings in 1890, mobilizing a far greater contingency of dancer-agitators (‘demonstrators’) and resulting in the far greater escalation of power politics mentioned already.

Unlike the imanenjana, the Ghost Dance operated a series of movements with multiple centres or poles, none directing dancers towards the capital, but circulating across the Plains, with doctrines and opinions that suggested a range of approaches to choreopolitical dissidence. Like the imanenjana and the Canudos revolt, the Ghost Dance was in large part initiated by a (self-styled) spiritual healer; but band leaders took a great part in the orchestration of the movement’s choreography of protest, its ways of ‘[creating] interference’, if only through a temporary suspension of ‘productive’ work time.

The 1870 Ghost Dance movement originated far from the Great Sioux Reservation of South Dakota, which would become the crucible of later events: further west, among the Northern Paiute or Paviotso of western Nevada on the Walker Lake reservation. The movement spread through the rest of Nevada, along the West Coast of the United States, and into Oregon and California.** It constituted a traditional Paviotso round dance—used for all special occasions—with a typical ring formation and shuffling sidestep to the left; men and Dance, Special Case 188. The letter was passed on to the assistant adjutant general in St. Louis, MO, and endorsed by W. Merritt, commanding brigadier general, who forwarded it to the adjutant general of the army. It was then submitted to the secretary of war by J. M. Schofield, commanding major general, and endorsed in Washington at army headquarters on 29 December 1890, not, however, succeeding in interrupting the rapid escalation towards military intervention; Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 56.

There were also variants in terms of how the dead would return. Sometimes it was said that a ‘supreme ruler’ was in charge of shuttling the spirits of the dead back to earth; or dead relatives would return from the south; or ‘the dead would come from the east when the grass was about 8 inches high’. Other times it was said that the dead would return in armies from the rising sun, or they would return from their graves. In at least one instance, among the Natives in northern California, the ‘dead would return ... and would swe the whites from the earth’. Thornton, We Shall Live Again, 3. See also Thornton, We Shall Live Again, 1-2, on the teachings and their spread. 57. Foster, ‘Choreographies of Protest’, 395. 58. See Thornton, We Shall Live Again, 1. See also Du Bois, ‘The 1870 Ghost Dance’; Leslie Spier, ‘The Ghost Dance of 1870 among the Klamath of Oregon’, in University of Washington Publications in Anthropology, vol. 2, no. 2 (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1927), 35-56; A. L. Kroeber, ‘A Ghost-Dance in California’, Journal of American Folklore 17 (1904): 32-35; and A.

Ghost Dancing + 237 women held hands, wearing ochre face paint. As the first Ghost Dance movement spread, local variations emerged.*® Among these was the Earth Lodge cult, originating among the Wintun and Hill Patwin of northern California; rather than ushering in the return of the dead, it pre- dicted the end of the world, a catastrophe that the participants would escape by taking cover in the subterranean houses they built. The Bole Maru in north-central California emphasized belief in the afterlife and a supreme being. The second Ghost Dance movement also began on the Walker Lake reservation, this time in January 1889, peaking in 1890 and continuing on well into the 1900s, gaining far more momentum and a wider spread than before.*' The new practice of dancing in a circle while holding hands, tak- ing care never to break the circle, which was typ- ical in the first Ghost Dance, offered a departure from ring formations then familiar among most tribes. For the Sioux, dancing facing the centre and moving around the centre together, pausing at each of the four directions, or dancing into and away from a central tree, characterized the Sun Dance; but physical contact now enabled danc- ers to engage in direct corporeal communication. This allowed them ‘to feel, holding on to the hand of your brother and sister’, in the words of Sioux activist Mary Crow Dog (1954-2013), whose fam- ily conserved oral histories of the Ghost Dance, ‘the rebirth of Indian unity, feel it with your flesh, through your skin’. The second Ghost Dance also more promin- ently heralded a vision of a new world. This was interpreted differently among different tribes and tribe members, according to local needs, dreams, aspirations, and relative willingness to adhere to the new white ways. As in previous cases, fiction—‘lies’—sat at the heart of the Ghost Dance narrative, though with the Ghost Dance this was not the ‘shamming’ that observ- ers construed as pathological but arguably fan- tastical narratives and playful tricks—white lies—that positively constituted (perhaps cata- lysed) a widely desired new world order. Wovoka, known as Jack Wilson (1856-1932), a Numu or Northern Paiute from western Nevada, had a revelation on 1 January 1889 following a solar eclipse. He believed he was Jesus and claimed to control the weather and be invulnerable to bullets and other projectiles. These claims were later repudiated, stating that stories about his bullet-proof capabilities were a joke. Clark J. Guild (b. 1887) notes that he knew Jack Wilson (Wovoka) personally and that Bill and Mack Wilson, sons of Wovoka's employer, had evidence of Wovoka's clever tricks. Wovoka managed to tie catfish to a string in a frozen river and claimed that spirits helped him to fish, to the muted amazement of his Native audience.

Mooney describes Wovoka's 'great revelation' in The Ghost-Dance Religion and Wounded Knee (1896): "On this occasion 'the sun died' (was eclipsed) and [Wovoka] fell asleep in the daytime and was taken up to the other world. Here he saw God, with all the people who had died long ago engaged in their old-time sports and occupations, all happy and forever young. It was a pleasant land and full of game. After showing him all, God told him he must go back and tell his people they must be good and love one another, have no quarreling, and live in peace with the whites; that they must work, and not lie or steal; that they must put away all the old practices that savored of war; that if they faithfully obeyed his instructions they would at last be reunited with their friends in this other world, where there would be no more death or sickness or old age. He was then given the dance which he was commanded to bring back to his people. By performing this dance at intervals, for five consecutive days each time, they would secure this happiness to themselves and hasten the event. Finally God gave him control over the elements so that he could make it rain or snow or be dry at will, and appointed him his deputy to take charge of affairs in the west, while 'Governor Harrison' would attend to matters in the east, and he, God, would look after the world above." [Wovoka] then returned to earth and began to preach as he was directed, convincing the people by exercising the wonderful powers that had been given to him.


COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES

Further reports revealed that he tricked other Natives into believing in his powers, for example by having ice deposited up the river on a hot day, ‘proving’ to his audience that his prediction of snow and ice came true. His ‘bulletproof vest’ was made by giving Natives blank cartridges, shaking up some powder he had concealed in his shirt. Mooney’s report of his conversations with Wovoka confirmed Wovoka’s denial of responsibility for claims to bulletproof ‘ghost shirts’ or to the dances involving ‘hostility toward the whites’. But Wovoka did claim that his ‘religion’ was one of ‘universal peace’ and that while he was not Christ, the Son of God, he had received a message from God while in the spirit world, urging the Indians to dance the special Ghost Dance. He also ‘genuinely’, wrote Mooney, claimed some supernatural abilities, particularly in regard to rainmaking. Mooney was impressed by Wovoka’s apparent assimilation of white ways: ‘If appearances are in evidence, he is sincere in this [good will]’, Mooney noted, ‘for he was dressed in a good suit of white man’s clothing, and works regularly on a ranch, although living in a wikiup’.11

Wovoka's appearance as a white man ('almost . . . but not quite') sufficed to convince Mooney of the movement's relative legitimacy—at least as far as its (fiction-laden) origins were concerned. In effect, the Ghost Dance brought about what Agamben characterizes, after early nineteenth-century French law, as a 'fictitious state of exception', one in which the sovereign decides whether a state of siege should be declared, this state serving conveniently as grounds for new laws, new measures, or an outright new world order to be instituted.

With the Ghost Dance, the fictitious state of exception—implicitly declared by the government arguably to institute far more radical anti-Native legislation than had previously been decreed, on the grounds of self-protection—was heightened by a complex of performative factors by which the Natives themselves performed a state of exception, ecstatically. Their ecstasy-belonging effectively reclaimed the sovereign right to self-representation, performing heightened suspension of everyday life, a theatrical coming-to-be of a new state.

The performance of this ecstasy-belonging and the dramaturgy and extended narratives (the fictions) accompanying its unfolding thus were varied, but Wovoka's initial teachings set the tone. His revelation—described in a 'letter' he received from the spirit world—prescribed dancing for four nights and one day; taking a bath in the morning before going home, not telling the whites about this, but knowing that Jesus is on the ground, 'he just like cloud'. Also '[t]here will be no sickness and return to young [youth] again'. Dancers were 'not [to] refuse to work for white man' and 'not [to] make any trouble with them until you leave them'. 'I want you to make dance for six weeks', the letter said, 'eat and wash good clean yourselves'. Promise of the return of the Native ancestors was also stipulated: 'Every body is alive again, I dont know when they will [be] here, may be this fall or in spring'. Wovoka also promised rain and snow: 'I will give you a good cloud and give you chance to make you feel good. I give you a good spirit', he said, 'and give you all good paint'. But the tribes had to gather for this event: ‘I want you people to come here again, want them in three months any tribe]s of you from there’.® Wovoka’s otherwise garbled message found a ready audience: he soon enjoyed substantial monetary rewards as he started to be revered as a messiah figure and was given gifts in exchange for the shirts and feathers he wore. The message of hope he had delivered became intelligible as a cue to revolt in the suspended time of ecstasy-belonging that characterized an indigenous state of exception that was going to contravene the white world order. News of Wovoka’s miracles and revelation spread, and from the Smith and Mason valleys in Nevada his Ghost Dance doctrine reached Oregon and California. It then spread north, east, and south into Idaho, Montana, Utah, the Dakotas, Oklahoma Territory, Missouri, and 66. Cited in Hittman, Wovoka and the Ghost Dance, 308. 67. Cited in Hittman, Wovoka and the Ghost Dance, 237-244, 242-243. 68. See Agamben, State of Exception, 3-4. 69. ‘The Messiah Letter’. Cheyenne and Arapaho versions cited in Mooney, The Ghost-Dance Religion, 780-781. 70. See especially ‘The Dyer Tape’, transcribed in Hittman, Wovoka and the Ghost Dance, 256-258, 257. C. S. Asbury, Special Indian Agent, Reno, Nevada, also stated in a letter to the commissioner of Indian affairs, Washington, DC, regarding ‘Alleged activ- ity of Jack Wilson, Wovoka, the Messiah’; Jack is a mercenary fellow and it may be that his visits are purely for his own financial needs, as he is still able to collect considerable money from the Indians visited, for his work as a “big medicine man.”’ Asbury notes that Wovoka ‘has been exceptionally free from the use of whiskey, opium, etc., and that his talks to the Indians . . . have been along the lines of temperance, morality and industry’; reproduced in Hittman, Wovoka and the Ghost Dance, 287-288, 287. Ghost Dancing + 239 New Mexico, Arizona, and other states, eventually encompassing most of the central western United States.

The revelation evolved, but substantial portions of Wovoka’s original vision remained, heralding the renovation and rejuvenation of the world through dance, song, and a rejection of aspects of white culture deemed destructive to Natives—alcohol in particular. Buffalo would roam free, all dead Indians would come back to life, disease would disappear, and food would be plenti- ful again. In Mooney’s terms, this was a return to a status quo ante, a mythic past, Atlantis regained, laced with Abrahamic visions of Paradise. It also signalled the concerted orchestration of choreopo- litical revolt. In spite of its broad appeal, the doctrine was widely disputed. As Indian agent S. G. Fisher noted, ‘scarcely any two tribes have the same ideas as to what they must do to bring about the desired result’. Some tribes believed all whites would be destroyed, while others thought that whites and Indians would live together in this Paradise, or become one people. Captain Dick, a Paiute at Fort Bidwell in California, told an investigator that when ‘Old Man’ returned, all the Indians would climb up into the mountains to escape the flood that would kill the white people.® For Short Bull (1851-1935), the Messiah had already come to Earth, but white people had killed him.° For Porcupine (c. 1848-1929), the point was to stop fighting, not to project the death of all whites.° For Natives at the Standing Rock Agency, the dead would return to reinhabit the earth, which belonged to the Indians in the first place; they would also drive herds of buffalo and elegant wild horses, and the Great Spirit would see to it that white men were unable to make gunpowder and all attempts______ The Great Spirit had deserted the Indians for a long time but was with them now and against the whites. The Great Spirit would cover the earth with 30 feet of additional soil, well sodded and timbered, under which the whites would be smothered. Some whites would escape this great phenomenon and become small fishes in the rivers of the country. According to a later variation, whites and Indians would have to die before the earth could be renewed. It was 'old and worn out', and there would have to be new ones.

Many variants emerged as there were areas of activity and sources of further doctrinal influence. The Mormons, in particular, were widely thought to have provided some aspects of their belief system to the Ghost Dance. They believed that the 'Indians' were descendants of the 'ten lost tribes', cherished as a part of their faith. Because Mormons believed that some of the lost Hebrew tribes had been absorbed into the Indian tribes, they thought that the Indians should know that they were a Chosen People, remnants of one of the lost tribes, so that they could be redeemed and become white and happy. Some Mormons appear to have participated in the Ghost Dancing.

COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES

emigrants [were] still ice-bound in the frozen north. .. . When the news of this Indian reve- lation came to their ears, the Mormon priests accepted it as a prophecy of speedy fulfillment of their own traditions’.”

A plethora of utopic spiritual movements were cropping up in the American West, allying messianic doctrines with ecstatic eschatological practices.®° The Ghost Dance gained as many as a few thousand followers, though its proximity to other mes- sianic movements in the American nineteenth and early twentieth centuries did not succeed in diminishing settler, agent, or government fears of Ghost Dance escalation or stem the move- ment’s repression.

Even as Ghost Dancers mixed Christian iconography with Native American dance and diplomatic practices, exchanging vis- its with one another, sharing information, they made what were ultimately modest and con- tained political demands.

CROSSED WIRES AND MEDIA MAYHEM

Yet the spread and transformation of Ghost Dance doctrine—and the amplification of fears on the part of Natives and government agents— provoked anxiety among settlers, which was exac- erbated by various regimes of mobilization across the Plains. These included intertribal visits and councils; newspaper articles, which sensation- alized the stories; and the increased circulation of misinformation between Indian agencies and the commissioner of Indian affairs.

Indian agent James McLaughlin (1842-1923), ina letter dated 29 November 1890 to the commissioner, T. J. Morgan, complained of the ‘wide spread reports appearing in the newspapers which are greatly and criminally exaggerated, and in a majority of instances without any truth whatever in so far as this agency [Standing Rock] is concerned’. He added that these reports had ‘caused an unneces- sary alarm amongst settlers in the vicinity who have fled from their homes, panic stricken, to places of supposed safety, on false rumours that the Indians had broken out, the reports besides having this tendency to excite the Indians to hos- tility and disobedience of orders rather than to allay the excitement amongst them’.

In a sec- ond letter, dated 10 March 1891, McLaughlin complained again of the hasty escalation of vio- lence provoked by injudicious reports: ‘many absurd and sensational newspaper reports which alarmed frontier settlers and the public gener- ally, causing additional troops to be sent into the Indian country and which with its active movements and the unlimited powers that were given the military in these operations alarmed the Indians very much and enabled the wily leaders to organize in better shape all the disaf- fected and more ignorant of the several bands of Sioux in what they were made to believe was common cause and their only safety’.

Indian agent Warren D. Robbins similarly wrote on 26 November 1890 that at the Nez Perce Agency, in Idaho, the only knowledge Natives there had of the ‘craze’ came from newspaper reports, as no emissaries had visited that agency.** News of the American troubles spread to London, as sensationalized versions of these events depicted crazed ‘Indian’ dancers in drawings appearing in, among others, the Illustrated London News (fig. 9.1). Natives were depicted brandishing toma- hawks, with their feathers upright, their arms splayed, and their bodies hunched, in a crowd ______ Mooney, The Ghost-Dance Religion, 703. 80. See for example Robert S. Fogarty, All Things New: American Communes and Utopian Movements, 1860-1914 (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2003); James Matthew Morris and Andrea L. Kross, Historical Dictionary of Utopianism (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2004); and J. Gordon Melton, Encyclopedia of American Religions, 5th ed. (Detroit: Gale, 1996). 81. James McLaughlin, Indian Agent, Standing Rock Agency, to Hon. T. J. Morgan, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 29 November 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. Andersson provides a useful analysis of press coverage of the Ghost Dance in The Lakota Ghost Dance of 1890, 192-250. Many newspapers, including the New York Times and the Washington Post, reported on the events without sending reporters directly to the scene; reporters who did go to the scene tended to gather in a small hotel at the Pine Ridge agency, many of them relatively inexperienced (192-193). 82. James McLaughlin, Indian Agent, Standing Rock Agency, to Hon. T. J. Morgan, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 10 March 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 83. Warren D. Robbins, Indian Agent, Nez Perce Indian Agency, Idaho, to Hon. Geo. L. Shoup, Governor of the State of Idaho, 26 November 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. L. G. Moses similarly notes that ‘dancing, peaceful Indians awaiting their divine redemption did not sell newspapers, so journalists surfeited the country with stories about Indians dancing themselves into frenzies as they awaited reinforcements from the risen dead’. 

Ghost Dancing + 241 FIGURE 9.1 Ghost Dance of the Sioux Indians in North America (1891). From Illustrated London News, 3 January 1891, 15-16. Courtesy the Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division, LC-USZ62-52423. dance that suggested bedlam. Sketches of the events on the other hand suggest a more subdued affair in some places; one drawing rendered from sketches made ‘on the spot’, reproduced in Harper’s Weekly depicting a dance at Pine Ridge, South Dakota, in 1890 (fig. 9.2) shows physical closeness, relative intimacy, and upright pos- tures; some women are wrapped in shawls, walk- ing towards the observer, while another dancer faces skyward in profile. All leg and arm gestures are low to the ground and restrained. Meanwhile, the empty plains in the background suggest a relatively isolated affair, nothing conjuring the hyperkinetic crowd contagion of the sort imagined in the Illustrated London News. But dancers were angry, and placid stares hint at the spirit of defiance with which Natives were variously disputing the mounting economic deprivation against which the dancing took place. “ONE BIG EAT, TO DIE LIKE MEN RATHER THAN LIKE STARVED RATS’ Dancing provided an occasion for distraction, bringing tribes together in a shared moment of ecstasy-belonging designed to counteract starvation and demoralization. Time and cattle were theirs to dispose of, and dancers performed this real and symbolic reappropriation on their home turf. So, whereas complaints against the Ghost Dancers emphasized their wastefulness and the supposed injury to the dancers’ health that these events occasioned,™ some settlers recognized the legitimacy and rationality of the whole affair. George A. Ferris______ 

 In a relatively rare expression of solidarity with the Natives, he redirected the blame to the Interior Department, which drove the ‘Indians’, he said, on account of ‘broken treaties extending through a period of over twenty years, and dishonest reduction in supply of rations . . . as a last resort into maddened rebellion, and to secure one “big eat”, as Sitting Bull declared, “and die like men rather than like starved rats.”’ In Porcupine’s terms, the Indians had to dance because if they didn’t, they would ‘get crazy and poor’; the apparently excessive expenditure of energy that the Ghost Dance required in effect reasonably offset their further demoralization. Ferris called on the president and the secretary of war to conduct, therefore, ‘an immediate investigation of the manifest wrongs, cruelties and long series of injustices in the stipulation of treaties and the reckless disregard afterwards of their provisions by government agents and post traders’. The only ‘waste’ was human, provoked by servility and starvation; the dance was a performative blow in the face of want that flaunted the vitality and dignity Natives were being denied. As I noted earlier, Bataille, writing forty years after these events, highlights wasteful expenditure as a vital contrast to pecuniary accumulation and capital gain. ‘Humans . . . grant themselves the right to acquire, conserve, and consume rationally; but, they proscribe themselves ‘unproductive expenditure’ characteristic of so-called ‘irrational’, ‘primitive’ cultures ostensibly refusing to accumulate material goods. The idea of use-value is ubiquitous in modern life, Bataille argues, but further submits that what may be considered ‘useful’ is often vague: if anything, utility might be measured in contrast to pleasure, so that excessive pleasure is considered irrational and ‘pathological’. Activities that dissipate accumulated wealth run counter to generally held principles of usefulness in modern bourgeois capitalist society, always involving the acquisition and conservation of goods in a materialist paradigm.° Paradoxically, Natives ‘wasting’ their time and cattle had already been ‘wasted’ by a government that denied them the basic living conditions by which they could accumulate wealth or work ‘productively’ (in effect, on lands and according to schedules and methods now managed from the capital) if they so wished. The "unproductive expenditure" of Native time in dancing was in effect, paradoxically, a luxury that should be afforded only to the wealthiest, leisure classes—those who did not need to work. Natives were seen to be confusing class boundaries in a system designed to keep them on a par with (or just below) settlers who were barely earning their keep and were exemplary for the sweat and toil—the labor they performed. Bataille's notion then complements the 'non-productive consumption of time' that the rising aristocratic class in the late nineteenth century in the United States boasted about, described by sociologist Thorstein Veblen (1857-1929) in The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899).®

In Veblen's analysis, the upper classes prided themselves on unproductive labor, strictly opposed to the necessary, seemingly trivial (and emphatically corporeal), labor of most women and lower-class workers; the upper classes conserved and transmitted their wealth without breaking a sweat. Wealth was a marker of worth, and its accumulation over generations a sign of superiority. The paradoxical expenditure, then, of the little wealth—conceived in terms of well-managed property and time—that Ghost Dancers had enabled them to demonstrate their rejection of a hypocritical system of value. Natives anyway had too little to eat; if they consumed the rest and exhausted themselves in a seemingly brash act of energetic 'waste', they were thus also refusing the exogenous exercise of government biopower. Their 'value' system did not exclude the need for food or work but did refuse slavery to a system of rations that obstructed their autonomy and whose terms had been criminally neglected. The terms of the Ghost Dance thus suggest outright cultural war.

Government, settlers, and Indian agents employed a discourse of reprimand that stressed the excessive expenditure of time and energy required for participation in the Ghost Dance as a cause for its repression: it impeded the progress of civilization because it exhausted its participants too much to work. Whereas social dancing for leisure was acceptable when engaged in with moderation, the Ghost Dance, which Native Americans performed well into the night, often multiple times weekly, was said to go too far.

A. P. Dixon, writing from Crow Creek and Lower Brule Consolidated Agency, South Dakota, on 18 December 1891 told the commissioner of Indian affairs that social gatherings were normally acceptable, but the fatigue this Ghost Dancing caused was not: 'I am aware of nothing wrong in social gatherings among Indians, where dancing is participated in to a moderate degree, but the nature of Indians, as I observe it, is such as to crave variety and excess, and as a consequence, if allowed to dance at all, they dance excessively, the same persons often-times two nights in each week, continued until late at night, greatly to the expense of their physical endurance, and necessarily to the neglect of any work which they may have to do on the following day, owing to their fatigued condition.'*

Not only did the dances exhaust participants, but Dixon saw 'no benefit to them growing out of the practice' and 'no good reason why the dances should not be absolutely prohibited, except' as he added, 'that the Indians would naturally argue that such an order would be a discrimination between their customs and the tolerated practices of the whites, to the abridgment of their personal liberty and freedom of action'.®° Georges Bataille, ‘La notion de dépense’, in Bataille, La part maudite, 23-45, esp. 25-38. One may counter that today excessive (materially useless) expenditure is the norm, even in an economic depression arguably worse than that of the 1930s during which Bataille wrote. Cultures of debt in fact require middle-class citizens to spend more than they earn instead of saving or accumulating parsimoniously, as Bataille argued of the bourgeoisie. 87. In John Frow, ‘Invidious Distinction: Waste, Difference, and Classy Stuff’, in Gay Hawkins and Stephen Muecke, eds., Culture and Waste: The Creation and Destruction of Value (Oxford: Rowan and Littlefield, 2003), 25-38, 27. 88. A. P. Dixon, Indian Agent, United States Indian Service, Crow Creek and Lower Brule Consolidated Agency, SD, to Hon. T. J. Morgan, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 18 December 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 89. A. P. Dixon, Indian Agent, United States Indian Service, Crow Creek and Lower Brule Consolidated Agency, SD, to Hon. T. J. Morgan, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 18 December 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 244 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES This paternalistic attitude was widespread. As settlers heard rumours of the Ghost Dance and began to witness such dances in their own areas, speculation as to the cause of the discontent intensified; meanwhile, factions formed and opinions splintered among Natives and whites. ‘Friendly Indians’, well-disposed towards the government authorities and church missions, castigated the dances, suggesting that Natives should be further assimilated into the new Protestant paradigm. One such ‘friendly Indian’ told an Indian agent at the Yankton Agency, South Dakota, that the true cause of all the trouble was ‘idleness’: ‘give these people work so that they can earn a livelihood and you will soon hear no more of Indian scares’.°° Indian agent John H. Waugh (1853-1894) offered a different approach. He wrote to the commissioner of Indian affairs on 29 June 1891 from Devils Lake Agency, North Dakota arguing that the dances were a reasonable form of leisure, providing respite from work, and were not a cause for alarm. On the contrary, when exercised with moderation, they offered Natives a harmless distraction and an incentive to work. They were damaging in extreme cases but tolerable in a ‘milder form’; and he pointed out that although many white settlers at Indian agencies did work hard—as did many Natives—they, too, indulged in all kinds of amusements ‘without any damage being done them morally or otherwise’. Nevertheless, efforts to acculturate Natives to the new settler mentality were articulated with force. At the 1896 Lake Mohonk Conference, Merrill E. Gates (1848-1922), a member of the Board of Indian Commissioners, stated that reformers’ efforts should emphasize converting Indians to a culture of ‘selfishness’ and a quest for material wealth: To bring him out of savagery into citizenship we must make the Indian more intelligently selfish . . . . We need to awaken in him wants. In his dull savagery he must be touched by the wings of the divine angel of discontent. Then he begins to look forward, to reach out. The desire for property of his own may become an intense educational force. The wish for a home of his own awakens him to new efforts. Discontent with the teepee and the starving rations of the Indian camp in winter is needed to get the Indian out of his blanket and into trousers—and trousers with a pocket in them, and with a pocket that aches to be filled with dollars. Starvation, in this view, would prompt Natives to convert to a monetary regime, instructing them in the pursuit of a different sort of happiness: isolation and labor leading to financial reward. Wovoka had served as a model, in spite of his ambivalent status at the helm of the affair; he was reputed to have had good will towards the whites and demonstrated an ‘industrious’, ‘moral’, and ‘temperate’ attitude. Quanah Parker (1845-1911), chief of the Comanche, was similarly commended for his ‘progressiveness’, defined by material affluence; he had four hundred cattle, many horses, a good farm, and lived in a house that cost $3,000, as Major Wirt Davis pointed out when forwarding a compliant letter by Parker to the authorities in Washington. Prosperity was a sure marker of a Native's disposition towards whites and his investment in cooperating with the government and the culture of industry. Natives who failed to accumulate wealth in the terms recognized by the engineers of the 90. E. M. Fortes [?], Indian Agent, Yankton Agency, 9 December 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

91. Waugh wrote: ‘Briefly stated my policy from the very first has been to forbid, discountenance and frown down upon dancing of any and all kinds. I have however incurred a great deal of opposition for my cause and after investigating the various kinds of dancing I have concluded that in defense to the often repeated request of some of our best old people who are non-progressive anyway, I would relent to the extent of permitting dancing to some extent of the milder forms, provided such a course does not meet with your disapproval. I think that by the judicious use of a wise discretion to permit the mild forms of dancing would act as an incentive to those people to labor and encourage them to do their work well and in season, as they seem to feel as though they should be permitted some form of social enjoyment at stated times and festivals, pointing out the many innocent forms of amusement the white people indulge in without any damage being done them morally or otherwise’. John H. Waugh, Indian Agent, Devils Lake Agency, to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 29 June 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

94. Wirt Davis, Major, 5th Cavalry, Inspector of Small Arms Practice, Headquarters Department of the Missouri, Office of the Inspector of Small Arms Practice, St. Louis, Missouri, covering letter to the Assistant Adjutant General of the [War] Department, 23 December 1890, to an enclosed letter from Quanah Parker, Chief of the Comanches, Cooper Creek, IT, to Editor Gazette, 7 December 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. Ghost Dancing + 245 American way were ‘unfriendly’, weeds in a new field of dreams symbolically deemed otherwise ready for mass cultivation. Attempts by the government, Indian agents, and settlers to acculturate Natives to the new dollar economy pushed an agenda of self-control fed by want. Commanding Brigadier General W. Merritt (1836-1910) argued that ‘under the influence of military discipline, regular habits, good food and clothing, together with the stimulus of earning a sum of money every month, their interests would become strongly identified with those of the Government, and the tendency would be of a civilizing and educational character’. 

McLaughlin similarly claimed that "civilization was steadily advancing among the Indians" but that "this advancement was stubbornly opposed by the old-time chiefs and medicine men, who, on account of the new ways and better order of things, were steadily losing their power." He added, "This class of Indians," who were "clinging tenaciously to the old Indian life encouraged by their non-progressive followers, were those who strenuously opposed the ratification of the act of March 2nd, 1889."

The Navajo, in the Southwest, enjoyed a successful trade economy and little desire to reject aspects of white culture; they depended on it for their prosperity. A chief at White Earth, Minnesota, who was sympathetic to the Indian agents' cause co-signed a letter with his fellow tribesman Rev. Joseph Wakazoo (d. 1910) claiming that oxen, ploughs, wagons, and farms were going to waste or being misused while Natives were visiting different bands, as far as one hundred miles away, to dance. The chief and the reverend sought the government's intervention for this "trouble in the Indian country arising from this dancing" and the "hating of the Christian religion."

"But this I tell you, Hon. Commissioner, that I am greatly ashamed seeing yokes of oxen with their yokes on collected [sic] where the heathen dance is going on. Was that what the oxen were given for? Again the plows that were given, is that what they were issued for to be piled in a heap at the gambling place? Again the wagons which were given, were they given for the Indians to go visiting distant bands? . . . When I look back at the Indian farms here, they seem to me like farms from which the owners had moved, all grown up with weeds—not planted this year, all through this dancing. And those very Indians, when I see them a few years ago, the men all had good coats on that was when they listened to the missionaries. Now they look ragged and miserable. And the women then had good clothes, now through the dancing they are a sorry sight."

Though performed to counteract demoralization, the "Indian dances" were denounced as producing it: they were "demoralizing in all their influences," according to another pastor. "They are a hindrance to the cause of education, to church work, and to civilization in any direction. They keep the people poor," he complained. "Though already so poor that they can hardly keep soul and body together, owing in great measure to [the] failure of [the] crops, they will give a cow or a pony, or go into debt to make a feast for the dancers." People were leaving their corn and potatoes unhoed, he said, and "the boys from the schools are out at night, to look on, if not to participate in these dances."

Hewitt has argued that "dance is a process of work that produces no work or artifact as residue." Dance instead is imagined in the aesthetic ideology of modernism as "pure energy," pure expenditure, uncannily paralleling a "capitalist 98. Rev. Joseph Wakazoo, White Earth, MN, to Hon. Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 17 July 1891, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.
99. Chas. R. Crawford, Pastor of Good Will Church, W. K. Morris, Superintendent of the Mission School, and M. N. Adams, Missionary of the [illegible] Agency, SD, to Hon. T. J. Morgan, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 21 June 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

« COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES fantasy of pure profit, pure production’.!°! Dance is Janus-headed, at once expenditure and return, pure and immaterial, productive and wasteful, as it generates no thing, only experience, affect, relation, and moment. Dance appears as the live encounter and the fantasy of evanescence as well as the frisson of energetic surplus taking shape in an instant before disappearing, becoming mem- ory. In this respect, dance signals the phantas- matization of life showing itself spectacularly before impending death. A dancing disease is arguably, then, the imagined excessiveness of life, its unproductive, luxurious expendability shown dramatically in a moment heralding the dancer’s end. In this regard, choreomania, articulated in the Ghost Dance, represents the modern fantasy of a body—and a body politic—consummating itself in the ultimate act of energetic expenditure: a dance whose collective purpose is to go nowhere. The Ghost Dances, I have argued, stage the bipolitics and choreopolitics of death; they occur where death is lurking because of systematic star- vation, and they take place as a vivid sign of its refusal.

Jean Baudrillard (1929-2007) argues that death appears frightening in modern capit- alism because it represents the end point of capi- tal accumulation and thus also of all productive expenditure. It is thus arguably tantamount to any dilapidation of energy, including in dance— whose excess becomes a modern capitalist disease. Death, like excessive dancing, offers one of the only ways out of a materialist regime of perpetual energetic and material accumulation. Symbolic death, such as in dreams and visions, temporarily interrupts the putatively forward march of time that is characteristic of a modern capitalist para- digm: symbolic death stages the escape from a life of accumulation and the (fictitious) material want that fuels it.

The Ghost Dance in this regard appears as a movement where the pathology of ‘dance’ potentially disappears with its dancers; the extenuation of the ‘disease’ comes with their extenuation. A regime of excessive dancing was what had to pass, according to this logic, into the past. Not surprisingly, dancers refusing this apparently natural course were branded fanatical.

“FANATICISM’: BANDING IN TROUBLED TIMES

Rev. C. J. Cook, an English-speaking Native and missionary at the Pine Ridge Reservation, wrote to the commissioner of Indian affairs on 8 September 1890 to let him know that the situ- ation at his agency was degenerating into ‘fan- aticism’. “There is growing unrest among the Indians because of want of provisions, lack of beef, etc’, he wrote. ‘This spirit of unrest has assumed shape through the wild fanaticism of the “ghost dance”’. Cook added that it would not take long before the situation resulted in open conflict. The Indian agent on his reservation had told him that morning that he had gone ‘to see with his own eyes the dance’ and corroborated this sentiment: ‘He declared he has never seen anything so crazy and likely to, sooner or later, bring about a genuine trouble. Three Sundays ago, there came near a regular fight between the Indians and the police. The Agent thinks the matter has gone beyond control. He is now writing for instructions, advice, and the authority to call in the troops and severely punish the ring leaders. This means, I think, trouble.101

The same thing was happening in reservations across the American Plains. Indian agent Perain P. Palmer wrote to the commissioner of Indian affairs on 11 October 1890, from Cheyenne River Agency, South Dakota, stating that "a number of Indians living along the Cheyenne River and known as Bigfoot's band are becoming very much excited about the coming of the Messiah." His police had been "unable to prevent them from holding what they call Ghost dances[.]" These Indians are becoming very hostile to the police, he added. "Some of the police have resigned." He also pointed out that "the Christian Indians are all quiet and well behaved."102

In a letter dated 25 October 1890, he wrote, "many cattle have been reported to have been killed by the Indians."103 In a letter from Standing Rock Agency, 17 October 1890, McLaughlin warned the commissioner that the situation was escalating. The "infection" had come to be so "promiscuous" that it now involved some Natives formerly considered to be "progressive" and "more intelligent." "Many of our very best Indians appear 'dazed' and undecided when talking about [the Ghost Dance]."104

Royer wired the commissioner on 13 November 1890 from the Pine Ridge Reservation, complaining that the "condition of affairs" was going from bad to worse and required urgent attention: "Yesterday in attempting to arrest an Indian for violation of regulations, the offender drew a butcher knife on the police and in less than two minutes he was reinforced by two hundred ghost dancers, all armed and ready to fight. Consequently, the arrest was not made... . The police force are overpowered and disheartened. We have no protection and are at the mercy of these Crazy Dancers."105

Property had to be protected, and the settlers in at least one county, Eastern Mead, South Dakota, petitioned the commissioner for military support.106

What had its roots in the familiar "Dreamer" or prophet beliefs in the return of the dead and the coming of a new age quickly devolved into open warfare, with the clash of civilizations—or, to borrow cultural theorist Arjun Appudurai's terms, a new "civilization of clashes"!107—as its most unprepossessing ambition. "I have today directed the Secretary of War to assume a military responsibility for the suppression of any threatened outbreak", wrote President Harrison to the secretary of the Interior on 13 November 1890. "In the meantime, I suggest that you advise your Agents to separate the well-disposed from the ill-disposed Indians; and The situation had quickly degenerated into an open contest, as settlers’ fears continued to mount. Natives were seen arming themselves ‘to the teeth’, stocking up on guns and ammunition, making ‘mysterious circles around their heads indicating that there [would] be some scalping done’, riding their horses in a circle, a custom denoting war, ‘killing cattle, breaking into houses, and stealing hay or destroying property that ‘generally [belonged] to friendly Indians’."James A. Cooper, from the Pine Ridge Agency, wrote to the acting commissioner and the commissioner of Indian affairs on 24 November and again via telegraph with Agent Royer on 28 November 1890, noting that a meeting had been called by the mayor of the city of Mandan on 17 November, which three-quarters of the adult male population of Mandan and surrounding areas had attended. A committee was set up to petition the president to attend to the danger they felt in regard to the Natives: ‘Settlers by the score come to town and tell of Indians armed to the teeth .... [The Indians] assume menacing attitudes, tap their guns ominously and show their scalping knives . . . . Cavalry is what is needed to be of use in times of Indian uprising’, Cooper remarked, ‘and to inspire confidence on the part of the settlers’, whose property was being destroyed.*” The government, concerned that these settlers did not feel ‘comfortable’ in these regions, ordered the deployment of troops.?

J. Fitzgerald wrote to the commissioner of Indian affairs: ‘Owing to the Indian scare, as they are liable to break out any time, the settlers are all coming in town and the country is depopulating very fast and unless some action is taken to make the Indians give up their arms and fire people who sell them, this country is ruined. It is a sad sight to see women and 248 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES Royer asked for one thousand soldiers to be deployed to ‘settle this dancing’,"* against six or seven hundred Natives en route to the Pine Ridge Agency to meet with local tribe members. Three thousand soldiers were eventually deployed by mid-November of that year, and more than three hundred Lakota Sioux were killed by government fire in the massacre at Wounded Knee on 29 December, marking a turning point in the conflict between Native Americans and American whites. This was a bitter zone of intensity, a devastating whirl of acceleration, against the grain of pacific efforts that were attempted among most parties involved at that point: Mooney suggests in his analysis that the 'butchery was the work of infuriated soldiers' shooting blindly against Natives who had 'come in good faith . . . to surrender and be at peace', according to official and unofficial correspondence, files, and conversation with parties on both sides.¹ The cost of the outbreak in one month was estimated at $1.2 million² (over $30 million today), a financial—and human—sacrifice far greater than the provision of rations might have entailed. In the end, only a small subset of the population was implicated in the more belligerent aspect of the Ghost Dance movement. While Royer complained bitterly that 'business [was] to a certain extent demoralized on account of the Indians not knowing what is to be done' and 'both the friendly [Indians] and the unfriendly' 'of course feel anxious',³ so that 'all industry most Natives, on many reservations, neither partook in nor condoned the Ghost Dance.⁴ Although described as a frenzy, the Ghost Dance was not nearly as excited, jagged, and erratic as its detractors made out, nor was it spontaneous; yet it suggested to Mooney a genealogical kinship with the dancing movements that contested death and depression, moral and physical desolation, and conditions of persecution that he saw in religious ecstasies everywhere. The universalizing sweep that his discursive gesture performed flattened Native American time while drawing attention to real material and political conditions of desperation, connecting this to other movements in aesthetic and narrative terms. His sympathy linked these dances to those of the dervishes and to the trances, dreams, and catalepsy of Jacob, who is told in a dream by God himself of the 'future greatness of the Jewish nation'.⁵ Leaving aside American claims to exceptionalism formulated in the early part of the nineteenth century against the threat of European invasion, and furthered again after World War II, this Abrahamic vision suggested a pan-continental unity founded in ecstasies calling forth better worlds. This was not a wasteful expenditure but affective politics proposing a theatre of resistance on contested ground; the only waste was positive, affirming the expenditure of time and energy to create temporary zones of autonomy.⁶

CONTESTED LANDS AND NEW BEGINNINGS

The Ghost Dance has been described as a religion, a cult, a frenzy, and a war against whites children in groups having no place to sleep leaving comfortable homes and their stock behind. People will not come here again unless they are confident [there] will be no more fear.⁷ J. Fitzgerald, Valentino, NE, to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 25 November 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

114. D. E. Royer, Indian Agent, United States Indian Service, Office of Indian Agent, Pine Ridge Agency, SD, telegraph to R. V, Belt, Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 27 November 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188.

115. Mooney, The Ghost-Dance Religion, 870.

116. Mooney, The Ghost-Dance Religion, 843. 117. This calculation is based on an estimated average 2.60% inflation calculated over the period between 1890-2016, based on the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics annual Consumer Price Index. I am grateful to Andrew Potter for advice on this measure. See <https://www.bls.gov/cpi>. 118. D. E. Royer, Indian Agent, United States Indian Service, Office of Indian Agent, Pine Ridge Agency, SD, telegraph to R. V, Belt, Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 27 November 1890, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 119. J. A. Gilfillan, White Earth Reservation, MN, to Hon. Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 11 December 1894, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 120. J. A. Gilfillan, White Earth Reservation, MN, to Hon. Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, DC, 11 December 1894, Ghost Dance, Special Case 188. 121. Mooney, The Ghost-Dance Religion, 928. 122. I borrow the term from Hakim Bey, T.A.Z.: The Temporary Autonomous Zone, Ontological Anarchy, Poetic Terrorism, 2nd ed. (Brooklyn: Autonomedia, 2003). Ghost Dancing + 249 and cast as a revitalization and a messianic movement fraught with contradictions and inconsistencies. Mooney wrote: ‘[Wovoka] has been denounced as an impostor, ridiculed as a lunatic, laughed at as a pretended Christ, while by Indians he is revered as a direct messenger from the other world, and among many of the remote tribes he is believed to be omniscient, to speak all languages, and to be invisible to a white man.”° Paradoxically, the fictitious state of exception he offered intensified a col- lective process of identity recovery during a time of violent political fissures. The ‘ultimate message’ of the Ghost Dance movement, in historian Gregory Smoak’s terms, was ‘one of Indian unity and identity’, although in the aftermath of the Wounded Knee massacre, he adds, it became a ‘metaphor for the desperate and illusory attempt of a people to recover the unrecoverable’.’ Yet attempts at recovery and recuperative reperformance in the succeeding hundred years redrew mnemonic reserves associated with the dance and attendant ethnocide. In December 1986, descendants of the Sioux massacred at Wounded Knee undertook a commemora- tive journey to trace Big Foot and the other Lakotas’ path from their camp on the Cheyenne River to the Wounded Knee site, inaugurating the Si Tanka Wokiksuye (Big Foot Memorial Ride), and repeating this journey in December every year until the centennial of the mas- sacre, 29 December 1990, when as many as 350 people joined. A ceremony performed at the mass grave at Wounded Knee re-enacted the event in reverse, as participants ‘released the spirits of those who had died at Wounded Knee and wiped away their own tears’, creat- ing a new ceremony, the Wiping Away of Tears Ceremony,’ rehearsing part of the original Wounded Knee journey but incorporating the spirits of the dead and their descendants and, significantly, omitting the Indian police and Indian agents who had fired the shots. This performative recreation allowed participants to reappropriate the history of the Wounded Knee massacre by returning to a dancing-place in an act of theatrical repetition that reconfigured the happening, featuring a new cast of characters performing—by their sole presence—the lapse between this and the historical event. The dif- ferential offered a sense of hope. Arvol Looking Horse described it as a symbol of the ‘rebirth of our nation after 100 years of mourning’. The massacre was not forgotten, but intensely remembered and reinscribed into the force of a new gathering. Here, the Ghost Dance lingers as a choreopolitical moment that serves as a zone of intensity, a rupture, a syncope, opening out onto a dream space that 'queers' historical time, in Schneider's terms, performing a protest that folds injury 'then' into a still fractured 'now', redrawing the genealogical map to host the spectres of future rebirths.

In the next chapter, I turn to the South Pacific, where indigenous practices layered with European biblical symbols reveal a creolization process in a complex interplay of sameness and difference, characterizing the struggle for anti-colonial liberation. I argue that anthropological literature in the second half of the twentieth century, romanticizing millennialist and eschatological movements among anti-colonial subjects, stretches the fantasies of the dancing disease further still, to draw anti-colonial frenzies into beatific scenes of natural political emergence.

The colonial other is in this view still Europe and America's special legacy and bequest, but is also a beacon for Europe and America to look to as they articulate their own imagined liberation from the 'modern' world they have constructed. In this view, crises in the West—what Foucault has called the anxieties of the second half of the twentieth century about the possibility of upholding an Enlightenment standard of rationality—dramatized a clash between new advances in scientific research and the devastating effects of the two world wars, the failure of eighteenth-century revolutionary principles to deliver the kind of humanist idealism revolu- tionary writers had sought, and the disintegra- tion of European legitimacy regarding its hold on the colonial world.

The discursive history of twentieth-century writing on the dancing disease thus reveals a further translatio: from a pathologizing to a eulogizing mode, heralding a new romance with the collective, the primitive, the 'native', and the 'Dionysian', and ambivalently celebrating new series of movements seeking to wrest participants free from colonial strangleholds.

As Foucault wrote, 'at the end of the colonial era, people began to ask the West what rights its culture, its science, its social organization and finally its rationality itself could have to laying claim to a universal validity'. Michel Foucault, 'Introduction', in Canguilhem, The Normal and the Pathological, 7-24, 12.

In the chapter titled "The Gift of Seeing Resemblances" in the book "Cargo Cults in the Antipodes," the author discusses the concept of the monstrous double and the interchange of differences. The author quotes René Girard and Michael Taussig, who emphasize the significance of the messianic sign and the mimetic in the context of the monstrous double. The chapter begins with the story of Charles Darwin's crew encountering the Fuegians in 1832, which involved a game of 'monkey see, monkey do'. The author describes the interaction between the travellers and the Fuegians, which involved mimicking and grimaces. Darwin reported that the Fuegians imitated his crew members' words almost exactly and, when a song was struck up and his men started to dance, he "thought [the Fuegians] would have fallen down with astonishment." But the Fuegians "immediately began themselves to waltz with one of the officers." By evening, Darwin noted, "we parted very good friends; which I think was fortunate, for the dancing & 'sky-larking' had occasionally bordered on a trial of strength." This sort of encounter, what Pratt describes as occurring in a "contact zone," a "social [space] where disparate cultures meet, clash, and grapple with each other, often in asymmetrical relations of domination and subordination," involved a 1. Charles Darwin, Beagle Diary, ed. Richard Darwin Keynes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 124. See also Inga Clendinnen, Dancing with Strangers: Europeans and Australians at First Contact (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 6-7. Darwin offers a slightly different account of the scene a few years later: the phrase "monkey like" does not appear, nor does the spontaneous outbreak of dancing on the part of the Fuegians assembled; instead, Darwin notes, slightly more soberly, that "one of the young men, when asked, had no objection to a little waltzing." Charles Darwin, Narrative of the Surveying Voyages of his Majesty's Ships Adventure and Beagle, between the years 1826 and 1836, describing their examination of the southern shores of South America, and the Beagle's circumnavigation of the globe, 3 vols., vol. 3 (London: Henry Colburn, 1839), 229. Earlier in the same account, Darwin compares the "party" assembled on their arrival as "the most curious and interesting spectacle I had ever beheld": it "altogether closely resembled the devils which come on the stage in such plays as [Carl Maria von Weber's 1821 opera] Der Freischutz" (228). See also Darwin, Beagle Diary, 122. 2. Darwin, Beagle Diary, 124-125. 3. Pratt, Imperial Eyes, 7. 252 ¢ performative dancing game and ostensive relation of play. It was a way for the British men to gain currency with their hosts and for their hosts to negotiate—assimilate, repeat, rehearse—this exogenous presence on their own land. The game may also have been amusing. It offered both parties a boisterous platform for communication through mockery and self-mockery. Though Darwin's crew quickly abandoned the game of "dancing & "sky-larking"” to penetrate further into the Fuegian land they had come to explore, his initial surprise at, and appreciation for, the Fuegians' "laughable & interesting" capacity for imitation suggests a disinterested empathy founded in the shared performance of a mimetic relation: these Fuegians showed that they could dance. Not only could they dance, they could waltz. There was hope for social and political relations eventually to flourish and evolve. Reading this primal scene of colonial and ethnographic contact in Mimesis and Alterity (1993), Taussig suggests that the question "why looking at the savage is interesting" to Darwin's captain, Robert Fitz Roy (1805-1865), is answered thus: "such looking is in itself a form of theorizing society and historical process." In particular, according to Fitz Roy, Taussig reports, "the British were once like the Fuegians"; second, "there is something absorbing in observing people displaying childlike ignorance"; and third, the Fuegians appeared to display a "healthy, independent state of ignorance." While the first two observations receive substantial attention in the preceding chapters, in scenes depicting, to their observers’ eyes, the observers’ own imagined childlike past to themselves, the third merits further pause. Colonial others—and their purported historical counterparts, observed by physicians, medical historians, and ethnographers in the pages of history books—do not just display beatific innocence and a monkey-like capacity for imitation, or a dark and dangerous unhealthiness, chaotic and primal in a different sense, but also, more ambivalently, a form of independence that complicates the relation of precedence this fantasy sets up. Colonial scenes such as this one reveal a nineteenth-century image of the ‘dancing & "sky-larking"' past that links childlike naivety to animal and feminine states, what I have been describing as another form of Orientalism: sexually charged, Dionysian and crazed, a dancing body gone awry, re-emerging from the past to haunt the present. Such scenes also reveal a measure of difference to which Europeans obliquely aspire, and which they seek (violently if they must) to possess.

'Imitation', then, does not just suggest passage between two or more bodies. Imitation is also a space of circulation and of aggregate configurations that bewilder observers by their apparent incoherence. The interest in reading these scenes, then, is not just, as Fitz Roy suggested, beatifically to observe the past or to wonder at depictions of childlike innocence and a purportedly healthy state of uncontaminated nature, but to articulate inarticulacy—in other words, to write science. The phantasm of primeval dance appears as the amorphous other that modern science employs to imagine itself against. Through this looking glass emerges a distorted body, diffracted many times, a proliferation of uncontrollable instances of locomotion ricocheting back to the imagined beginnings of historical time. Watching scientific men watching scenes of dance suggests a proliferation of contact zones and the theorization of a self, moved by these phantasms.

In this chapter, I turn to the southern antipodes, to the Oceanic world. Melanesia and Polynesia become the sites (and sights) within which the discursive history of the dancing disease moves once more, as cargo cults quintessentially perform the modern fantasy of capitalist longing projected onto Pacific Islanders believed ecstatically to await the dead—and the spectre of material goods—in airplanes, boats, and rafts. But as this chapter argks, cargo cults also reperform the fantasy of ancient ecstatic practices recombined with European—specifically Christian—figures of awaiting and redemption. In this view, the spasmodic, agitated, restless theatre of returns that cargo cults in Papua New Guinea and New Zealand enact suggests a dancing disease in whiteface, a mimic game of waiting for the end of colonialism to come. In René Girard's (1923-2015) terms, the 'monstrous double' that emerges in an interplay of desires (and distrust) throws performer and witness into a hermeneutic conundrum, as the game of alterity is trumped. Playing at the other is, in a perverse way, also becoming the other; the drag act belies a desirous, mimetic thrust that complicates any narrative of difference and liberation. Yet, as the chapter further argues, European anthropologists folded the cargo cult and other millennialist narratives into a discourse on anti-colonial liberation worldwide, as if once again the colonial other were serving as a pure disciple of movement, including revolutionary movement, premodern and anti-industrial, signalling everything ancient, pre-linguistic, and organic in the long history of a corrupted and alienated West. Before moving to the cargo cults, the chapter considers the history of millennialist expectation in Jamaica, as an example of mimetic doubling that produces, in Taussig’s terms, a ‘two-layered’ body.

MAGIC AND MIMESIS: A HISTORY OF DOUBLINGS IN THE ‘CONTACT ZONE’

Taussig has suggested that for Benjamin, primitivism and alterity are twin terms describing the ‘mimetic faculty’, what Benjamin called the ancient and magical ‘gift of seeing resemblances’. This gift, according to Benjamin, was ‘nothing other than a rudiment of the powerful compulsion in former times to become and behave like something else’. The mimetic faculty, Taussig writes, is a remnant of the sort of primitive magic—described by pioneer anthropologist James Frazer (1854-1941) in The Golden Bough (1890)—that produces sympathetic acts of contagion, as when an object doubles what it is meant to represent or what it touches: a figurine standing in for a person it resembles (in the case of sympathetic magic), for example, or a nail clipping or strand of hair standing in for the person to whom it belonged (in the case of contagious magic). Seen as contaminating forces by virtue of their formal similarity or tactile proximity, the figurine and the nail clipping enact a sort of desirous thrust, in Girard’s terms: the object desires its other, moves towards it, overwhelms it. But this desire has to be reciprocal: in being contaminated, one is vulnerable to the power of the object because one is drawn to that which one resembles, and to that which has once been close by. Mimesis is ‘two-layered’: it implicates ‘sentience and copying’, feeling or desire and form.

Contact produces a discursive zone of intensity in which the encounter compels theorization; proximity enacts a shudder of recognition that calls the subject (back) to himself or herself. The monstrosity this entails, as parties engaged in a game of mimetic doubling contemplate one another’s alterity and sameness, produces a ‘copy that is not a copy’, in Taussig’s terms, a copy with difference: a copy that copies right back, but while doing so opens a theatrical space of variation.

Yet, as Taussig implies, the choreography involved in this mimetic theatre also suggests a coded interplay of differences separating colonizer and colonized camps according to rules well known and cunningly manipulated by both. A white colonial ethnographer such as Malinowski, dressed in white colonial drag, poses with dark-skinned Trobriand islanders in a scene Taussig reads as deftly, subtly self-mocking. The men hold suspiciously phallic gourds, and while Malinowski is wearing the expected white costume of the colonial anthropologist, he is elsewhere shown at work in little more than colorful long pants. The scene is posed, and we are left to assume that the islanders, too, were in on the conventions and comedy of this colonial theatre. So while the Fuegians danced Darwin's crew members' dance expertly, in Darwin's account, the crew also counter-imitated the Fuegians, who in turn counter-imitated them right back. This recursive loop, frustrating the closure of mimesis, sits at the heart of this chapter, which showcases anti-colonial dances and liberation movements in the South Seas counter-imitating European dress and Christian iconography in a play of ‘primitive’ revolt that recuperates, playfully perverts, and mistranslates symbols of whiteness. These movements perform translations from the periphery to the centre of anti-colonial agitation, and from the symbols of 7. Taussig, Mimesis and Alterity, 80. 8. Walter Benjamin, ‘On the Mimetic Faculty’, in Reflections, ed. Peter Demetz, trans. E. Jephcott (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1979), 333. Taussig, Mimesis and Alterity, 33. 9. Taussig, Mimesis and Alterity, 80. 10. Taussig, Mimesis and Alterity, 115-128. 11. Michael Taussig, ‘The Instrument of Ethnographic Observation’, in What Color Is the Sacred? (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009), 119-129.

The sign of history: ex-centricity and temporal lag

I draw from Bhabha’s theory of culture to articulate this mimetic slippage. Following Foucault, Bhabha suggests that ‘history’ cannot be found in a search for origins and grand narratives but in ‘petits récits, imperceptible events, signs apparently without meaning and value—empty and excentric’. Bhabha writes:

The sign of history does not consist in an essence of the event itself, nor exclusively in the immediate consciousness of its agents and actors, but in its form as a spectacle; spectacle that signifies because of the distantiation and displacement between the event and those who are its spectators. The indeterminacy of modernity, where the struggle of translation takes place, is not simply around the idea of progress or truth. Modernity, I suggest, is about the historical construction of a specific position of historical enunciation and address. It privileges those who ‘bear witness’, those who are ‘subjected’, or in the Fanonian sense … historically displaced. It gives them a representative position through the spatial distance, or the time-lag between the Great Event and its circulation as a historical sign of the ‘people’ or an ‘epoch’, that constitutes the memory and the moral of the event as a narrative, a disposition to cultural communality, a form of social and psychic identification. The discursive address of modernity—its structure of authority—decentres the Great Event, and speaks from that moment of ‘imperceptibility’, the supplementary space ‘outside’ or uncannily beside (abseits).17

In Bhabha’s view, modernity is construed as that which is seen—in other words, as a theatre of witnessing and observation dramatizing the imagined spatial or temporal ‘lag’ between those doing the seeing and those who are seen. The history of modernity is choreographic: it performs a continual set of micro displacements which reveal ‘the supplementary space “outside” or uncannily beside’ them: the geographic and geocultural space—(often colonial) territories—into which narratives (and bodies) continually move, and from which their spectacular aspect makes ‘history’ become apparent. What Bhabha calls ‘excentric’ signs (those occurring within these margins) further displace the apparent coherence of colonized as well as colonizer selves, which come to be theorized always at a remove and always on the move. Such encounters can be described as ‘uncanny’, further following Burt, for whom the ‘alien’ body of modernity is ‘uncanny’: it is not quite at home (where home denotes a place of residence and returns), though it attempts to return ‘there’. 

Subjects writing—theorizing—themselves are confronted with shifting spaces of imagined priority and futurity, in other words, shifting genealogies, as they seek to recover what they find is already gone. The places to which they return reveal themselves never to have been quite there as imagined, but to be here, in a space of ‘uncanny’ encounter. I began this book with a genealogy of the decentred texts proliferating out of Hecker’s essay “The Dancing Mania”, showing how colonial travel and Orientalist additions moved choreomania across disciplinary sites, in a series of translations by which the concept morphed, just as the world within and with which it moved did too. Here, following Bhabha, I argue the ‘supplementary space “outside” or uncannily beside’ the paradigmatic dancing manias—from the European Middle Ages, the Italian South, the French Revolutionary era, nineteenth-century religious awakenings, revolutionary Madagascar, and, at a stretch, the American Plains—present an even greater proliferation of spectacular events of history, medicine, and disorderly corporeality than the earliest choreomanias allowed, stretching the Dionysian undercurrent to its colonial edges. This cacophony of cases only very loosely linked to St. Vitus’s dance emerges on the historical scene to trouble the contours of this ‘strange affliction’. As cases move further from the often repeated core, the consistency and coherence of the disorder dissolves. No longer construed in medical and anthropological literature as core cases of the historical, medieval choreomania, 12. Bhabha, The Location of Culture, 348-349. “The Gift of Seeing Resemblances’ +» 255 these events are nonetheless ghosted by the literature on the dancing disease that by now suffuses colonial medical and anthropological imaginaries implicitly.

BLACK CHRISTS: PERFORMATIVE MISCEGENATION IN JAMAICA

Before moving to the Melanesian and Polynesian cases, it is worth pausing on a prior, recurring figure of doubling and miscegenation that saturates the nineteenth- and twentieth-century imaginaries of colonial seepage, excess, and waste, as well as recuperation and what I call translatio. The figure of a Black Jesus—a Black Christ or messiah—is as old and widespread as it is contentious. The most revered religious icon in the Latin American world, the Black Christ of Esquipulas, in Guatemala, boasts Nordic features but is carved out of a dark, black wood. It is white and black, a sixteenth-century figurine that embodies indigenous colour and conqueror forms. But this perversion of Christianity’s ostensibly white mission, this Christianity in the negative, also represents an indigenous subjectivity all the more natural-seeming (to white or mestizo observers) as its distance from an implied more or less white Christian core paradoxically renders the latter all the more apparently universal. Because the Black Christ is doubled racially, it is all the more allegorical: of this world and outside it. The black native becomes paradigmatically Christian; yet because of this surfeit of allegory, it also comes to represent doubleness in excess and, as such, appears ‘abnormal’ to many observers.

Even in the most radical messianic movements—such as that among the Ras Tafaris in Jamaica in the 1930s, where a strict anti-white doctrine separated black followers from the rest of society in the belief that Haile Selassie (1892-1975) (emperor of Ethiopia, claimed to be a living god and a descendant of David) would deliver blacks from exile—separatism was played out through a hybrid set of cultural symbols. The Ras Tafaris claimed to be a lost tribe of Israel, enslaved to whites in a modern-day Babylon; they refused to interact with whites or with blacks who worked for whites. The movement, which echoed the ‘Great Revival’ of the 1860s in Jamaica, folded Judeo-Christian scripture into a narrative system and set of practices that became counter-mimetically Christian and pan-African, involving dancing, spirit seizure, flagellation, trances, confessions, and dreams. For Christian missionaries observing this part European, part African practice, the remainder, the ‘abnormal’ portion of the scenes they saw, was choreographic: bodies apparently running amok, disturbing a narrative through-line they thought they otherwise knew.

The ‘Great Revival’, described by at least one missionary as a widespread ‘frenzy’ that ran through Jamaica at the same time as the uprising in Madagascar I described in chapter 8, similarly posits narrative creolization. To colonial observers, the simultaneous recuperation and rejection of Western biblical narratives meant a confusing spectacle of partial alterity. Rather than merely reach towards whiteness (and arrive at it, in Bhabha’s iconic formulation, ‘almost’, ‘but not quite’),¹ colonial subjects ran with Christian narratives, it seemed, excessively, performing them too earnestly, and corporeally. They did not just displace the Great Event (or ‘canonical “centre”’) but produced what Bhabha calls the ‘enigma of authority’,¹ redrawing the corporeal contours of Christianity. Corporeal virtuosity was particularly noted of millennialist events but was treated by colonial ethnographers and missionaries with suspicion, as if the excess of fast-paced gestures, and the sudden onset of talents not previously displayed by revivalists, signalled the intercession of demonic powers. Both sides of the mimic game saw suprahuman, unnatural influence in the other.

William Tyson, of the Wesleyan 13. The history of part-black, part-white messiahs in Africa is voluminous. On the Bashilele belief, which became widespread throughout the Congo in the 1930s, in the arrival of a part-black, part-white Man who would perform a host of miracles, including raising the dead, see e.g. Lanternari, The Religions of the Oppressed, 10. 14. William Tyson, Brown's Town, to General Secretaries of the Missionary Society, 23 April 1861, Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, Correspondence, Jamaica, in MMS/West Indies/Correspondence/EBN 49, 1858-1865, Methodist Missionary Society archive, School of Oriental and African Studies Library, University of London. 15. Bhabha, The Location of Culture, 122. 16. Bhabha, The Location of Culture: xi. The doubling of alterities went further. Jesus himself multiplied, and Tyson added that an informant "who had taken part in services in which such cases have occurred ... and who himself professed to have been converted during the revival" revealed that two forces (or spirits) were at play. One was the spirit of Jesus, "a meek and quiet spirit, who convinces of sin, fills with sorrow and distress, but soon brings his subjects to find peace and joy in believing." The other was a "violent spirit which, when it seizes hold of the people, they become frantic and scarcely know what they do." Tyson remarked that his informant was unwilling to say whether he thought the second spirit was a good or a bad one, but for Tyson, "those who have been led astray by such fanaticism, or who have been guilty of great extravagances, have been after all comparatively few." These wayward few also served to remind the Methodist missionary society of what God intended: continued efforts to civilize and to convert. In particular, opposition to all "excessive" physical practices causing locals to become "frantic" had to be subdued; this was the work of the first, demonic spirit. Evidently, Jesus, the "meek" spirit, did not dance, run, howl, rush up trees, or lie prostrate.® Proper Christianity, in this view, was an unvarying and stationary practice, opposed to the excessive gesturality and hypercorporeality of the demonic brand of Christianity that the Jamaican revivalists counter-imitated back to the missionaries. Demonism was quintessentially a mirror distortion: in this case, colonial reproduction with difference, what Taussig describes as the "ac/dc" interplay of mimesis and alterity, producing an "artful combination," a "combinatorial perplexity," a "magnificent excessiveness over and beyond the fact that mimesis implies alterity as its flip-side"° The devil's genius was to appear just like the original, but excessively so with respect to the original. Again following Taussig, this relationship of alterity and excess is complicated by the fact that between mimesis and alterity lies perpetual oscillation, so that "it is far from easy to say who is the imitator and who is imitated, which is copy and which is original."° The collapsing of acts and corporealities between an endogenous and exogenous Christianity revealed Christian revivalists outdoing missionaries in their zeal, their belief, but also perhaps most spectacularly in their choreographic exercises. As an anti-colonial movement, with assimilationist undertones, this brand of revivalism went beyond white Christian religion by absorbing it so intensely as to make it virtually disappear to itself. The revivalist movement performed indigeneity as a recorporealization, a making-natural of colonial culture. This perplexed missionaries, who thought they were bringing culture to an uncultured place. The excessive quality and sweep of revivalists' imitations rendered them not only pathological but ecosophical in colonial discourse: excessive gestures appeared to arise spontaneously, involuntarily, out of native soil. According to a letter in the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society archives from Savannah-la-Mar, Jamaica, signed T. Raspass and dated 6 May 1861, the Jamaican revival approximated a hurricane sweeping over the island." But the movement had been brewing for some time. The roots of this eschatological culture may have dated back to the American Revolutionary period, when several hundred United Empire Loyalists left for Jamaica, taking 17. William Tyson, Brown's Town, to General Secretaries of the Missionary Society, 23 April 1861, Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, Correspondence, Jamaica, FBN 49, 1858-1865.

What these native Christians then catalysed was a mixture of part-indigenous, part-imported religion that clashed with official missionary teachings: in particular, the unorthodox use of drumming and shell-blowing, dancing, and spirit-seizure, misce- genated another Christianity, to white Europeans’ eyes, so European missionaries could not quite claim to implant a pure, untouched Christianity entirely into new ground. Christianity was now wildly, jaggedly corporeal, just as it had been among the revivalists in Kentucky whose jerks and other hypercorporeal exercises I discussed in chapter 5. Only here, the native back-translation of heightened corporeality and virtuosity in reli- gious practice rendered the adoption of Christian icons and words suspect: rather than appear to be simply very zealous, native Jamaicans seemed to be exceeding the bounds of religion and enter- ing into uncomfortable pre- and potentially post- Christian terrain. Messianic iconography concentrated in the figure of Jesus and the Hebrew narrative of a return to an ancient homeland, mixed with intense corporeal practices and ideas about dif- ferent sorts of transformation and spirituality, so that running, dancing, howling, and spirit possession, considered taboo by the Western colonials, effected a translatio between local ‘heathenism’ and ‘hereticism’ and current bib- lical canon.

What’s more, these hybrid cultures, oscillating between mimesis and alterity, posited a choreography of difference in which Western colonial writers and native Jamaicans ended up articulating their own senses of difference (and eventually sameness) to one another as well as to themselves. Whereas the missionaries desired their teachings to be assimilated—even revered (certainly unquestioned)—the Jamaicans’ recu- peration and transformation of these practices enacted a counter-desire to consume what had been brought to the island with the initial aim to conquer and subdue. From an ecosophical perspective, Caribbean bodies transformed hos- tile environments by adopting, assimilating, and excessively incorporating their signs: these (partly) colonized bodies performed a theatri- cal anthropophagy, consuming the narratives, signs, and symbols of their hosts the better to expel them in the end; yet in the process, they also became in part that which they consumed, handing back the colonizer’s language, costume, and props. Meanwhile, the consummation of one brand of Christianity, its excessive expenditure (even exhaustion) in the form of counter-mimetic perversions, yielded what the British social anthropologist Peter Worsley (1924-2013)— who influentially introduced the term ‘third world’ into English anthropology—called ‘heart- searchings’ on the part of the West. The West's image had not been reflected back to itself in quite the narcissistic way it had imagined: colonial subjects were reappropriating Euro-Christian iconography, practices, and beliefs but challenging and dragging them into another spatio-temporal 'lag'—another (Jamaican) space 'uncannily beside' Europe. With this, the very image of a Western genealogy nestled in the infant backwaters of colonial geographies had to be reassessed.

CARGO CULTS IN MELANESIA: THE PAPUAN "VAILALA MADNESS"

As Edward B. Tylor (1832-1917), one of the founders of British anthropology, noted, anthropology was a 'reformer's science'. It was construed as a politically progressive field, allowing 'the great modern nations to understand themselves, to weigh in a just balance their own merits and defects, and even in some measure forecast . . . the possibilities of the future'. Anthropology was at the outset conceived as a natural science, at once politically engaged and unshakably scientifically objective, proceeding according to the new nineteenth-century scientific methods which construed science as a mode, a field, and a practice. At the same time, anthropology emerged from medical history and colonial medicine as a modern science fundamentally concerned with alternative temporalities. Anthropology hovered at the cusp of scientific atemporality between future and past, in a full, messianic present rent through with shards of primitivism, antiquity, animality, and lofty ideas about civilization.

Soon, anthropology would become the field within which anti-colonial sentiment was most passionately deliberated, as this originally colonial medical science folded back onto itself to reveal people rising up around the world, shaking off foreign rule. But the new romantic thrust of twentieth-century anthropology was just as rent through with primitivist fantasies as its earlier incarnations, which had gazed dubiously at the beatitude of primitive savagery. As a site within which twentieth-century incarnations of the 'dance mania' took root, early to mid-twentieth century anthropology, still laced with medical debate, returned to the eschatological and millennialist scenes of medieval St. Vitus's dancers and the revolutionary uprisings, frenzies, and upheavals of the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century movements discussed in previous chapters but revealed a new borderland between ancient and 'modern' corporeality. With the increasing prominence of fieldwork, mimetic gesticulations and collective dreams of better futures showed alien—inscrutable—bodies becoming ever more present and ever closer to the anthropologist's fantasy of a Lost Atlantis. 

Colonial men and women performed theatricals of colonial hauntings that thrust figures of antiquity and archaicity up to their observers' faces. Colonial bodies were not just moving jaggedly, revealing states of heightened (‘abnormal', pathological) excitement in the pages of medical books or on theatricalized hospital stages; their gestures became increasingly political. According to anthropological observers, men and women contorting their bodies and waving props and flags were engaging in discursive practices which, viewed in a Western light, could bring all men and women new forms of sovereignty. The West was implicated in a collective futurity that included the ‘third world' paradoxically at the bottom and at the helm of a new boat. Cargo cults were foremost among (anti-) colonial movements that enacted futurity while drawing on indigenous forms of belief and cultural practice. Steeped in a ‘desirous' belief in the Europeans' power to bestow material wealth on the world (and thus also on the movement's followers), these movements, like the Ghost Dance, also sought the radical elimination of Europeans and their replacement with the ancestral dead. Although cargo cults have received substantial attention from anthropology, history, and religious and area studies in a rich body of literature articulating a complex entanglement of discourses, they have received considerably less attention in theatre, dance, and performance studies. Yet, as Dorothy Billings has argued, the politics of performance in at least one such cargo cult mined a rich history of ironic play that was misread by baffled Australians as inexplicable fantasy.” The late twentieth-century Johnson cult', based on the figure of Lyndon B. Johnson (1908-1973), whom Papuans in New Hanover claimed to vote for in an effort to have American power and wealth replace the local Australian government, performed a politics of resistance while appearing naively to misunderstand local structures of governmental authority. Simultaneously, as anthropologists, including Bronwen Douglas, have pointed out, recent anthropological interest in the so-called ‘politics of tradition' has increasingly recognized the place of Christianity in Papuan belief, particularly in the latter part of the twentieth century." The ‘Vailala Madness' in Papua New Guinea was paradigmatic among cargo cults, recuperated by twentieth-century anthropologists such as Worsley and the Italian historian of religions Vittorio Lanternari (1918-2010) as representative of the ‘primitive' world rising up out of colonial oppression. Described by Lindstrom as the originary cargo cult in mid- to late twentieth-century social scientific discourse, the Vailala Madness became, as he points out, nearly equivalent to the broader term ‘cargo cult', increasingly employed to designate any sort of ‘unpredictable and inexplicable' ‘eruption'."" According to the German missionary The Vailala Madness, a cult that emerged in 1857, promised the renewal of heaven and earth. Mansren, a figure with the name "ruler" or "lord," was said to have self-imposed exile in the Netherlands and would return to New Guinea via Germany or Japan. This led to ecstatic preparations, including special dances and songs. Hundreds of people engaged in ecstatic singing and dancing, anticipating Mansren's arrival and the return of the dead in boats. These events likely originated from Papuan longhouse or mask dances employed for major ceremonial occasions.

The Vailala cult swelled up and died down with the ebb and flow of colonial and Allied activity during World Wars I and II. The arrival of the Japanese in the 1940s set into motion a dramatic cultural revival, fueled by cultural ambivalence and a projected return to old ways. The Vailala movement was not a straightforward anti-colonial revolt, but rather a double movement absorbing and rejecting 'Europe,' cast as futurity and ancestry, a force at once exogenous and indigenous to themselves.

British missionary E. P. Jones observed the double movement expressed as 'vertigo,' with Papuans claiming they would be 'turned into Europeans with European dress, implements, food, and even language.' They were keen to possess books and had flocked into services everywhere. Jones noted that there are many ways to look at this movement, including as a form of indigenous ancestor worship laced with Christian ideas about redemption.

The people of the Oil Field 28. In Lindstrom, Cargo Cult, 21-22. 29. Lindstrom deconstructs the myth of the cargo cultish desire for refrigerators, among other Western goods, in Lindstrom, 'Cargo Cult in the Third Millennium'. 30. Worsley, The Trumpet Shall Sound, 90. See also esp. 70-93. F. E. Williams, government anthropologist of Papua from 1922 to his death in 1943, offers a first-hand account in F. E. Williams, The Vailala Madness and the Destruction of Native Ceremonies in the Gulf Division, Territory of Papua, Anthrop. The Vailala Madness and the Destruction of Native Ceremonies in the Gulf Division

Report No. 4 (Port Moresby, 1923)

F. E. Williams, "The Vailala Madness in Retrospect," in Evans-Pritchard, Firth, Malinowski, and Schapera, eds., Essays Presented to C. G. Seligman, 369-379.

Williams notes that several alternative terms are used to describe the 'Vailala Madness', including "The Gulf Kavakavd', i.e., the 'Gulf Madness'; the 'Orokolo kavakava', in reference to the village of Orokol, which, paradoxically, 'is practically the one coastal village in the Gulf Division that has remained immune'; 'Head-he-go-round', the 'usual Pidgin-English expression'; 'Kwarana giroa' or 'kwarana aika', and 'Haro heraripi, regional variants; 'Iki havere' ('belly-don't-know'), a term used in coastal villages throughout the Gulf Division; and 'Abo abo', meaning 'giddy' or 'crazy', terms used to the west in the Purari Delta. See Williams, The Vailala Madness, 2-3.


COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES

near by thought it a political rising because some wild spirits talked of their ancestral spirits driv-ing out those whites who were here trading but this is very rare'. Jones preferred to describe the phenomenon as a 'religious revival not in a usual evangelical sense though there is that in it in a small degree'. Overall, the district was 'aflame', and he required of the London Missionary Society six more men 'to meet the calls'.

Europeans emerged as if out of a phantas-matic future conceived by Papuans as occurring in an alternative space (across the ocean, via rafts); but Europeans simultaneously had to be annihilated, as the far more ancient ancestors of the Papuans would come back again to take their place. The movement was short-lived.

B. T. Butcher (b. 1877), also of the London Missionary Society, noted in his report for the year 1920 that 'the semi religious movement that was noticed last year has largely died away'. In a letter dated 1 January 1921 Jones added that the 'sort of mass movement which was partly chris-tian partly heathen' which he had written about before was still present, but few incidents were now to be reported. Although Papuans seemed to have gained in religious zeal—one man was 'seized with violent agitation[,] his body shook as with ague and for a moment was uncon-scious' —the excitement was 'settling down'. Jones 'was able to soothe [this man] and [he] went home somewhat calmer'.

The Australian-born British government anthropologist and ethnographer F. E. Williams 1893-194______ In it, he recognizes the deep crisis colonialism had provoked among native Papuan islanders, suggesting that this so-called epidemic madness had run its course. It was ‘now more than twelve years since a movement known as the Vailala Madness began in the Gulf Division of Papua', he wrote. By the time of his writing, the madness had ‘[begun] to die its lingering death, and by now it [was] no more than a memory'. The Vailala Madness had, however, originally ‘spread with the speed of an epidemic’, meeting with ‘high enthusiasm’ among natives, who described it as ‘hot'. Jerking motions of the head from side to side and leg and arm muscle twitches earned the Vailala episode designation as a modern-day ‘St. Vitus' dance' by one eyewitness, the acting resident magistrate of the Gulf Division, G. H. Murray, in his annual report of 1919-1920. Expectations of miracles and ‘miraculous happenings' had engendered what Williams called a ‘mass hysteria', as ‘great numbers were affected by a kind of giddiness; they lost or abandoned control of their limbs and reeled about the villages, one man involuntarily following the example of another until almost the whole population of a village might be affected at the same moment'. This frenetic and highly contagious condition, known as haro heraripe, that is, ‘one's head is turning around' (or, in pidgin English, "‘Head-he-go-round Men') occurred, Williams argued, involuntarily among the ‘masses', who were imitating the leaders ('bosses'). The leaders, he argued, were ‘affecting' this condition ‘for their purposes'. As in previous cases of so-called choreomania, bodily loss of control and choreography of mass imitation, coupled with a theatre of manipulation and deceit, earned this episode designation as epidemic hysteria. The involuntary aspect of the event prompted Williams to use the term ‘Automaniac', denoting the ‘self-induced condition of nervous or mental derangement'.

As with other cases of agitated social movements I turn to later in this chapter, the imitation of an excited leader was nearly sufficient to provoke gestural agitation among crowds. Similarly, what Agamben describes as the catastrophic disintegration of gesture in chorea (chapter 3 here) characterized the apparently impulsive ‘automaniacal' movements of men whose heads, according to Williams, ‘turned around'. Here, however, gesture did not disintegrate into incoherence; specific terms and objects emerged out of the fray to signal a colonial encounter whose performance of giddy desire suggested an attempt to assimilate the exogenous culture of the foreign invaders with a ceremonial structure inherited from precolonial days. Papuans denied themselves their old customs just as they assimilated colonial sounds: a mixture of pidgin German (‘Djaman'), abolition of personal ornamentation, feathers, and other objects representing the old customs and ceremonies, and prophecies foretelling the return of the dead, often in the form of white men (as Williams noted, ‘some Europeans were actually welcomed as the ghosts of Papuans') suggested profound cultural ambivalence and an attempt performatively to account for changes going on more broadly on Papuan shores. The preparation of food, with tables laid out, down to the knives, forks, and decorations, staged the triumphant return of the ancestors, who would be nourished with the technological paraphernalia of the whites. Williams noted that the ‘bosses’, who had sole access to the ahea uvi (hot houses) where the spirits were supposed to return, must have profited from these lavish displays ‘long after the masses had ceased to show any nervous or physical symptoms’.*® For Williams, the leaders were not all (or not originally all) feigning; ecstatic seizures and visions, which had preceded the ‘Madness’, and belief by Williams's informants that the early days had been characterized by actual miracles continued to grant the period between 1919 and 1921 the mark of a new ‘golden age’ connected mimetically with the old. Rapid change and the miscegenation of new beliefs—from mistranslations and reinterpretations of objects such as the Anglo-Persian Oil Company’s wireless device, turned into a device for receiving messages of deliverance through a flagpole*°—meshed nostalgia and fascination with European language and dress, symbols and technology.

As Williams wrote in his report on the Vailala Madness, poles had made their way into the Papuan cosmogony in a variety of ways: ‘the flag pole appears to have been instituted by the London Missionary Society a good many years ago. The villagers were given flags, and might hoist them on any signal occasion: but particularly, as I understand, on Sunday .. .. Now, however, it has certainly been adopted by the Vailala Madness as one of its cult-objects’.“° One of the flagpole’s main functions was to ‘receive messages from the dead through its agency’. Singing ‘vigorously’ at the foot of these poles helped to catalyse the arrival of the message; the message, then, having come down the flagpole and into the ground, ‘went up into the belly of the leader, and thence into and out of his mouth’. These scenes of recuperation constitute what Agamben calls the ‘experience of language as such, in its pure self-reference’: language (like gesture) signals not just the communication of a message but the communication of the communicability of the message. Communicability—the ‘sentient’ or tactile aspect of ‘copying’ language—takes precedence over the semantic content of any message deployed.

Within the act of displacing language at its threshold (at the edge of the sea or at the tip of a pole) was a series of encounters that dissolved the distinctness of (foreign) language. Messages, which came ‘from the sea “like the wind,”’ mixed Christian biblical references with sounds from the English language (among others) for an audience of Papuans who may have been familiar with neither. At Arihava, in April 1922, Williams noted a man ‘delivering an exhortation from the platform of an eravo [long house]. Dancing and singing was going on near at hand and his voice was almost drowned, but numbers of people were gathered about the platform; watching and listening. He spoke at the top of his voice, and very rapidly: the language, I am told, was English, and was not understood by the people present. The only phrases intelligible to me were “Ihova” [Jehovah] (with frequent pointing to the sky); “Me wantum kaikai” [cake] and “He all right”’.® Other terms used included ‘Heave 'em up’ and "Come on boy'. Williams added: ‘the speaker was highly excited, striking himself continually on the chest. Throughout the performance his right leg trembled violently as if quite uncontrolled’. 

Another man, who took his place on the platform, seemed quite to 'lack inspiration'. Although his leg trembled, it did so 'without the same appearance of spontaneity'.

In the theatre of mimetic doublings that this event performs, spontaneity (or the 'appearance of spontaneity') holds currency as an indicator of the event's proximity to desire for the other within the context of a synthetic ceremony. For the colonial medical and anthropological observer, these events signaled a theatre of intelligibilization, where the otherwise opaque Papuan body and sounds were rent through with shards of whiteness and gestures indicating assimilation of and proximity to a new cast of seemingly magical, potent white things (cake, sky, Jehovah).

W. M. Strong (d. 1946), government anthropologist and chief medical officer at Port Moresby, argued in his introduction to Williams's official report that this 'Madness' could be interpreted from a number of standpoints, including notably as a reaction to what Williams noted was the unfortunate 'suppression of ceremonies, games, dances, and the like', which '[robbed] the natives of that zest of life which is derived from social enjoyments' and '[led] to ugly social abnormalities'. The 'all work and no play' policy colonialists favored was, [Williams] argued, 'less profitable for primitive man than for civilized savages'. Significantly, this Protestant work ethic kept Papuans from enjoying what for them amounted to a healthy balance between work and play: 'those who, genuinely anxious to improve the native's condition . . . argue that for him work is the prime essential' fail to realize that 'energy denied its proper outlet will break loose at some unexpected point'.

In Williams's terms, 'repression leads to abnormality; . . . it is not improbable' , he ventured, 'that in the Vailala Madness the voluntary suppression of the ceremonies contributes something towards the repulsive and ridiculous behavior of its victims'. As he put it: "The ceremonies—to say nothing of their artistic and emotional value—are healthy [emphasis in original] social activities . . . evolved or accepted and modified in perfect accordance with the character and desires of the people. So long as they are allowed to follow one another regularly the feelings of the people will pursue their natural course of rising, culmination and subsidence: this is the anabolism and katabolism of collective feeling".

This organic metaphor posited collective life as being organized according to metabolic relations, composed of organic build-up (anabolism) and subsequent expenditure or release (catabolism). In this view, dances and other ceremonies were as necessary and healthy as they were organic. So, too, their suppression, in Williams's view, caused more trouble than it resolved. Interference into the natural course of humans' energetic expenditure provoked outbreaks, hysterias: as he argued, 'hold down or stifle these purely natural activities [ie., ceremonies], and you may have to deal with an objective case of collective hysteria'. The Vailala Madness offered a palimpsestical view of native life and European influence: it was at once impenetrable, confusing, rich, complex, and obscure—so puzzling that it could be interpreted from nearly any angle. Indeed, ‘reading’ and translating the Vailala Madness into metaphorical and pragmatic terms, linking it to more familiar tropes, became the colonial ethnographer and administrator’s greatest challenge and accomplishment. At once false proof that games had to continue to be suppressed, insight into pathological instances of crowd psychology and early religion, and a window onto the life of so-called ethnological people, the Vailala Madness served as a crucible for the hermeneutic challenges of colonial rule.

The conjunction of functions this report presented to the physician, the sociologist, the ethnographer, and the scholar of religions—as well as the generally concerned person, whose interest in Papuan labour and health was gestured towards without further qualification—offered the report reader (in this case initially members of the London Missionary Society) an ambivalent picture of the effects of the introduction of the Christian religion and European technologies into the ‘native culture’ of the Gulf Division. Hermeneutic challenges and the constant negotiation of legibility, translation, and counter-mimicry were endemic. Confusion over the performance of ‘making Christmas’, as Papuans sometimes described the erection of platforms and flagpoles and the endeavour of ‘making merry [such as] at an ordinary dance’, suggested slippages between Christian and native Papuan concepts of pleasure and duty, and the Papuans’ adoption and theatrical redeployment of European objects and affects. 

'Colonial power requires a double articulation by which to explain the double standard that posits freedom and rational enlightenment as universal principles only partially attainable in the colonies. Colonial people are cast as almost free, almost rational; and, as the Papuan case suggests, almost able to conform to a Protestant ethics of ‘all work and no play’. But they fail entirely to subscribe to this, in the colonialist's view, and this is where the ‘madness’ appears to emerge. The European articulation of this difference rests on the Papuans' imagined status as natural beings whose metabolisms require energetic outlets (in Strong's terms) yet whose partial imitation of Western language and ceremonies suggests a culture never quite able to catch up to the West. Papuans were at once at least as natural as their Western counterparts, inasmuch as they also required a balance between festivity and labour (they are not ‘labour machines’), and locked out of modern temporalities by virtue of their imitative excess. They imitated the West, but they also imitated one another imitating the West, in an excessive exercise of counter-imitation that led to collective ‘madness’. As a site for negotiating the West's encounter with colonial assimilation and mis-assimilation, the Vailala Madness suggests a disciplinary articulation between medical anthropology, positing biological universalism, and an incipient discourse on culture and cultural difference. For Worsley, increasing contact and communication (or miscommunication) between colonial and colonized peoples produced a sort of midcentury anthropology-sociology complex—or crisis—which extended by the 1960s to the emergence of anthropological and sociological studies of Hollywood, mental hospitals, and Australian aborigines and Bushmen; the objects of study characteristic of these two fields had meshed, though methods now differed. Anthropologists were less sure than ever of their status as privileged viewers, able to survey their subjects from a safe, generally geocultural, distance; at the same time, distinctions between ‘backward’- and ‘forward’-tending nations persisted. ‘This overlapping of fields and interchange of techniques’, Worsley wrote, ‘is part of a process of ever-growing interaction between backward and advanced peoples, of the breakdown of colonial societies, their absorption into wider politics and the growth of new national entities. It has been a process marked by heart-searchings about the inadequacy of anti-evolutionary, particularly functionalist, anthropological theories formulated on the basis of the study of “untouched” primitive societies and which later proved to be inadequate when applied to the phenomena of “culture contact”’.

The process of surveying the land and its inhabitants had to confront the two-way vector of cultural exchange that characterized mimetic (and counter-mimetic) encounters between peoples. This contact zone suggests a site for the articulation of ‘dance’ between medicine and colonial anthropology, between theatre and political history, and between performance and ‘culture’. To the extent that Papuan ‘head-he-go-round-men’ engaged in corporeal recuperations of white ceremonial choreographies, enunciating white (German, British) words (‘heave ‘em up’, etc.) and recombining colonial props (flags, poles, cutlery) with extant ceremonies (long tables, etc.), the performative doubling of past and future in a messianic ‘now-time’ of expectation reveals a zone of intensity, in which colonial medical and anthropological readings of native performance rearticulated the West’s concept of its own difference (its theorization of its self) right back. As a site for the negotiation of sameness and difference, the Vailala Madness instantiated a theatre of making-similar, in which counter-mimicry rendered white gestures and speech jagged and mad. The dance of counter-imitation showed that native Papuans were not, as in Bhabha’s formulation of the colonial condition, ‘almost the same [as whites], but not quite’, but rather the converse: almost entirely different, but not quite.

CARGO CULTS IN POLYNESIA: THE MILLENNIAL ‘CULT’ OF THE HAUHAU

A second cargo cult, revealing an almost mirror image of the Papuan Vailala Madness, brings these relations of counter-mimicry and performance further to light. Similarly staging a theatre of millennial expectation and choreographic recuperation, as well as jagged gesturalities, seeming linguistic unintelligibility, and the performance of fragmentary eloquence against a backdrop of apparent incohesion, the Maoris’ Hauhau movement, like the so-called Vailala Madness, emerged in the second half of the nineteenth century. Like the Vailala Madness, it was theorized by colonial medical anthropologists in the first decades of the twentieth century as an instance of primitive beatitude and natural upheaval: at once a disease and a locally specific cultural happening in part attributable to human (particularly colonial) intercession.

Alternately known as the Pai Marire movement, meaning ‘the good and the peaceful’, the Hauhau movement emerged in 1864 as an alternative to Christian religion under British colonial rule. As with the Vailala Madness, it borrowed from Christianity yet anticipated the swift disappearance of Europeans from Maori land. Te-Ua (d. 1866), a Maori leader, had converted to Anglicanism under the British and, claiming converse with the angel Gabriel, who he said taught him the symbols and rituals of a new religion based on the Book of Revelation, laid the ground for a set of practices that recombined Maori props and practices and Christian eschatological beliefs. In Te-Ua’s version, men and women were to enjoy free sexual commerce with one another, and all Europeans were to be driven back to the sea, from whence they came, with the help of angels conjured by the utterance of the word ‘Hau!’ With all the Europeans gone, adepts would learn European sciences and arts, as well as the English language, effortlessly, with the help of Hauhau priests and angels. A central pole, or niu, traditionally used for divination in Maori practice, now served as the focal point. Barton Babbage, Hauhauism: An Episode in the Maori Wars, 1863-1866 (Wellington, New Zealand: A. H. & A. W. Reed, 1937); James Cowan, The New Zealand Wars: A History of the Maori Campaigns and the Pioneering Period, 2 vols., vol. 2, The Hauhau Wars, 1864-72 (New York: AMS Press, 1969); James O. Gump, “The Imperialism of Cultural Assimilation: Sir George Grey's Encounter with the Maori and the Xhosa, 1845-1868”, Journal of World History 9.1 (1998): 89-106, 101-103; and Kenelm Burridge, New Heaven, New Earth: A Study of Millenarian Activities (New York: Schocken Books, 1969), 15-22.

James Belich, in The Victorian Interpretation of Racial Conflict: The Maori, the British, and the New Zealand Wars (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1989), notes that the movement may not have arisen from despair at defeat in war and that ‘just how revolutionary an ideological change the new religions represented remains open to question. Similar cults had emerged before the [Maori] wars, and early Maori Christianity itself can arguably be understood as a syncretic religion, even an adjustment cult’ (204).

For a discussion of the term ‘Hau’, alternately denoting power, wind, breath, and life force, see Burridge, New Heaven, New Earth, 17. “The Gift of Seeing Resemblances’ +» 265 around which special dances and songs called karakia and waiata were to be performed, using a mixture of words borrowed from Hebrew, English, German, Greek, and Italian. Lanternari, in The Religions of the Oppressed, noted that rhythmic dancing among the Hauhau was carried to a ‘fever pitch’ as adepts ‘fell prey’ to ‘collective seizures’ and ‘trances’.™* The niu ceremony, performed to generate a state of ecstasy among participants, blended British political and religious iconography, recu- perated into Maori practice. Colourful banners, with crosses similar to those of the British flag and the mission banners, hung from the top of the niu. Te-Ua’s belief that he was the new Moses (and the Maoris the new chosen people of God, descended from the tribes of Judah) and that New Zealand was the New Canaan transposed the Christian and British onto the Maori world and the biblical Sermon on the Mount onto the Maori niu, from which the divine message was to descend. This practice continued in relatively full force until 1886, when Te-Ua surrendered to British officers, who were alarmed at anti-British riots that had broken out among some adher- ents. The movement continued in fits and starts until about 1892. Although Te-Ua’s doctrine was pacific, emphasizing virtuousness, righteous- ness, and eventual reunion with the dead, some of the Hauhaus’ belligerence towards the mili- tary and missionaries had caused alarm. British soldiers, in an early battle, had been taken by sur- prise, decapitated, smoked, and paraded around the village. A missionary who had until then lived relatively quietly among the Maori was crucified, and his eyes were swallowed whole.®° Interpretations abounded, but most generally accepted was that the Hauhaus were rebelling against colonial incursions on their land; in one Hauhau’s words: ‘Bishop [Williams], many years ago we received the faith from you. Now we return it to you, for there has been found a new and precious thing by which we shall keep our land’.® Another Hauhau was reported to have said: ‘These men, these missionaries, were always telling us, “Lay up for yourselves treas- ure in heaven”. And so, while we were looking up to______ For Kenelm Burridge, a British anthropologist whose New Heaven New Earth: A Study of Millenarian Activities (1969) is still one of the most frequently cited works on millennialism today, land seizure was central to the emergence of the Hauhau movement in Polynesia. The relation of the land to the ancestors (who were believed to lie within it), its function in providing sustenance, and its role in warfare and other sources of power or prestige (mana), made the land symbolically and pragmatically a focal point for Maori life. Understandably, its usurpation by the British was cause for revolt. In conjunction with the Christian-inflected personality cult of Te-Ua, the Hauhau had emerged out of an earlier, land-based movement, the King movement: a flood of British and other Europeans arriving in New Zealand in the 1850s had prompted the formation of a ‘pan-tribal anti-land-selling league’, as historian James Gump writes in his account of nineteenth-century Maori conflicts.

Fighting over land tenure peaked in the 1860s in what were known as the Maori wars, at first rallying new tribes to the King movement and eventually morphing into the broader, more dramatic Hauhau (Pai Marire) movement. The theatricalization of the conflict over the land— and the bloodiness of the conflict—earned the Hauhau movement a bleak place in the annals of official Maori history. Historian Paul Clark describes the Hauhau as having been vilified in travel guides and school history, which pitted the ‘mad’ Hauhau against the forces of law and order. Clark’s succinct account of the process captures its narrative line: ‘On 2 March 1865 New Zealand history gained its first martyr and New Zealand historiography her first madmen’.

The reiteration of the tragedy of the missionary assassination had become common knowledge, as had the Hauhau's belief that they were impervious to bullets: ‘words like fanaticism, reversion, and barbarism [abounded]’ ‘in the education of New Zealanders, and in popular and scholarly writing’. This officialization of the conflict had the added benefit of a thrilling depiction of natives gone amok; they were not just savage, they were clinically mad. But they were also typically eulogized, less for their madness than for the ancient warrior culture their practices conjured up in the minds of their ethnographer dramaturges. What Clark describes is a narrativization process that powerfully dramatizes the war between the ‘brutal’ Maoris and the British. Now classic works published by the New Zealand writer and publicity officer James Cowan (1870-1943) in 1922 and by S. Barton Babbage (1916-2012) in 1937 riled up their readers with fantasies of a warrior culture as terrifying as it was powerfully subdued. 

Cowan prefaces his study with grandiloquent terms, describing 'desperation', a 'long racial conflict', 'many a day spent . . . on the fern-grown site of some fortification or on some battle-ground, in gathering from the veteran bush fighters of two races the stories of the past', and 'stirring tales . . . drilled into the memory of the native of the old type by unvarying repetition in the tribal home'. The mixture of romantic adulation and paternalism was best expressed in his invocation of 'the generation of men now fast passing away'. The 'young Maori's mind', he reported, 'has been transformed by books and colleges, and he has lost the marvelous memorializing powers of his forefathers'.* In this adulating and romantic view, Maoris had been a natural people, close to the earth; European learning had corrupted them. And the Maoris' own war against the Europeans had destroyed what little primitive spirit they once had.

Cowan was not immune to the use of comparison in describing the 'friendly mist which befogged a foe', one of the central beliefs of the Hauhau, denoting their supposed ability to hide themselves from their enemies by uttering a spell, the huna, which provoked a fog. He wrote: 'we read of very much the same kind of supernatural mist in the “Iliad.” This comment is dropped into his account like an afterthought, an aside; yet it connects these 'holy warriors' with the Grecian past, simultaneously removing their story in time while bringing it closer to his readers' assumed areas of knowledge and points of reference. The analogy is casual, and similar analogies are sparse; yet their effect, to elicit his readers' sympathy, as well as admiration or awe, for these tragic heroes captures the pathos of Cowan's narrative in a classical turn of rhetoric foregrounding pity mixed with edification.

Babbage similarly condoned the Hauhau for their political resistance, understandable, he argued, given the 'land... issue': 'it is no wonder that there was a reversion to the old primitive policy' and 'not strange that religious enthusiasm was invoked in the political struggle. Under strain and stress there is frequently a tendency to turn towards the supernatural. Hauhauism provided a fresh battle cry, promising them deliverance from their degradation'. However, he added, 'at times it was almost the form of madness, and psychologically was a kind of group neurosis'. Freud's Totem and Taboo (1913) had twenty years before likened the 'psychic life of savages' to 'neurotics'. Inquiry into savages' 'stages of development' and 'legends, myths and fairy tales' offered modern Europeans a wormhole into their own pre-conscious past.

Similarly, for Babbage, the history of these savages offered a literature that looked deeply into the workings of the human mind in a child-like state, where mimesis governs all relations between nature, its symbols, and the self. The niu, Moses, Te-Ua, and their government, as well as their postwar historiographers, showed forth a battle over an autochthonous claim to territory, obliquely expressed through the dramatic creolization of biblical, European, and Maori objects, practices, and beliefs. This geo-cultural drama staged what cultural geographer Joel Bonnemaison (1940-1997) has described as the 'circulation/iconology dialectic' by which icons transform as they move. This dialectic, often epitomized in objects and narratives, troubles the standard opposition of 'opening vs. 61. Cowan, The New Zealand Wars, vol. 62. Cowan, The New Zealand Wars, 9. 63. Babbage, Hauhauism, 71. The term ‘group neurosis’ to describe the Hauhau was perhaps first used by the moral psychologist and professor of anthropology I. L. G. Sutherland (1897-1952), in The Maori Situation (Wellington, NZ: Harry H. Tombs, 1935), 31. 64. Sigmund Freud, Totem and Taboo, trans. A. A. Brill (New York: Vintage Books, 1946), 3. “The Gift of Seeing Resemblances’ +» 267 closing, universalism vs. localism, cosmopolitanism vs. isolation. Genealogies shifted on new terrain, in a translatio from West to South and, in disciplinary terms, from missionary religion to historiography. Genealogically and choreographically, the Maori movement conjugated icons and spaces mimetically to displace the (Western) fantasy of scientific universalism in the particularities of counter-mimetic acts. ROMANTIC RECUPERATION MODERN ANTHROPOLOGY’S PHANTASMATIC BACKYARD The romantic recuperation of millennialist movements such as the Papuan Vailala Madness and the Maori Hauhau into twentieth-century literature on anti-colonial revolution belies the fact that these early movements were also composed of strong measures of colonial mimesis and iconographic recombination. In the ambivalent exercises of counter-imitation that natives performed, Europeans encountered something slightly different from what they thought natives represented as supposedly barbarian ancestors of the whites: not pure experience, as Agamben suggests of the West’s notion of the state of ‘infancy’ allegedly resting at the dawn of civilization, prior to language and gesture, but an ambiguous show of iconographic, linguistic, and narrative recuperation by which the colonial saw himself mirrored back in a disconcertingly distorted form. This show of counter-mimesis could not, the colonial thought, represent the West’s infancy, though natives came to be increasingly imagined as a key to its future. Similarly, natives recuperated European tropes as a way to empower themselves, not through separatism but through wilful assimilation and back-translation. Back-translation implies the movement or transfer (the translatio) back into one language of the words or phrases exported from it into another in an act of translation. Expressions like ‘Heave ‘em up’ and ‘Me wantum kaikai’ or performances such as ‘making Christmas’ adopted colonial expressions, defamiliarizing them through repronunciation, and reperforming them within a context of indigenous recollectivization that pushed the colonial to the margins of the event. The event, meanwhile, became apparent as (virtually) unintelligible to observers who thought (nominally) that they knew what they were bringing to the ‘savage’, namely civilization, (European) language, religion, and everyday articles such as cutlery and dress. The doubling of mimesis is nearly comical in its parallelism: the colonial West and the colonized South were equally finding in the alien body of the other a representation of their own past and their (soon to be liberated) future. These nativist movements’ assimilation into twentieth-century anthropological agendas that pitted a now corrupt, decadent West against the supposed purity of the savage other thus fails to take the heterogeneous mixture of practices, the constant de- and reterritorializations, the back-translations, into account. Indeed, the Papuan and Maori mixtures of ‘heathen’ and ‘Christian’ religiosity do not, on closer scrutiny, immediately reveal the kind of uncompromising upheaval that anthropologists such as E. W. P. Chinnery (1887-1972) and A. C. Haddon (1855-1940) described in their landmark essay ‘Five New Religious Cults in British New Guinea’, published in Hibbert Journal (1917). For Chinnery and Haddon, ‘social unrest’ and the emergence of new forms of religion, especially when accompanied by the emergence of a heroic leader, occurred in civilizations ‘at all stages’. The present ‘fervor’ that they noted in New Guinea constituted a paradigmatic form of religious renewal in the face of colonization. Instead, new waves of writing on decolonization movements remained tethered to old tropes. Jagged movements, rolling eyes, and apparently epidemic hysteria—now signalling a ‘good’ pure 65. Joél Bonnemaison, Culture and Space: Conceiving a New Cultural Geography, ed. Chantal Blanc-Pamard et al., trans. Josée Pénot-Demetry (London: Tauris, 2005), 43. 66. Agamben, Infancy and History. 67. ‘An awakening of religious activity is a frequent characteristic of periods of social unrest. The weakening or disruption of the old social order may stimulate new and often bizarre ideals, and these may give rise to religious movements that strive to sanction social and political aspirations. Communities that feel themselves oppressed anticipate the emergence of a hero who will restore their prosperity and prestige. And when the people are imbued with religious fervor the expected hero will be regarded as a Messiah. Phenomena of this kind are well known in history, and are not unknown at the present day among all peoples in all stages of civilization’. E. W. P. Chinnery and A. C. Haddon, ‘Five New Religious Cults in British New Guinea’, Hibbert Journal 15.3 (1917): 448-63, 455; cited in Burridge, New Heaven, New Earth, 3-4.

268 ° COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES primitivism—all characterized the uprisings and revolts taking the colonial world by storm, as told in the new literature on crosscultural anthropology. In Lanternari’s grandiloquent terms, ‘the cry for freedom rising from the throats of the oppressed peoples is fraught with lessons for us to learn ... . These new worlds, so very different from ours, are now experiencing a crisis; but their impact upon the West has thrown our civilization into shock, initiating an era of travail which can be fruitful for all mankind if it leads to a broader humanism than the world has ever before known’. His study Movimenti religiosi di liberta e di salvezza dei popoli oppressi [The Religions of the Oppressed: A Study of Modern Messianic Cults] (1960)—a title suggesting compassion, romantic allegiance, and a paternalistic sort of emotionality, gesturing towards a unified world connecting ‘ethnological’, ‘primitive civilizations’ with ‘modern’, ‘Western’ ones®—claimed inspiration from the oppressed. ‘Today’, he wrote, ‘as we watch the so-called savage or backward peoples [cosiddetti ‘incolti’ o ‘selvaggi’] come to the fore and take their place on the world stage, it becomes the cultural, political, and moral duty of those who belong to the so-called cultured and elite civilization [civilita cosiddetta ‘colta’ ed ‘eletta’] to recognize the call to freedom and liberation rising from the mouths of thousands of prophets who speak from the jungles of the Congo, from the remote islands of Melanesia’.” Not only were oppressed people, in Africa and the South Pacific, rising up against the oppressive conditions in which they lived—serving the modern historian with a romantic model to emulate—they were also worthy of the historian's interest insofar as they were in a sense part of an extended 'family'. As with the Native Americans discussed in the last chapter, these African and Oceanic people, Lanternari wrote, '[revealed] characteristics found in ancient or in prehistoric cultures . . . [at] the roots of our present Western civilization'. The myth of primitive ancestry, as ancient as new world 'discover-ies' themselves, prompted, in this context, a new genealogy, hinging on the projected reversal of the oppressor-oppressed relation: the West was now to heed the third world, which it articulated as its forgotten but passionate, forward-thinking, colonial cousin. "This call' for freedom, Lanternari intoned, 'demands an answer from the Western world'. At the time of the 1963 preface to the English edition of Lanternari's work, three years of anti-colonial struggles had brought the purpose of this kind of study to even greater light: crowds of people in the French and Belgian Congo, in Upper Volta, Sierra Leone, Ivory Coast, Tanganyika, and other parts of Africa had 'shaken off the yoke of colonial rule'.

The religious tenor of these liberationist movements was not lost on Lanternari, who saw in the future emancipation of the world's people and concomitant 'erasure' of all 'evil' an ancient eschatological trope fundamental to the very institution as well as the progress of civilization. "The problem of the relationship between history and eschatology', he wrote, and the 'contradict-ory, yet indissoluble, bond between current reality and future goals . . . [which] lies at the root of almost every major human experience' was a question that had not yet 'been solved even for the West'.

But the West was ready to learn from its colonial peers. Lanternari underscored the political tenor of this collective brand of excitement, recu-perating 'nativist' movements into a global rhetoric of revolt. For Lanternari, 'the birth of these movements can only be understood in the light of historical conditions relating to the colonial experiences and to the striving of subject peoples to become emancipated'. For Worsley, writing in 1968 at the peak of the counter-cultural movement of the 1960s, 'the cults . . . express social and moral solidarity and independence in a highly charged emotional situation resulting from the overthrow or ques-tioning of ancient ethical values'. Social historian George Rosen (1910-1977), also writing in 1968 in Madness in Society, similarly argued that 'movements [that] derived from the clash of peoples and cultures, particularly in colonial settings . . . occur within emotionally charged and explosive situations . . . where there is dis-satisfaction with existing conditions'. Eric Hobsbawm (1917-2012), in Primitive Rebels (1965), emphasized the 'revolutionary' rhet-oric of 'hope' in 'a complete and radical change in the world which will be reflected in the millennium'—a 'hope' Wilson (1926-2004), millenialist movements were politically motivated, if not 'revolutionist'. In Magic and the Millennium (1973), Wilson argued that 'millennialism represents . . . a vision of a different social order'. Historian Michael Adas, in Prophets of Rebellion: Millenarian Protest Movements against the European Colonial Order (1979), argued that 'millenarian protest movements' and 'prophetic rebellion' from Java and New Zealand to East-Central India, German East Africa (Tanzania), and British Burma, offered a comparative history of 'social protest'. However, the recovery of the Vailala and other messianic 'cults' into a modern social scientific discourse on revolutionary liberation and political emancipation overlooked the extent to which these movements were also staged in strong iconographic and narratological terms.

Whereas they called on 'mnemonic reserves' and native genealogies, mixing native with Christian iconography, they rarely translated into concerted political action in the first instance. Trances and ecstatic visions suggested a performative withdrawal from the colonial situation, a messianic temporality seeking future liberation from the past yet also paradoxically becoming European, becoming 'white', without whites or Europeans around.

The rise of anthropology as a discursive platform for discussing, analysing, and interpreting societies across the world, often in the service of government administration, prompted the relative extinction of the choreomania diagnosis as a strictly medical disease. No longer visible as a purely (or merely) biomedical entity, choreomania—and allied choreiform activities, including trance and possession, psychotropic and ecstatic states—came to be subsumed under the general banner of culture. These were not abnormal (i.e., pathological) activities but objects of fascination with the other (primitive, pre-modern, non-Western), of nostalgia, and, eventually, of a romantic annexation to the broader contestatory movement of the 1960s and 1970s.

As the nineteenth-century medicalization of corporeal upheavals moved increasingly into the realm of cultural discourse, what McCarren calls medicine and dance's twin capacities for discovering 'new realities for the body' resulted in a new politicization of body culture. Writers entrenched in anthropological discourses on otherness wove romantic longings for the primeval past into a scientific discourse on social and political protest. So the genealogy—the choreography—of the dancing disease took a new turn.

Narratives of alterity and the creolization of European and colonial iconographies prompted early twentieth-century ethnographic writing to extend the discursive project of mapping political uprisings onto social and corporeal terrain, folding a new wave of theatrical revolts into old fantasies of primitive frenzy. These new scenes described an era of sociopolitical change, genealogically linked to the old but tending towards an imagined common futurity rooted discursively in everything ancient, pre-linguistic, and organic in the long history of a (self-styled) corrupted and alienated West.

In the next chapter, popular culture rooted in black and Latin dance moves erupts in a show of collective and convulsive gestures on the American dance scene, gathered once more into the medical discourse on the dancing disease. Psychoanalytic theory, indebted to primitivist fantasies of the 'savage' and yet simultaneously childlike body, articulates a vision of America colonized by sexually charged spontaneity.

Choreic, jagged moves in the popular dance scene become all the more contentious and simultaneously mimicked as they tap into fantasies of unruly, spirited dancing ascribed to foreigners and to the underclasses—at the same time unraveling a language of desire and of longing for free movement.


PRIMITIVISM AND THE SAVAGE IDEAL Writing in 1950, surrealist anthropologist Michel Leiris (1901-1990) cautioned his read- ers about the ‘poetic and aesthetic emotion’ that the spectacle of a faraway people pro- vided to sentimental observers.' Colonialism, he argued, reflected a fantasy of indigenous wholesomeness and primitive integrity that exalted anthropologists, who were stimulated by the thoughts of revolts and revolutions ema- nating from the subjects of their research. But ethnographers and anthropologists had to fight battles on their home turf first.'' Civil liberties, equality among the sexes, and other pressing political needs had to be addressed in Europe as well as in the colonies. It was not sufficient to gape at colonial subjects rising up on native soil. The nostalgic proximity between European and colonial peoples that Leiris noted, and the theatrical relation that he recognized between European academics and colonial subjects, revealed a philosophical rift. As this and the previous chapter argue, the spectacle of histor- ical crisis spawned an ambivalent body of writ- ing marked by the rise of scientific ideas about cultural difference. This was what Claude Lévi- Strauss (1908-2009), in a 1952 study commis- sioned by the newly formed UNESCO, called the illusion of monstrosity: in lieu of the ‘natural phenomenon’ that the idea of cultural diver- sity might imply, ethnographers were produc- ing a scandal of difference founded on the utter alterity of the ‘savage’, the ‘other’, those who are not ‘from here’ (‘de chez nous’).*

1. Michel Leiris, ‘Lethnographe devant le colonialisme’, in Cing études d’ethnologie (Paris: Denoél/Gonthier, 1969), 83-12______ The idea of the collective, ancient dancing "other"—at once savage, fascinating, and undisciplined—ran through the history of nineteenth- and twentieth-century intellectual culture. Increasingly, as this chapter shows, the fantasy of the primitive dancing "other" was racialized—specifically, made black—and the tension over this other's proximity to 'rational' European man was intensified. No longer only a denizen of the Grecian past or the Oriental colony, the frenzied dancing body was increasingly now understood as indigenous to a new black modernity.

In Burt's terms, the 'alien' body of modernity was primitive, feminine, disruptive, and energetic; it was also a body (and place) to which one (imaginatively) returned, as to a dark and ultimately unrecoverable womb. Further paradigmatic of what Girard calls the 'monstrous double'—as I showed in the previous chapter, an encounter between 'an "I" and an "Other" caught up in a constant interchange of differences'—the 'alien' body of modernity took other bodily forms into itself to become its own (m)other. In becoming 'possessed', in vulturizing and ventril-quizing other corporealities, modern subjects imagined themselves double: at once that which they came from (a fantasy awkwardly conjugated for some with post-Darwinian discomfort at the notion of a common African heritage) and that which they went towards (as I showed in the previous chapter, the shared promise of a new 'third world'); that which they ingested, mimicked, and recorporealized and that which they spit back out, cleaned up, and transformed—performing what Gilroy calls a 'politics of transfiguration', by which oppressors and oppressed continuously undercut one another with cultural and counter-cultural reappropriations.

Modernity emerged contrapuntally to a phantasmatic 'past' that had, according to this ac/dc logic, to be outgrown, superseded (again and again). This was epitomized in the 'African' contribution to modernity of Josephine Baker, what bell hooks describes as Baker's 'lived contradiction': the projection of an Africanist fantasy concocted out of Baker's African-American heritage for Europeans telling her what black dance should or should not be. As Burt notes, Baker's moves, by her own account, were likened to St. Vitus's dance. In the Revue Négre, she wrote: 'One of the critics compared our movements to St Vitus's Dance. "What kind of dance is that?" I asked. "It's a nervous disorder that makes you tremble all over." "That's not a sickness," I retorted. "It's the way we act in church back home." "Here in France, God likes us to kneel quietly." Why didn't God demand the same behaviour in France as in Harlem? It would make things so much easier.'

What Baker saw as normal corporeality 'back home' in Harlem was understood as a sickness in Europe, a nervous disorder hardly distinguishable from Baker's brand of black dance. Burt argues that the language of 'dislocation, disruption and frenzy' used by critics to describe Baker's performances 'might otherwise have summed up the social experiences of metropolitan modernity'. Baker performed freedom from nineteenth-century bourgeois culture, summing up at once a modernist thrust towards social, scientific, and technological progress, Burt points out, and a white European desire to commune with the racial other. For McCarren, modern responses to Baker's ambivalent blackness were symptomatic of a wider trend according to which African and African-American dance signalled the 'potential to represent madness'. The link between neurological, psychiatric, and African figures of disorder was tight. 

Jayna Brown compellingly argues that Baker remained throughout her career a ‘mediating figure between the nations and races’, ostensibly (at least performatively) loyal to De Gaulle but also ‘multi-dispositioned’, representative of primitivism—the ‘[timeless] savage’—in a context of French negrophilia but also more sprawlingly of Haitian, Tunisian, and Vietnamese colonial regimes and the ‘infinitely metropolitan’ sophisticate. Jayna Brown, Babylon Girls: Black Women Performers and the Shaping of the Modern (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2008), 252-254.

‘Negropathy’ and ‘Negromania’ were similarly, for ‘Rip’, direct conduits to the madhouse.’ Jayna Brown, draw- ing from The Key to Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1853), by Harriet Beecher Stowe (1811-1896), fur- ther underscores the science of phrenology in ‘proving’ that blacks were Oriental: not only was the ‘Negro temperament’ ‘vivid’ and fan- ciful, continually possessed by the workings of the imagination, but black, ‘like orientall, nations’-—in Stowe’s terms, ‘the Hebrew of old and the Oriental nations of the present’— ‘incline much toward outward expression, vio- lent gesticulations, and agitating movements of the body’.

McCarren argues that conjugated with this primitivist fantasy was a fascination for all things machinic: cinema, together with ever more rapid industrialization and technologiza- tion, heralded a new choreographic vocabulary of tics and jerks, what would later become the popping and krumping, slow-motion effects, robot imitations, and corporeal fragmentation of hip-hop, or what I further call an alterkinetic aesthetics that favours the skip, the hop, the glide, and the rotation in equal measure, and smooth as well as striated rhythms. In this chap- ter, black and Latin American moves, described as characterizing a primitivist and machinic, hyper-angular modernity, reached a new peak as popular and medical discourses surrounding a deluge of new dance ‘crazes’ persisted in calling them sick, ‘[symptomatic] of an epidemic of con- tagion’, as dance critic André Levinson (1887- 1933) put it.

The 'tumescence' characteristic of the 'new dances' represented a healthy outlet for sexual energy, in the opinion of at least one clinical neurologist and psychiatrist, Dr. A. A. Brill (1874-1948), who was close to Freud at the time. But just as the discourse on sex required tasteful and discreet framing and perpetual qualification, so, too, debates regarding the pathological (or healthy) character of the 'new dances' centered on quantity as well as quality. Too much dancing was problematic; so too angular, flailing, overly theatrical motions (imitating animals, for example), and overt performances of sexual attraction were taboo in much of the European and American popular press, which parroted for the most part the new social sciences.

The fragmentary discourse on the new dances was one in which the entire social apparatus was at stake. 'Reading' the fashion for new dances was reading a social choreography in which a broad range of choreographic aesthetics came into play: some apparently symptomatic of epilepsy and hysteria, others apparently indicative of low social class or foreign status. Ambivalence regarding the healthiness of the 'new dances' and the dance 'craze' was thus ambivalence regarding the way health should look. As this chapter argues, beauty—nearly always construed as the expression of good health and moral rectitude—had at once to be natural and artificial, effortless and crafted. 'Grace' was intentional, cultivated; it differentiated itself from automatic, animal moves. To dance with elegance and grace was to rewrite the body as a body of civilization and modernity.

But, I argue in this chapter, the specter of primitivism continued to haunt lithe, 'modern' figures of beauty, as their precondition and triumphant countersign. The 'modernity' of modern social dancing—most prominently, the tango—was widely imagined to rise out of a disorderly past.

Brown, Babylon Girls, 78. See Harriet Beecher Stowe, A Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin: Presenting the Original Facts and Documents upon Which the Story Is Founded, Together with Corroborative Statements Verifying the Truth of the Work (Boston: John P. Jewett & Co., 1858), 27. Stowe further writes that the 'negro race' is 'peculiarly susceptible and impressible' and particularly 'extravagant' in religious meetings: "They will laugh, weep, embrace each other convulsively, and sometimes become entirely paralyzed and cataleptic", in contrast to the 'cool, logical and practical' 'Anglo-Saxon race' (27-28). Blacks are defined not only in terms of effusive gesture (significantly, as I have shown throughout this book, like another class of 'Orientals', Jews) but also by excessively rapid changes between such seemingly 'peculiar' states, so that convulsions lead to catalepsy.

Monstrous Grace + 273 a fiction conserved and massaged to prove modern society's upward trajectory. Through dance, modernity emerged contrapuntally, as a symbol of ascent and disentanglement. Baker's moves, although 'read' as African, primitive, and machinic, excited the early twentieth-century imagination inasmuch as they eluded full legibility, frustrating the closure of representation. They appeared to many contemporary writers uncanny: familiar and yet foreign, animal and automatic, mechanical and biological. Yet they were highly stylized, careful, deliberate, crafted, artful, and as such potentially repeatable—in short, choreographic. 

As an emphatically choreographic form of what may otherwise look like a sort of nervous dis- ease, St. Vitus's dance (still imagined, in Baker's retelling, as a spontaneous and unrepeatable disorder), Baker's jagged gestures and aesthetic incongruities signalled a performative 'return of the repressed', a term Freud coined around this time to describe the re-emergence of ancient traumas theatricalized in the modern body and mind. By standing in for what was old and diseased and simultaneously for what was fresh and new, Baker appeared on the modern stage as a powerful cipher for the articulation of white and black Europe and America's fraught relationships to their imagined pasts. Her 'banana skirt' was nearly parodic of African sav- agery, yet her grace and choreographic precision were reminiscent to some of the Russian bal- let. Indeed, nearly coincident with a new wave of enthusiasm over stylized 'black' moves was a trend in ancient Greek 'maenad' dances inspired by vase paintings popularized by, among others, the classical scholar Jane Harrison (1850-1928) following her archaeological excavations, as well as the flowing tunics and 'natural' movement of Isadora Duncan (1877-1927)—arguably the most famous of early twentieth-century maenads, for whom dancing was a 'Dionysian ecstasy', an enabler of disindividuation, fem- inine communion, and cathartic collapse.' Influenced by Duncan's romantic brand of Dionysianism and free, 'natural' movement, Vaslav Nijinsky (1889-1950), further spurred on by the visionary impresario Sergei Diaghilev (1872-1929), brought his own brand of primi- tive, titillating, feline sexuality and godlike prowess to the concert hall stage. Soon, as the British popular writer Samuel Beach Chester (b. 1880) wrote, everyone was clad in Russian exot- ica and attempting balletic—as well as tango and other dance—feats."" Dionysianism merged with colonial exoti- cism, bringing black and Oriental moves to western Europe via the American South and Russian East. In Khanna's terms, psychoanalysis was a colonial discipline, drawing from national and colonial archaeology and anthropology to imagine 'the unconscious, the evolutionary tra- jectory of human civilization, and the origins of repression'.1 After Darwin, many whites tried to but could not shake the image of a shared African ancestry, an image that confounded travellers active in the everyday business of colo- nial administration and ethnographic research. Yet many 'moderns' in Europe and America— white and black—aspired to a world of greater racial harmony, even transcendence, reaching imaginatively towards an ever more stylized Africa. The aesthetic passage to modernity was forked: African, Greek, and European at the same time; and aesthetically jagged, rapturous, and smooth. The 'alien' body of a mixed-race modernity discovered exciting angularities in African masks and in Baker's Charleston but recuperated these into a still fraught discourse on disorder, unreason, and the dancing 'craze'.

BLACKNESS AND GESTURAL MODERNITY

'Blackness' is highly disputed terrain, though consistent in concepts of blackness and the recent history of blacks is what Gilroy has called a position 'in but not necessarily of the mod- ern, western world'.16 Modernity in this view is The Ancient Dancer in the Modern World: Responses to Greek and Roman Dance (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 188-208. On the relationship between Duncan, Nijinsky, and ragtime, see also Susan Manning, Ecstasy and the Demon: The Dances of Mary Wigman (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2006), xxiii. 17. Samuel Beach Chester, Secrets of the Tango: Its History and How to Dance It. Fully Illustrated with Photographs and Diagrams (London: T. Werner Laurie, [1914]), 55. 18. Khanna, Dark Continents, 26. 19. Gilroy, The Black Atlantic, 29. 274 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES Western, and though it is composed of black (and brown) men and women, these men and women are marginalized, contained within but cast to the side of an inexorably white centre, in spite of the constant traffic between white and black subjects in what Gilroy terms the intellectual, social, and cultural heritage of the Black Atlantic. For Thomas DeFrantz, blackness can be articulated in aesthetic terms—significantly, a broadly white experience of the illegibility of these terms. Black movements performed on the concert hall stage in the first half of the twentieth century were ‘untidy and dangerous to some white viewers because their aesthetic imperatives were largely inscrutable’." Black dance epitomized an obscure, ‘antimodern’ aesthetics, what DeFrantz characterizes as ‘downward-directed energy, insistent rhythmicity, angularity of line, percussive rupture of underlying flow, individualism within a group dynamic, and access to a dynamic “flash of the spirit” that confirms simultaneously temporal presence and ubiquitous spirituality’" Blackness and Theban, Dionysian Orientalism served as twin phantasms underpinning scientific concepts of modernity, which do not so much sideline black and Oriental others but set them at the heart of the modern enterprise, just where it becomes unhinged from the imagined illegibility and obscurity of the past. According to this reading, modernity appears as articulation, intelligibilization; but, significantly, it requires a fantasy of the unintelligible against which to set this process of bringing to light. Disorderly dance becomes the object of intelligibilization against which modernity sets itself. Rather than suggesting a triumphalist scientism that simply makes light out of the dark, this view argues that intelligibilization is a constant process of negotiation, a constant interplay of sameness and difference, a politics of transculturation and transfiguration. This is not only a ‘white’ problem but a problem of modernity as that which discursively and performatively sets itself in a mimetic relationship to the putatively obscure past. This ‘modernity’ construes disorderly figures of alterity to see itself as like but fundamentally different from its own distortions. Aesthetic ‘modernity’ cannot do without its twisting, ‘Charentonesque’ others. Choreomanias, while not equivalent to ‘black dance’ in the sense DeFrantz suggests, shared many characteristics with it: a purportedly ‘antimodern’ aesthetics, angularity, and insistent rhythmicity. But the choreomanias diverge from this in being even more phantasmatic alien than black dance. The choreomanias, while black, inasmuch as they are imagined as pre- and antimodern, are also characterized, I have shown, by their irregular rhythmicity and disorganized movement, rather than the steady persistence of what DeFrantz characterizes as a deep, ‘downward-directed’ percussive beat. The choreomanias, by and large, suggested ‘upward’ movement, a slightly ‘hysterical’ tendency towards hallucination, as well as the sort of collective Dionysianism that Brazilian artist Hélio Oiticica (1937-1980) describes as dissolving the ‘T’.”” Rather than demonstrating ‘individualism within a group dynamic’, individuals prey to the dancing disease disappeared into groups and collectivities, pathologically losing their individuality in a putatively animal return to a pre-civilized, pre-historical, orgiastic (and now increasingly black) state of being. But before being rewritten as sexually productive (reproductive), the blackness of the modern choreomanias had to be discursively purged of the hypersexuality typically attributed to black dance. These dancers were now black yet white, signalling the transfiguration of a ‘downward’ aesthetic upward.

The paradox of this animal-yet-antique condition beset the discourse on nineteenth-century dancing manias I have described thus far. But with the advent of new animal-like and jagged dances in the twentieth century, a new set of paradoxes emerged. Jazz, tango, and the social dances known as ‘animal dances’ erupted onto the popular and social dancing scene to trouble medical interpretations of the dancing disease. Recast as a popular and social plague emphasizing youth culture and the contamination of black (as well as occasionally Latin) moves among primarily white people, the dancing ‘disease’ now signalled a racially marked hyper-locomotion and extreme gregariousness but also a ‘healthy’ tendency in the white middle classes towards physical sport.

Monstrous Grace * 275 THE JAZZ ERA: THE CAKEWALK AND THE EPILEPTIFORM BLACK Ragtime and then jazz took Europe and America by storm in the first decades of the twentieth century. For Leiris, this represented an intoxicating youth culture light years away from the stuffy formalism of the previous generation. Jazz was animal and nocturnal. In Lage d'homme [Manhood] (1939), his experimental auto-ethnographic novel, Leiris wrote of an early 1920s Parisian world of all-night jazz clubs suffused with tropical heat, orgiastic abandonment, frenzy, possession, and a feeling of religious communion derived from dancing; eroticism; his first substantial encounter with Negroes; and what he called a broadly pervasive yet naive wonderment at the apparent comforts of modern progress as well as the new rhythms that promised a world that was accepting of his and his peers' awakening sexual desires." This culture of fête and jazz was primitive and modern; it was of the moment, and it was exotic. The fête Leiris described in Paris was characterized by dancing, drinking, and relative rhythmic novelty but also uncertainty with respect to modern life and to a pervasive proselytizing culture celebrating modern civilization and war. America was emerging as a military and cultural power, and the Harlem Renaissance, then at its apogee in the 1920s, was rippling over to France. Leiris and his friends wore tapered trousers and pointy shoes 'to look American', he wrote; they jiggled their shoulders in an attempt to do the 'shimmy'."* But 'modernity' was ambivalent: what was new to them was also what they experienced as primitive, in contrast to a different discourse on modernity that was coming out of the World War I trenches and the reconstruction of the West. That modernity was machinic, cold, and anonymous without ecstasy. It smelled of death rather than life. It was steeped in an old European world attempting to grapple with ruin by moving blindly forward without looking back. New dances from the American South made their way to fashionable Parisian night clubs. The bunny hop, the grizzly bear, and soon the Charleston followed in the steps of the parodic 1900s and 1910s cakewalk, bringing a whole new generation of black moves to a Europe giddy with exhaustion from World War I. Whereas the cakewalk, based on ragtime sounds, and according to legend originally performed on southern plantations (for a cake provided by the plantation’s master), mimicked white Americans’ haughty postures and upright stance, animal dances showcased unabashed copulation. The Bunny Hug, as Nadine George-Graves writes, simulated fornicating rabbits, ‘with rapid hopping, shaking, grinding, and wiggling’.* The grizzly bear imitated a dancing bear, with clumsy, heavy steps performed on the toes, the body swaying from side to side, and the couple flopped over onto one another, their arms dangling over each other’s shoulders. Every once in a while, someone would yell out ‘It’s a Bear!’ and dancers might raise their arms, mimicking a clawing motion. The turkey trot similarly engaged a couple’s bent arms waving like turkey wings, while the couple were facing, the man holding the woman at the waist. Again, the man and woman might perform small hops, as the man moved behind the woman with sexual innuendo. Other animal dances included the kangaroo hop, the eagle rock, the horse trot, the kangaroo dip, the chicken scratch, the crab step, the herringbone twist, and the lame duck, while a range of non-animal dances showcased characters and places from the American South, including, most famously, by the 1920s, the Charleston.

Yet, as Gordon has pointed out of the cakewalk, the translation—what I have called the translatio—from ‘Negro’ to white moves was never simple or unidirectional. White music hall performers rechoreographed cakewalk dances for a spectatorship already accustomed to the epileptic performances that had emerged out of Charcot’s clinic and made their way onto Parisian cabaret stages. Epileptic gestures—performed as exaggerated jerkiness, postural inversions, and grimaces—merged on music hall stages with the ‘new’ black moves, seen as contorted, comical, and grotesque. As Gordon notes, the cakewalk evolved towards an epileptic exhibition; 23. Michel Leiris, L’age d’homme, précédé de La littérature considérée comme une tauromachie (Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1939), 159-160. 24. Leiris, L’age d’homme, 162. 25. Nadine George-Graves, ‘Just Like Being at the Zoo”: Primitivity and Ragtime Dance’, in Julie Malnig, ed., Ballroom, Boogie, Shimmy Sham, Shake: A Social and Popular Dance Reader (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2009), 55-71, 61. 26. George-Graves, ‘“Just Like Being at the Zoo,”’ 61-63. What Gilbert called the ‘African virus’ had possessed them like an epidemic of chicken pox.” Gordon further notes Levinson’s chastisement of ‘Negro dance’ as a ‘black virus upon European civilization’ that spread through dance halls; for Levinson, this ‘virus’ was ‘[symptomatic] of an epidemic contagion of society which should concern the pathologist’. As Browning has argued, black and Latin rhythms have quintessentially worried white European and American moralists threatened by the apparently uncontrollable, uncontainable quality that they express. Black music in particular was thought to exercise its ‘voodoo’ on upright (white) citizens vulnerable to contagion and the spectre of death. Yet the extent to which this threat was recuperated and transformed by European culture and society in the early decades of the twentieth century suggests that black culture from the African colonies and the American South—reaching Chicago and Harlem—was also imagined according to myths of alterity and antiquity founded in a fantasy of a primitive Grecian past mingling with the mechanical gestures of neurological disease. Civilization and culture, animal rhythms and childlike irrationality, were two sides of one coin in the medical (and moral) discourse, and though moralists and pathologists alike were concerned with the apparently ‘viral’ spread of blackness on European soil, this ‘virus’ immediately recombined with new strands of jagged gesturality on the ground, further to confound aesthetic delineations.

As a photo advertisement for a vaudeville spoof on the Charleston (Fig. 11.1), the recuperation of black moves by exaggeratedly sick, thin, ungainly, distorted white bodies made these into quintessentially white pathologies: dancers dressed in everyday business attire, a trouser leg half pulled up, eyes bugged out, heavily rimmed in dark paint to suggest fatigue bordering on psychopathological alienation, suggested that whites could not keep up with blacks. The whites are self-mocking, suggesting the recuperation of and possibly imagined ascendancy over an invasion of black moves. The dancers present a caricature of the Charleston, performed most famously by Baker at the Folies Bergére. Significantly, their counter-mimetic performance of her choreography misfires. In a widely reproduced image, Baker poses with her knees pointing outward in perfectly opposing triangles to form a diamond shape, her arms crossed in front of her at right angles in a perfect X (Fig. 11.2). Thus, in making jagged what is otherwise a perfectly symmetrical (and in this sense classical) pose, these vaudeville dancers also caricature the discourse according to which the new popular dances are sick, viral, epidemic—pathologies of (white and black) culture and motion. Offering what I describe as an alterkinetic aesthetic, this comedic spoof on the Charleston and its popularly chastising response recuperates the discursive theatre of disorder in a performative re-enactment according to which racialized gesture and neuromotor disease are positively recombined. White middle-class workers in this version suffer both from a culture of overwork and from the putative exhaustion of too much play. They become ‘crazy’ by dancing too much, and the jagged, angular quality of the new moves gives rise to comedic impotence: they are not suave; not seductive. The black dances have become white in this image, and in becoming white, they are made awkward and ridiculous: not elegant as in Baker's performance. The only 27. Rae Beth Gordon, ‘Les rythmes contagieux d'une danse noire: Le cake-walk’, Intermédialités 16 (2010): 57-81, 68. The literature on primitivism and négritude in the Parisian cultural and artistic avant-garde is vast. See also Petrine Archer-Straw, Negrophilia: Avant-garde Paris and Black Culture in the 1920s (London: Thames and Hudson, 2000); William Rubin, ed., ‘Primitivism’ in Twentieth-Century Art: Affinity of the Tribal and the Modern, 2 vols. (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1984); Carole Sweeney, From Fetish to Subject: Race, Modernism, and Primitivism, 1919-1935 (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2004).

28. Yvette Guilbert, Une heure de musique avec Yvette Guilbert (Paris: Editions Cosmopolites, 1930), 11; cited in Gordon, ‘Les rythmes contagieux’, 79.

29. André Levinson, ‘The Negro Dance: Under European Eyes’, Theatre Arts Monthly 11.4 (1927): 282-293, 282; cited in Gordon, ‘Les rythmes contagieux’, 79.

30. Browning, Infectious Rhythm. Monstrous Grace * 277 FIGURE 11.1 ‘Charleston posed by Ted Rogers, Jien Saergent and Viola Worden who are appear- ing with great success in vaudeville’. The photo appears alongside an article by Curtis Mitchell, ‘Why Dorothy Dances Jazz Steps: Fred Stone, American Comedian, Tells Why He Trained His Daughter in Eccentric Rather Than Classical Dancing’. Originally in Dance Magazine, March 1926, 28-29. Courtesy the Jerome Robbins Dance Division, The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, Astor, Lennox and Tilden Foundations.

way to dance these ‘new’ dances (for whites) is through the self-mocking operation of counter- mimesis, by which the dances are branded as ultimately inaccessible (because too black), yet through transfiguration, they are recuperated into the semiotic system of another genre: the familiar white hysteric. According to this redis- tribution of the aesthetic politics of jagged dance, colonial hysteria discussed in earlier chap- ters gave way to a white brand of hysteria that was contrapuntally articulated against the grain of black animal dances whose sexual play, when purged, left little more than a ghoulish body. 278 ° TANGO TEAS: ‘GRACEFUL’ RECREATION

Meanwhile, tango was increasingly described in the first decades of the twentieth century as a new epidemic dance ‘craze’, rippling through well-heeled society in Paris and New York, where the institution of tango teas, or thés dansants brought a distinctly African-inflected Latin American exoticism to the social dance circuit. Peaking in the spring of 1914, ‘when the modern dance-craze was reaching its mad- est exuberance’, in one dance master’s terms, COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES FIGURE 11.2 Postcard of Josephine Baker performing the Charleston at the Folies-Bergére, 1926. Photo by Stanislaus Julian Walery. an explosion of self-educational guides to dan- cing emerged, instructing aspiring dancers in the proper steps and etiquette.*' From Samuel Beach Chester's Secrets of the Tango: Its History and How to Dance It (c. 1914) to Maurice’s Art of Dancing: an autobiographical sketch with complete descriptions of modern dances and full illustrations showing the various steps and positions (1915),______ The aesthetic figure of the ‘torque’ that Schwartz has 31. Maurice Mouvet, Maurice's Art of Dancing: An Autobiographical Sketch with Complete Descriptions of Modern Dances and Full Illustrations Showing the Various Steps and Positions (New York: Schirmer, [1915]), 72. 32. Chester, Secrets of the Tango, 20. Monstrous Grace * 279 put forward—describing a nineteenth- and early twentieth-century predilection for torsion or unwinding as of a coil—was reaching a peak with the sinuous tango, and although the recently explosive Le Sacre du printemps had just hit Paris in late May 1913 with its violently percussive beats and insistently syncopated rhythms, tango promised a smoother but no less titillating groove, inspired, Chester noted, by the ‘furore’ the Russian dancers had provoked.** Paradoxically, tango, though a ‘dance mania’, inasmuch as it ‘spread more universally than any dance since the world began’,** in Chester's hyperbolic language, promised to return the world to a state of litheness and grace. The polka, which had made its way to Britain from Bohemia, had started ‘the jerky craze’, in Chester's admonishing view, that continued in the cakewalk and the rough-and-tumble animal dances of the ragtime era—the grizzly bear and the turkey trot—but tango now promised to return dancers to healthy, elegant refinement.*° Citing the physical culturist A. Wallace Jones, Chester noted that the tango ‘gives exceptionally beneficial physical results’.*° Sociability, exercise, and improved posture, aiding digestion, respiration, and circulation, were among the fabulous paybacks the tango promised.*” Writing from London, Chester applauded the joie de vivre that tango dancing revealed among his otherwise glum co-nationals. Healthiness countermanded otherwise unsavoury aspects of the dance, and although distinctly Parisian in its undertones and exotically Latin American and gypsy in its perpetually mythologized roots, the tango could be recuperated into an English economy of good posture and good grace. Everywhere it went, the tango seemed to conserve a dangerous exoticism and yet mould itself to local norms. In spite of the risqué sensuousness of the dance, in which men and women were enlaced more closely than ever before, the tango was articulated as a new, free, sophisticated practice whose benefits to health and well-being countermanded any morally deleterious effects on dancers not otherwise accustomed to winding their arms around one another morning, noon, and night. The tango had travelled. Although perhaps an extreme example of the international mobility of the dance teacher, Mouvet represented a brand of roving expert who picked dance styles up where he went, developed his own, and became increasingly sought out as a performer and instructor at once. Winding his way through Paris, London, Vienna, Budapest, Monte Carlo, and New York, Mouvet danced before royalty and ambassadors, gaining and losing dance partners along the way. He noted that the waltz, which had swept through Vienna and Paris before making its way to the United States, was replaced stateside with an effervescence of new styles, ‘as if by some wave of religious mania the entire country became obsessed with the dance- desire’.** He attributed this ‘frenzy’ to the ‘twentieth century's restless yearning for novelty’,*® just as he recognized that this facile passion for fads might be superseded by careful mastery of a few standard and versatile steps. In Chester's terms, the tango had overshadowed all other dances and pastimes; in its 'engulfing, cataclysmic proposition it is far ahead of polo or yacht-ing; its soft tentacles extend in all directions, squeezing vitality into the bondage of pleasure.' It was not exceptional only for its exoticism, as it displaced other exotic acts. Rather, tango was global: 'The War Dance of the Red Indian, the Highland Fling, the Irish Jig—all are interred. Arabian dances have been lost in the Arabian Nights. The merely Montmartre [sic] efforts at the Moulin Rouge are forgotten. Fabulous fan-cies of the imagination are easily eclipsed in one mighty, overwhelming reality, the Tango of to-day. Whether it is the Tango Argentino or the Tango of today.

'So far as dancing is concerned, [the tango] is a revolution. It is an extraordinary change—an absolute volte-face from the jerky dances which have ruled the ball-rooms for the past few years. These dances—the one-step, the two-step, and variations of their kind, pleasantly known as the Bunny-Hug, the Grizzly-Bear and the Turkey-Trot—emphatically did not make for grace. The Tango, on the other hand, is a particularly graceful dance . . . . The Polka is to blame for a lot. It really started the jerky craze, from which we have never really recovered. The Tango will tend to check this and make us more graceful again.'


Tango styles varied, but the tango 'engulfed' everyone 'the same'. Ballroom and tango classes and salons mushroomed across Europe and America in the first decades of the twentieth century. Tango teas emerged in the 1910s to allow women and men to dance not only in the evening but in the afternoon, and soon in the morning, too. Chester notes a newspaper article exclaiming at the ubiquity of tango, now danceable 'at Every Meal!': 'After Tango Teas, Tango Dinners and Tango Suppers—Tango Breakfasts'. 'Not, of course', Chester hastens to add, 'couples who prance round the breakfast table at one’s home, but eleven o'clock affairs at one of the West End cafés. Such is the latest development of the latest craze. So profitable have Tango experts found the “boom”, that every day more experts are coming to London from all parts of the world. When the lucky dancers are not dancing, the majority of them are teaching ambitious learners.'"

Widely seen, as cultural historian Lewis Erenberg has pointed out in his now classic account of fin-de-siécle American popular dance culture, as an occasion for married and unmarried women to rub shoulders with insalubrious migrants, often under the cover of an exped- ition to go shopping, tango teas also offered a relatively above-ground retort to the sup- posedly grimy and crime-ridden culture of the still more dubious cabaret.* But cabarets, too, underwent a transformation during this period. All-day dancing emerged in tandem with a cul- ture of all-night entertainment during which patrons were increasingly invited to join in the show. In Erenberg's account, a booming world of night-time performances had transformed New York nightlife in the period between 1912 and 1916, with lavish halls boasting dining tables spilling out onto dance floors, out of which the new ballroom stars emerged—most promin- ently, Irene and Vernon Castle. Initially, dancers offered stand-alone performances; later they mingled with patrons, and soon restaurantgoers themselves built up an appetite to learn the same steps they saw. Although this suggested a sophisticated society of Broadway glitter, Erenberg points out the ‘childlike’ pleasures of play that these events occasioned. The ‘Midnight Frolic’ at the Ziegfeld Follies invited patrons to wear silly hats and blow noisemakers, ‘recreating’ the ‘prerational and emotionally expressive period of childhood’ when the world was all ‘excitement’ and ‘careless fun’. In Erenberg’s analysis, the dance ‘craze’ was a return to childhood and an opportunity to break down the long-standing cultural hold of the Protestant work ethic over the middle classes, who found that they could let go inasmuch as they trespassed onto exotic cultural terrain.

The argument is familiar. In Lepecki’s terms, it rehearses ‘a familiar theme in critical race studies: that of the animation of whiteness’s melancholic nature by energizing, contagious, black “soul power”. The animation of whiteness by black soul and black motions’, Lepecki writes, ‘participates entirely . . . of narratives that equate dance with the uncanny infusion of life in the corpse’. Equating ‘this “soul power”, this surge of motion in the apathetic European body that infects and suspends the endemic melancholia of whiteness every time it witnesses the spectacle of uncanny motions’, from the slave plantation to the post-colonial dance hall, with ‘the primal fantasy underlying . . . colonialist exploitation’, Lepecki suggests that Western dancing is ‘fantastically conceived’ as the uncanny animation of inert corporeal matter.

Awkwardly residing outside the body, in the act of spiritual infusion of vitality into the mechanical (white) body from an exogenous (generally foreign or racially other)—spiritually potent—source, ‘dance’ becomes, in the Western imagination, ontologically prior to a ghostly body—a body that is already (almost) dead. Resonant with DeFrantz’s suggestion that black dance is spiritually charged in the white Western imagination, this model of dance also rehearses an Aristotelian version of conception whereby femininity provides the matter or body and masculinity the spirit or soul in a new being: here, blackness, this time titillatingly masculine and hypersexed, animates a limp white body that nevertheless resists total transformation into 40. Chester, Secrets of the Tango, 10. 41. Chester, Secrets of the Tango, 49. 42. Lewis A. Erenberg, Steppin’ Out: New York Nightlife and the Transformation of American Culture, 1890-1930 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984), 79. 43, Erenberg, Steppin’ Out, 127-128. 44, Lepecki, Exhausting Dance, 109. 45, Lepecki, Exhausting Dance, 109. Monstrous Grace + 281 the imaginary hypersexed blackness and spirituality of the black body-spirit. The white body borrows, dances, but only so far. In the miscegenation of the new Euro-American moves out of African and African-American dance cultures, a part-white, part-black corporeality emerges on the modern stage constantly to negotiate a process of monstrous doubling, counter-mimicry, and creolization, what Edouard Glissant calls a relational poetics, a nostalgic métissage con- stantly displacing itself.*° The popular recuperation of so-called alien (largely black) moves by primarily white middle-class bodies in the first decades of the twentieth century also resulted in these moves’ re-indigenization, their ‘whitening’. The contamination went both ways. In Chester's terms, tango was international: it 'encircles the globe ... [increasing] like a snowball, accumulating steps as it moves along';*1 but it lost some of its supposedly primitive danger in becoming global, civilized. Though rousingly 'originating in "the wilds"', tango became tamer, 'highly complex and even delicate', Chester wrote, 'by passing through many phases of worldly life'. Paris in particular served as a cultural crucible at this time in the English imaginary, at once reaching over to colonial Africa and vaguely accessible to the upright English West. Everything exotic and mad, it seemed to the English, passed through Paris. Yet the exact location of tango's origins was unclear, alternately attributed to ancient Pyrrhic war dances among the Greeks, to the chica—what Chester called an 'unpleasant' South American dance said to have originated from the 'negroes'—or to the slightly more (to him) palatable Spanish tango, which had reputedly travelled back to Europe from Latin America. Tango was undeniably other, temporally and geographically. The haziness of its origins only added to its mystique. Indeed, tango gained its modernity—it became a paradigmatically and paradoxically 'modern' dance—inasmuch as it figuratively reached back to and simultaneously transcended a supposedly uncouth state of natural abandon.

The colonialist and classist overtones in Chester's account are clear: with the Briton, Chester wrote, 'the fate of the Tango is in safe keeping. He took it up when it had a questionable reputation, and already that reputation is vanishing like a thin mist swept from a mountain-top by the morning sun.'1° Tango, in becoming English, gained the articulacy only an upright, educated Henry Higgins could grant an Eliza Doolittle pulled up from out of the gutter. Like the contemporaneous cakewalk and later the Charleston, tango dances were rooted in underground cultures, which they exoticized and rewrote: with the tango, working-class, often foreign, choreographies came to the 'surface' of polite society and—transfigured—almost as quickly disappeared from view.

Only a few years before the tango burst onto the international social dance scene in the early 1910s, the notoriously violent 'Apache' dance, borrowed from stylized gang fighting among the Parisian underclass and the fiction of Native American warrior culture after which it was named, made its way to the genteel salons of Paris and New York. In the case of the Apache, it was literally drawn from the underground taverns of Paris. Mouvet, its greatest exponent and popularizer, characterized the event as a true 'sensation'.2 The Apache was a 'peculiarly vicious and savage dance' full of 'primitive savage grace', but carefully mastered, it could be rehearsed with all the outward form of the emotion and none of the actual brutality. In 1909 Mouvet had been taken by a fellow dancer at the Moulin Rouge, Max Dearly (1874-1943), to the underworld of the Paris Halles, 'down a flight of dark, evil-smelling stairs, badly lighted and gruesome'.

282 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES ‘rough’ world, full of Apaches—the underworld ‘gunmen of Paris’—playing poker, with their ‘girls’. A ‘rickety’ piano with stained keys, played by a ‘villainously ugly little hunchback’, whose ‘deformity took on a grotesque menace’ in this light, accompanied the dance they had come to see and soon take, like a pair of colonial travelers or wayward modern-day Orpheuses, back up to the Parisian glitterati.61 The dance, performed to a valse Chaloupée, the ‘waltz of the Apache’, began with a slap across the mouth, delivered by the Apache with nonchalance to a young woman, ‘his girl’, who consented to carrying out the dance with him. At its conclusion, she lay limp on the floor, and the Apache returned to his gaming. Mouvet and Dearly learned the steps from the Apaches, thrilled at the ‘sensation’ it would create all over Paris. When Mouvet, after six weeks of practice, took his version of the dance to the Café de Paris with his partner, Leona, both had practiced mimicking the ‘terrible gestures’ of the Apaches. Mouvet dropped his jaw in the same ‘grimly vicious reproduction of brutality that had crept into [the Apache’s] face’ when Mouvet had witnessed the dance first-hand; so, too, Leona ‘trained her features to something between abject fear and devotion’. The performance had its effect, and ‘for a little while’, Mouvet wrote, ‘I was an Apache, more ruthless, more savage, more violent, more fearless than any of them. The sensation astonished even myself. I had never known such excitement in that café before’.72 Handsomely paid back for their labor and the ‘intense nervous strain’ the performance had provoked in them, Mouvet and his partner—together with this ‘new’ dance— became, as he put it not too modestly, the talk of tout Paris.73 Soon, Mouvet and his partner were invited to Biarritz to dance before King Edward VII (1841-1910), one of numerous monarchs to enjoy the frisson that such a stylized performance of lawlessness and violence could provoke. The tango, which was brought to Paris, according to Mouvet, in one of many apocryphal stories of its emergence, by some South American dancers who found their way to the Café de Paris, would soon follow. The new dances, including the Apache and ever proliferating variations on the tango, were rough, brazen, and sinuous but also ‘alluring’, ‘insinuating’, and ‘subtle’,84 and though performed with great control, evoked a world inaccessible to most audiences and performers. Inevitably, apologists and detractors vied for the last word. In a vitriolic rebuke by the evangelist preacher Mordecai Ham (1877-1961), the new dances were ‘satanic’. Quoting a speech Dr. Frank Richardson gave to the Medical Association of New Jersey, Ham argued that the dances were ‘impure, contaminating and deadly’. Dr. S. Grover Burnett of Kansas City, former president of the medical school of the University of Missouri, also quoted by Ham, claimed that ‘one-tenth of the insane of this country have lost their minds on account of troubles which may commonly be traced to modern dances’.

The language of satanism appears throughout. See e.g. 41. Ham, who argues that there can be no Christian who is also a dancer, further suggests that ‘the Greek word komo or komos translated “rioting” in Romans 13:13 and “rev- ellings” in Galatians 5:21, and “revellings” in I Peter 4:3 meant dancing in the original’: dancing was not only ‘lascivious’ and ‘wan- ton’, it was, moreover, an incitement to revolt (17).
Ham drew extensively from medical and other ‘authorities’ and was not unique in his reprobation at the time. See e.g. Beryl and Associates, eds., Immorality of Modern Dances (New York: Everitt and Francis and S. F. McLean, 1904), who attribute a lust for bodily contact to round and square dances, arguing that modern square dances con- tain ‘a great deal of the indelicate French dance of the eighteenth century, called the “Branle”, consisting of several persons joining hands, leaping in circles and keeping each other in continual motion’, as well as the ‘immodest Spanish “Pavane”, in which the per- formers look maliciously at each other, strutting like peacocks, fluttering, fondling, cooing and wooing, approaching and retreating and imitating something in the animal kingdom, until at last . . . both parties rush like maniacs to the wild close embrace . ... To some extent they imitate the lecherous Satyrs and the deliriously lustful Bacchantes, whom history describes as frolicsome and addicted to various shameful kinds of sensual enjoyment’. The modern dances were thus animal and foreign, as well as dissolutely and madly Dionysian. Beryl and Associates, Immorality of Modern Dances, 37-38.

Ham, Light on the Dance, 27. Monstrous Grace + 283 worker productivity were among the social ills that beset all those who danced without ‘put- ting daylight’ between them. What’s more, according to the Swedish-American psycholo- gist Hans Huldricksen, further quoted by Ham, ‘shameless extravagance, voluptuous dances and unbridaled [sic] luxury and profligacy’ gave rise to nothing less than “The War Disease’, the most alarming alleged result of these ‘extravagant entertainments’. Like the Ghost Dance among the Plains Indians, ‘reckless luxury’, epitomized by English costume balls at Covent Garden, was said to threaten destabilization of the moral order, lead- ing to social dissolution and death.” Although these carefully hand-picked examples served to authorize Ham’s own rancorous preaching, they reflected widespread currents of malaise circu- lating concomitantly with the otherwise buoy- ant spirit of play and loosening of social mores that was rippling through 1910s and 1920s Europe and America. The language of reprobation was rising to the same heights of hyperbolic distortion as ear- lier portrayals of dance manias. According to a Sun editorial, the new ‘dances are a reversion to the grossest practices of savage man’; they were ‘based______ The so-called 'tango pirates'—lower-class men who seduced higher-class women at tango teas—were barbarous and decadent, egregiously predatory, and, paradoxically, effeminate in their predilection for round-the-clock dancing.™* Admonitions against the threat to young girls were paramount. But women and girls (and effeminate men) were not the only ones who enjoyed the new dance regime. As a McClure’s story, 'Dance-Mad Billy' (1915), makes clear, women were sometimes the last to let down their guard and get dancing. Once they did, sometimes with their partners in life and some-times with partners acquired on the dance floor, they found that they could network, socialize, and exercise all at once. Dancing, for wives as for husbands, boosted creative inspiration and productivity and reinjected married life as well as work with joie de vivre.® The so-called new dance craze fit every moral agenda, simultaneously boosting energy, sap-ping energy, consolidating relationships, and dissolving relationships. As Wagner has pointed out, critics cited rising numbers of divorces during this period, attributing the breakdown of society to the uncontrollable dancing fad (as well as to feminine emancipation). The harshest indictments emerging out of the ensuing decades suggested that the ebullience of the Roaring Twenties, leading to the dramatic Wall Street crash of October 1929, could be traced back to flapper culture and the rage for loose clothes, defiance of corsets, and too-close but also too angular and gangly dance styles. Simultaneously, a culture of wholesomeness emerged, rearticulating the vivacity of modern dancing in terms of social health. Not only were individuals and couples benefiting; social mores at large would be cleaned up with correct posture, controlled socializing, and, according to the new discourse on wholesomeness, a proper channelling of spontaneous, childlike energies into respectable and graceful corporeal forms.

The Castles: Healthy Dancing for the White Middle Classes

Irene and Vernon Castle were at the forefront of this trend. Establishing a thriving business of social dance lessons targeted at young women and men who would not otherwise venture out into lower-class dancing establishments, the Castles argued that dancing was healthy, proper, and good. In their terms, 'dancing, properly executed, is neither vulgar nor immodest, but, on the contrary, the personification of refinement, grace, and modesty. Our aim is to uplift dancing, purify it, and place it before the public in its proper light.' When this has been done, we feel convinced that no objection can possibly be urged against it on the grounds of impropriety, but rather that social reformers will join with the medical profession in the view that dancing is not only a rejuvenator of good health and spirits, but a means of preserving youth, prolonging life, and acquiring grace, elegance, and beauty.

Modern dance was healthy and good because it was graceful; it worked in the service of beauty and youth, offering 'clean fun' and 'healthy relaxation' 'to offset the hard work of the day'. The Castles' short instructional handbook concluded with a brief article, 'Dance and Health', by Dr. J. Ralph Jacoby, who argued that dance, as the 'practice of joyousness', also developed the 'power of control': properly exercised, the body could become strong and house a strong will.

This Grecian virtue, also highlighted by the Castles' dance school superintendent, Mrs. Elisabeth Marbury (1856-1933), in her introduction to the handbook, suggested that the 'grace and beauty and classic rhythm' of modern dancing descended from ancient Oriental (specifically Theban) tomb dances, which came to the West via Rome. For Marbury, modern America traced its lineage back to Thebes, paradoxically to Dionysus, the wily Theban god. But what made these dances modern was their transcendence of this ancient heritage. They were modern because they heralded from the Dionysian East and because they purified, regularized, and updated these ancient sepulchral rites. Their modernity was, implicit in Marbury’s terms, contrapuntal. It was also smooth.

There was no 'hopping' in the Castles' modern dancing, no 'contortions of the body', no 'flouncing of the elbows', 'twisting of the arms', no 'fantastic dips', Marbury wrote. It did not matter much that these contortions, dips, and 'hoppings' referred primarily to black and black-inspired moves: the bunny hop, the grizzly bear, the turkey trot, many of which playfully imitated animal gaits (and which, as Brown notes, Irene Castle learned from the black dancer and former chorus line member at the Harlem Darktown Follies, Ethel Williams).

The tango, likewise lifted out of its purportedly dark and dirty Argentinian heritage—became heir of the 'stately' minuet. In the Castles' version, 'there is in it no strenuous clasping of partners, no hideous gyrations of the limbs, no abnormal twisting, no vicious angles'. Instead, 'the Castle Tango is courtly and artistic', Marbury stressed. All 'folk' roots were at once mentioned and cast aside; modern dancing was emphatically that which elevated itself out of the imagined primeval muck of ancient times, darker races, and lower classes. Modernity in her view was healthful, hearty, and adroit; significantly, it was also defined in contrast to a version of the past fantasized as twisting, gyrating, and irregular, as well as Oriental and unrefined. 'Shuffles and twists and wriggles and jumps are no longer words to be used in connection with dancing', the Castles wrote. Dancing should not be done in a 'romping spirit', with the whole body, but with the feet primarily, while the upper body remained erect. The Castles' tango was a stately and slow dance, 'simple, and not full of jerky and complicated steps'. Yet in order to highlight this triumphant overcoming of the old uncouth dances, the new dances had also spectrally to encompass these as their implied negatives: their black, Latin, lower-class, and immigrant origins, which appeared almost sous rature, under erasure, carefully 67. Mr. & Mrs. Vernon Castle, Modern Dancing (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1914), 17. 68. Elisabeth Marbury, ‘Introduction’, in Castle, Modern Dancing, 19-29, 24-27. 69. J. Ralph Jacoby, ‘Dance and Health’, in Castle, Modern Dancing, 173-176, 175-176. 70. Marbury, ‘Introduction’, 19-20. 71. Brown, Babylon Girls, 157, 164, 171. Brown further notes that the Castles hired James Reese Europe and his Society Orchestra to play at private dance functions they hosted, after which ‘high society would hire only black musicians’; yet black dancers, whose moves white dance professionals assimilated—as novelties—into their own acts, increasingly worked, ‘with a few exceptions’, ‘behind the scenes, informally and unrecognized’ (170-172; see also 210-216). 72. Marbury, ‘Introduction’, 20. 73. Castle, Modern Dancing, 39 74. Castle, Modern Dancing, 86. Monstrous Grace + 285 recuperated into a clean, white body culture. As the Castles write in ‘Castle House Suggestions for Correct Dancing’: Do not wriggle the shoulders. Do not shake the hips. Do not twist the body. Do not flounce the elbows. Do not pump the arms. Do not hop—glide instead. Avoid low, fantastic, and acrobatic dips. Stand far enough away from each other to allow free movement of the body in order to dance gracefully and comfortably. . . . Drop the Turkey Trot, the Grizzly Bear, the Bunny Hug, etc. These dances are ugly, ungraceful, and out of fashion.” The Castles’ instructions are composed almost entirely of negatives. Aspiring dancers wanting to learn the Castle House style of dancing—the ‘correct’ style—are enjoined to drop all the playful, recognizable black elements of the ragtime-era animal dances coming out of the plantation South. The ‘correct’ style, in the Castles’ influential view, is emphatically smooth: dancers glide rather than hop. They succeed in diverting attention away from their bodies and the potential for sexual arousal arising from these bodies’ proximity to one another, presenting instead a polite style of dancing as prescriptive as it is controlled. The Darwinian language of upward motion and civilized progress out of ungainliness, animality, and downward stooping suffuses the text the Castles propose. Blackness is spectral in their high-society steps: in Brown's terms, subject to ‘erasure’. “The black subject’, Brown writes, ‘is evacuated, removed’. Paradoxically, this process of removal was effected by way of ‘absorption’: white Americans did not try to become black but to ‘absorb’ ‘the slave body’, ‘its power’, and thus to ‘affirm its servitude’.”© The process of making black bodies invisible still, yet again, enabled a further transfiguration of blackness by which American whiteness appeared through ever-evolving operations of ‘willful misrecognition’.”” As in other cases I have described in this book, the fiction of a savage underbelly underpins the language of modern dance in a popular discourse on bodily modernity. Modern dancing erects itself phantasmatically out of the supposedly disorganized, irregularly choreographed past, which it conjugates with a new, efficient bodily futurity. For Bergson, a concept that encompasses its opposite is always richer and more complex than any other: chaos implies order, which it distorts; non-being implies being; the possible implies the real.” Modernity likewise implies savagery, antiquity, irregularity, and an ancient type of motion that underlies but is opposite to the proper expression of good health. In other words, modernity is underpinned by a fantastical corporeal disorder, a dancing disease which it is modernity's supposed burden to purge, albeit with as much zeal as was apparently displayed in the disorder in the first place. Again, the operation of counter-mimicry is arresting. Not only is the 'mania' for modern dancing virus-like, zealously purging and amending an older, more pernicious dancing disease, but these older and newer manias are suspiciously similar in tone.

The dancing the Castles and their acolytes promoted was in their view natural, childlike, and purportedly universal. A good rag, they wrote, compelled one to move. Movement was the expression of a healthy body and a sound mind, even a disposition towards pleasure. 'If we bar dancing from the world', Marbury wrote, 'we bar one of the supreme human expressions of happiness and exultation. The tiny child skips for joy and prances to the music of the hand organ long before it knows the difference between happiness and sorrow. In time of festival in many countries dancing is the key-note of the gathering.'

Learning to dance was to share in a universal culture of happiness yet to distance oneself from the very expressions of joy that seemed to result in sexually charged, ebullient, and ungainly body postures elsewhere. Irene Vernon famously became an icon of the New Woman, carefree and healthy but polished. She posited dance as a beauty aid, a slimming device, an elixir of youth; a natural and easy way to maintain naturally rosy cheeks without cosmetic aid. She reformed fashions and hairstyles, favouring softer corsets, more comfortable shoes, and a close crop—the famous.

At the same time, her celebration of the vigorous, healthy and 'youthful spirit' at times hazardously approached the fascistic body culture that National Socialists hailed less than two decades later. Wholesomeness, in her view, a 'contagious' and a 'hilarious' force, exuded unmitigated pride in youthful bodies, epitomizing the rugged, can-do spirit of the West.*°

Clean, vigorous dancing girls and boys were signs of moral overcoming and spiritual as well as physical advantage, corporeal trophies in a bright new world that believed it rose resolutely up out of the imagined vulgarity of African-American slavery and cultural overdependence on a decadent European past.

HEALTHY TUMESCENCE: FREUD, BRILL, AND SEXUAL TABOO

The borderline against which an ancient and chaotic sort of dancing could be fixed moved constantly. As I have shown, 'bad', irregular dancing happened in the elusive past, and elsewhere; it was also what cropped up in the present as the spontaneous expression of archaic disorderly ways. In that respect, it was properly modern, but only inasmuch as it revealed modern stresses, modern modes of acting out according to more primitive corporeal forms. Accordingly, the first decades of the twentieth century saw an explosion of writing on dance 'crazes'. Virtually every decade of the twentieth century had its own craze, from the cakewalk and the Charleston to the Lindy hop, the grizzly bear, the bunny hug, and the swing to the twist, the mambo, disco, and eventually raves. What remained constant was the language of contagion and moral outrage at the animal, primitive, ugly, and always too fast tempo of the new moves, as well as their situation at the frontiers of white civilized society, often in black or Latin quarters and among the supposedly degenerate youth. But running through the pathologizing refrain of these public admonitions was a contrary trend, extolling the virtues of dancing for individual and social—often sexual—health. No longer just a strange and wonderful excrescence from historical antiquity, with odd appearances among exotic peoples in the present day, dance manias in the first half of the twentieth century came to be described as squarely contemporary affairs tapping into what came increasingly to be understood as humans’ healthy primal urges to move, to dance, and to shake. Dancing frequently or at length and with abandon, in this respect, was described in morally ambivalent terms. It was healthy inasmuch as it was an expression of the fundamental workings of the human mechanism (the impulse to move and mate through sexualized attraction rituals); and it was suspect inasmuch as those engaging in such disinhibited dancing were evidently failing to suppress their basic animal urges.

Freud early on set the stage for this ambivalent moral stance, following his studies with Charcot at the Salpétrière in the 1880s and his continued exploration of hysterical symptoms in his private practice. Unlike Charcot, Freud saw hysterical gesticulations and delusional beliefs as caused by suppressed sexuality, often provoked by early childhood trauma. Although Charcot found the seat of hysteria in the patient’s autonomous nervous system, for Freud hysteria was ultimately the product of psychological trauma located in the patient’s mind: the patient’s mental rather than physiological apparatus. It could frequently be cured, he found, by talking.

His comparison in Totem and Taboo between what he described as the neurotic life of children and that of savages further anchored spontaneous, apparently meaningless gesture into a primitivist discourse aligned with the world of art. Pablo Picasso (1881-1973), Georges Braque (1882-1963), and other contemporaries of Freud had discovered in the masks of colonial Africa a new aesthetic regime founded in jagged angularity, one that sat comfortably with the hypothesis that primitive men and women held the key to childlike discoordination and uncensored motor impulses. This primitivist aesthetic, which Burt describes as constitutive of modern art and choreography, depended upon what Martha Graham (1894-1991) would later describe as a means of retrieving ‘ancestral footsteps’, ‘cultures from the past’. With the rise in aesthetic enthusiasm for Dionysianism among the Cambridge Ritualists, a small group of classical scholars eager to reinstitute Dionysus as the god of ecstatic pleasure, Freud’s brand of primitivism joined early comparative anthropology, neurology, colonial medicine, archaeology, and classics in founding new lines of thought around primitive sexuality. Heavily indebted, like the Cambridge Ritualists, to Greek tragedy in his iconic rewriting of the Oedipus myth, Freud read widely and pilfered from the new fields, borrowing as much from early comparative ritualism as he gave to the new psychological method. Active at Oxford as well as Cambridge at the turn of the twentieth century, the Ritualists—most prominently Harrison and Gilbert Murray (1866-1957)—believed that Greek tragedy originated in a magical, primitive, prehistoric fertility rite that celebrated the death and rebirth of Dionysus. 

Working on the heels of early comparative anthropology, particularly the pioneering work of E. B. Tylor in "Primitive Culture" (1871) and Frazer in "The Golden Bough," the Ritualists saw productive comparisons between the primitive life of savages and ancient Greece. Similarly influenced by Tylor and Frazer's work, Freud reprised their comparative enthusiasm and reached into the past in compiling his iconic study of infantile recurrence and totemic primitivism. Though in parts barely more than an extended paraphrase of Frazer's writing, "Totem and Taboo" lays the groundwork for a renewed brand of scientific thinking about the past: antiquity, in Freud's analysis, was little more than the primal seat of modernity's traumatic wound. Incest taboos in particular could be found among 'savages', neurotics, and children, suggesting that the similarity between these groups differentiated them generally from 'civilized' man. More important, the repression of incest and other highly sexualized taboos gave way to complex cases of individual distress and widespread social disorder.

With his recuperation of ancient Greek anthropological culture into his analysis of 'savage' life, Freud rearticulated the discourse on primitive corporeality as hinging on interior processes and inarticulate pasts. The primitive within us was, for Freud, axiomatic; so, too, our capacity to display primitive behavior was, in turn, fundamental. At our core, for Freud, we were still pre-linguistic and infantile; we only covered this up more or less well with 'civilization'; fittingly, outrageous and superstitious behaviors were still pervasive in human culture. This was not necessarily a bad thing.

Freud's English translator, Brill, a clinical psychiatrist and neurologist at Columbia University in New York, argued that 'dance manias' were healthy affairs. In an article published in the New York Medical Journal, "The Psychopathology of the New Dances" (1914), Brill suggested that 'the present dancing mania' was decidedly an 'epidemic' affair, a 'psychic epidemic' well known to psychiatrists familiar with such phenomena as the folie à deux. More to the point, the 'present dancing epidemic' was 'not new to history. For centuries dancing manias broke out in different countries', Brill wrote, 'and although they were not as widespread as the present one, they aroused as much, if not more, attention'.

Comparing the present mania to the familiar assortment of paradigmatic cases, Brill noted that dancing epidemics had broken out in Aachen in 1374 and Strasbourg in 1518—and had been cured through popular appeal to St. Vitus. Like religious crusades, they were violent enthusiasms highly transmissible from person to person. The present epidemic in contrast was not religious, Brill wrote, but was virtually global: it 'spread like wildfire over the whole civilized world'. 'Everybody', Brill wrote, 'almost the whole world, is dancing the new dances'.

Brill decided to witness the dances himself. What he found surprised him. Whereas he agreed with friends and patients that the dances were 'wild and emotional', he also noted that they 'offered more muscular exertion, more contact, and more motion' than the old dances—particularly the waltz—and therefore, as he put it, 'more opportunity for tumescence'. The dances quite literally provoked people to be aroused and to copulate. As he put it, the new dances, like the old ones, satisfied a fundamental sexual need: they were 'manifestly erotic' and thus provided an opportunity for 'emotional discharge' and 'gratification'. But why were these new dances more popular than the old styles? Brill decided to conduct a survey by distributing a questionnaire to 'a few hundred enthusiastic dancers,' approached by his friends and patients. The questions focused on whether the participants had ever become sexually excited while dancing the new dances or while watching the new dances, and whether they had experienced similar feelings with the old dances.

After a few months, Brill collected responses from 342 people, including 119 women and 223 men. Only 14 men and eight women admitted to having become sexually excited while dancing the new dances, and 16 men and nine women admitted to having become sexually excited while watching the new dances. Eleven men and six women said they had become sexually excited while dancing or watching the old dances. Brill concluded that a very small minority of men and women were sexually aroused by the new dances, and there was no difference between the new and the old styles.

Brill found that nearly half of the men and all of the women who had responded in the affirmative were known to him and displayed 'hyperesthetic sexuality.' They experienced sexual excitement from activities like riding in an automobile, bicycling, or horseback riding. A small majority of the women, moreover, had for various reasons been deprived of normal sexual contact and were thus plausibly more prone to sexual arousal.

Brill suggested that watching dance was at least as sexually arousing as dancing. He concluded that observers who became vexed suffered an excess of sexual feeling that was 'immediately repressed,' resulting in 'a strong outburst of indignation.'

Brill's conclusion was to condone the dances as healthy and good. Motion was necessary for adults, just as it was for children. 'Motion pleasure,' a form of 'autoerotic sexual manifestation,' was at the basis of dancing, enabling the normal gratification of the sexual instinct and providing more pleasure and gratified love the more contact and muscular exertion the new dances afforded.

Brill's summary analysis enabled him to interpret the recent 'psychic epidemic' as a result of 'mental and emotional repressions,' following Freud's theory of neurotic and psychotic abnormality. The medieval 'dancing epidemics,' in Brill's view, were naturally caused by 'the tyranny of the feudal system and the church, which for a long time kept the people in an oppressed and wretched state, allowing them no outlet for their emotions.' The present dancing epidemic, Brill argued, was 'due to similar causes'. Puritanical prudery and Anglo-Saxon hypocrisy had led to widespread sexual repression, which the new dances assuaged. Particularly in America, where prudery was most acute, stifling women, who were subject to a debilitating double standard, the new dances could do what the suffragette movement also did for women in England: offer a 'safety valve for repressed tension'. Brill, by his own admission, did not dance himself, but his benignly patronizing support for the popular dance movement in the mid-1910s ignited slightly amused hyperbolic accounts in the popular press.

An article published in the New York Times on 26 April 1914 reprised his article, as well as recent writing by the neurologist Gustave F. Boehme (1860-1949) of the West Side German Dispensary and Hospital. Boehme was researching 'tango-foot', a condition born from too much tango dancing, resulting in a new brand of occupational disorder, after bursitis or 'housemaid's knee', 'miner's elbow', and 'weaver's bottom'. This new disorder was extended to 'the devotees of Terpsichore' who complained of pain in the front of the foot accompanied by a slightly rheumatoid stiffness or bruising, resulting in a slight limp. Boehme recognized the requirement for great flexibility of the ankle in the new dances, particularly the tango but also the tango-like Brazilian maxixe and the hesitation waltz, all of which involved repeated extension, flexion, and adduction of the foot. The best cure, in Boehme's opinion, was to cease dancing altogether, limit walking, and engage in baking bread or other foodstuffs for a few days: this would reduce the swelling and restore the ankle and foot tendons to their proper state.

Women were caught in the crossfire of the new dance craze and its medical—as well as moral—adjudication. In Brill's analysis, women were more repressed, tenser, and therefore more galvanized (as well as relieved) by the dancing. Yet Boehme thought they should never have left home. Domestic duties were not compatible with the new dance craze, which provoked dancers to stay out longer hours and dance more frequently, and with greater energy and vigour, than in previous times. Debate about the healthiness of dancing raged. As the Castles pointed out in their handbook, a number of new medical opinions suggested, against the moralizing reprobations of the day, that the new dancing offered a healthy form of exercise. What's more, dancers drank less, the Castles pointed out, and moved their bodies 'instead of becoming torpid around a card-table'.

For the neuropsychiatrist Dr. Charles L. Dana (1852-1935), whose Text-Book of Nervous Diseases and Psychiatry (1915) the Castles quoted for support, 'dancing, including gymnastic dancing and folk dancing, under proper conditions and limitations, is one of the best exercises for persons of all ages. It is especially adapted to the temperament, physique, and dress of women.' The concept of 'excess' was highly equivocal: excess lay largely in the eyes of the beholder. Dancers themselves, except in the case of a hurt foot, never in my readings sought out medical help. At most, their obsessiveness sparked political or domestic crises (and occasionally resolutions), described in magazines and the popular press. But the figure of the dancing disease that was of interest to medical professionals and, increasingly, to popular opinion suggested a vital surplus upending social life. 

ANAESTHESIS: DANCE MARATHONS AND THE LIMITS OF SENSE

After tango, jazz, the Charleston, and animal dances suffused urban dancing life in the 1910s and 1920s, the spectacle of vital energy—its expenditure and depletion—fuelled another dancing ‘craze’, the so-called ‘dance marathons’, at the turn of the 1930s (fig. 11.3). But whereas the proliferation of ‘new dances’ that was characteristic of the first two decades of the twentieth century had seemed to threaten (and enhance) conjugal life, to upend and simultaneously fashion ambiguous forms of racial segregation and intermixture, the dance marathons appeared spectacularly to be going nowhere; to showcase excess eviscerating itself.

Dance marathons suspended the regularity of the work week entirely, while hinging on a performance of round-the-clock work doubling as entertainment. Marathoners danced—often, merely shuffled—for days, weeks, even months at a time in exchange for food or shelter. Rather than dancing excessively fast, they danced excessively long; and paradoxically became experts in not feeling: they anaesthetized themselves not only to calluses and boils but to the hunger and rootlessness of the Great Depression, hoping in the meantime by their endurance to become noticed and famed.

Yet, judging by newspaper coverage from the period, most noticed in dance marathons were the dancers’ lopsided, drooping bodies, anaesthetic in another sense: they were exhausted, subsisting at the other limits of (monstrous) exuberance and grace. The spectacle they offered observers was of near lifelessness: they performed a depleted passage into ‘bare life’.

‘Dance marathons have been but one type of a wave of fatigue contests which has rolled across the country in the last four or five years’,¹ wrote sociologist James T. Farrell (1904-1979) in an article titled ‘The Dance Marathons’ (1931). Influenced by Thorstein Veblen at the University of Chicago, Farrell saw dance marathons as stupid lower-class entertainments, products of the new organization of leisure that thrived on the ‘release of responsibility’, novelty, and cheap celebrity. The dance marathons, unlike the medieval flagellant movement, to which he compared them, were ‘psychopathic’ and ‘sub-normal’ events, deprived of what he saw as the rich spiritual context of the Middle Ages. Dance marathons, Farrell argued, sprang up in the chaotic, anarchic, spiritually void environment of a crassly materialistic modernity in which poor people sought a ‘moral holiday’ from workday obligations. They also sought monetary rewards and renown, which they thought would enable them to forget their misery in the novel glare of the public spotlight. Dance marathons in depression-era Europe and America galvanized hundreds and eventually thousands of participants who danced relentlessly for days, weeks, and even months at a time. As Carol Martin has written, dance marathons were 'endurance entertainments', the latest in a craze for competitions and world records that was unleashed after the inauguration of the first modern Olympic Games in 1896.°° They also harked back to novelty happenings from the late nineteenth century, including a 'continuous' medicine show described in the Houdini collection at the Library of Congress: according to Martin, participants walked continuously around the perimeter of a seated arena, performing special feats on the hour for prizes. Marathons could take any number of forms: one man pushed a peanut up a hill with his nose continuously for thirty days, winning a $500 bet; others held hands, drank milk, ate eggs, chewed gum, sat at length atop flagpoles, walked, or danced continuously for ever longer periods of time.

After starting in Britain and then moving to Europe and America, dance marathons gained increasingly hyperbolic media attention, pitting one nation against another, one competitor against another, and soon enough, humans against time and life itself. With dance marathons, the story of choreomania appears temporarily to arrive at an exhausted halt, as dancers, folded into a public discourse on health and cinematic theatricality, tended increasingly towards the apparent aim of barely moving and not-feeling. Yet they danced a lot, and in that they appeared 'lunatic', according to mildly lampooning coverage in the Sunday Mirror Magazine.% The craze was relatively subdued. Photographic archives of marathoners held at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts show couples barely moving in the last stages of a competition, during which they may have slept for only a few minutes every hour for months at a time. They brushed their teeth, ate, groomed themselves, and used the facilities during carefully circumscribed breaks, even while 'dancing'. By the end, some are not shuffling their feet at all anymore but barely swaying. Dancers take turns holding their partners limp in their arms, slumped over, half delirious, occasionally falling to the ground before being scooped back up by hired attendants. The task was to keep moving at all costs. This was not dancing as much as remaining approximately upright, at the limits of motion, even passively so. At first, marathons involved acts of dancing prowess, and as the events came to be increasingly commercialized and managed by magnetic impresarios, venues capitalized on—even created—famous dancing couples to provide entertainments for curious onlookers. Some marathoners became semi-professional, moving from one marathon to the next in search of their own brand of theatrical gold, perfecting comic feats for critical acclaim and cash showers. As 95. Martin, Dance Marathons, 5-6. 96. 'Pictures That Tell a Story—and Tell It Better Than Words. Our Latest Lunacies', Sunday Mirror Magazine, 8 October 1933, 2.

Colonial and Postcolonial Stages

Martin has pointed out that marathons inevitably made up a portion of heightened theatricality, mixing 'real life' exhaustion and the performance of real pain with a choreographed theatrical frame complete with time clocks, staged dramas (including fake and occasionally real weddings), and familiar—often good or bad—characters, as in professional wrestling.* But whereas Martin argues that marathons eventually lost their audiences because essentially nothing happened for days at a time during these events and the novelty eventually wore thin, I argue that the marathons' continued appeal and lingering status in the popular imagination was also this catabolic fall into nothingness.

What I call anaesthesis pits the ungainly, tired, and 'ugly' against an aesthetic regime centred on heightened affect, sense, and feeling, as well as beauty and elegance. In dance marathons, dancers hardly moved; occasionally, they collapsed. The beaten-down, exhausted fall, signifying defeat in contest, signalled breakdown without release. There was no breakthrough, no shift that produced a new sensation, a new realm of possibilities.

Whereas choreomanias were characterized in medical and anthropological literature by their jerky, inelegant, erratic, and spontaneous, almost animal motion, dance marathons, paradoxically, in their sluggish but determined shows of endurance, demonstrated an excess of will, a surplus of voluntary motion, extreme dancing at the final frontier of men's and women's ability to endure physical and mental pain through continuous dance. Dance marathons were a new sort of mania in this configuration: they tapped into a discourse on poor health in opposition to work—nurses' and doctors' stations were regular features of the dance halls, and ice blocks were regularly used to numb swollen limbs—but also capitalized on the performance of extreme banality, and participants' and spectators' extreme endurance of this banality, cloaked in a spirit of incessant eventfulness and fun.

Marathoners performed the ultimate theatre of work and simultaneously the ultimate public performance of economic failure: though a very small minority were professional dancers and many others hoped to gain a dime from cash prizes (or at least be sheltered and fed), dance marathoners also fundamentally showcased the collective passing of time (fig. 11.4). Dance, in this context, hovering at the limit of choreographed motion, showcased the final limits of endurance, performing anaesthetic prowess, an ability to surpass even the extreme sensation of continuous dancing. Dancers affected the jerky movements, contortions, flappings, and twists of black and black-inspired popular dances, to arrive at a completely limp state of bare motion doubling as the ultimate spectacle of willpower, sacrifice, and capacity to thrive in the face of adversity and want. Dance marathoners epitomized gestureless motion: motion without purpose or end, except inasmuch as winning a dance marathon signaled the ability to be the last couple standing, 'still'. Time was the marathoners' greatest enemy but also what they dramatically triumphed against. Time, increasingly, was the yardstick against which new manias were publicly measured: for dancers' excessive endurance more than the supposed monstrosity of their contortions. So, too, in fighting a gruelling race against time, dances were abstracted from theatrical gesture: the performance of unending motion was dramatic enough. ‘THE “JITTERBUG” AGE’ By the end of World War II, America and the rest of the world had lifted itself from this torpor and found a new dance ‘craze’ to call its own; but, as with the medically inflected popular literature on dance manias I have discussed in this book, the ‘craze’ highlighted gestureless motion. The 1940s, fittingly, were dubbed the ‘jitterbug’ age—directionless, purposeless, nearsighted, materialistic, and gadget-happy—by Reverend Dr. Christopher J. McCombe, speaking from his pulpit on the Upper West Side of New York.1 A court ruling some four years later suggested that the jitterbug dance was ‘crazy’ and that those engaging in it became ‘crazy’: “The word “bug” is defined among other meanings as “a crazy person, scheme or idea”’, the court ruled. ‘The word “jitters” means “extreme nervousness” ’.2 The combination was toxic, setting one unwitting participant into a tizzy after she was ‘sent into a spin by a “jive-maddened marine”’ and sustained unspecified injuries.3 More worrisome in East Germany, the jitterbug (or Swing heini) was said, by Communist authorities keen to keep America’s swing music at bay, to ‘rape’ ‘German culture’ and ‘[prostitute] Germany’s musical heritage’ with its ‘wild convulsions’. Jazz addicts’ in Soviet-occupied Germany were cautioned to ‘work off their surplus energy on rubble piles’ rather than succumb to this ‘Marshall Plan export’ designed to ‘deaden the minds of the masses’ with its saxophone doodling and trumpet blares.4 The post-World War II world was edgy, skittish. Burt notes that for Katherine Dunham, the jitterbug relieved tension rather than building tension, as the ‘fascistic’ mass dances of the 1930s purported to do.5 When Elvis Presley (1935-1977) burst onto the American cultural scene in the 1950s with his black moves and childlike pouty lips, swinging his hips and hooking his knees inward like a rag doll, he fused all of the racial and sexual ambivalence of the preceding decades in a torrent of energy that provoked its own mania. Psychiatric and psychoanalytic literature, bleeding into the popular press, once again weighed in with injunctions against this contagious behavior spilling out of bounds.6 Youth culture and the new spirit of contestation appeared to be ever more dramatically out of hand. Rock’n’ roll, jagged and fast, in its turn donned the mantle of the ‘dancing disease’. ‘THE RAVING FRENZY OF THE HIGHWAYS’: CHOREA IN THE AGE OF ROCK ’N’ ROLL Joost A. M. Meerloo (1903-1976), physician and psychiatrist at Columbia University, read the energetic outpouring of the 1950s and 1960s as yet another incarnation of the dancing disease—a disease now so modern that it could be found in the very spirit of car culture, youth culture, and of course rock ’n’ roll. So, whereas the literature on rock ’n’ roll is vast, far too much so to treat adequately here, the persistence of the imagined genealogy and discourse of choreomania it represents compels a cursory glance. For Meerloo, dance manias, which have surfaced, he argued, from prehistory to the present, constitute an expression of mass anger, impotence, and frustration, a raging desire to return to the womb and anesthetize oneself to society through rhythmic pulsations similar to what a mother uses when rocking her child to sleep. Dance maniacs are trapped, for Meerloo, in their childlike impulses, are sexually and socially unfulfilled: it is never possible, he pointedly notes, to return to the womb.

An account he provides of a jukebox scene in which some disenfranchised youth hit up against the alienating violence of ‘modernity’ encapsulates virtually all the paradoxes and prejudices of the discourse on choreomania I have presented thus far, from the language of primitive and childlike animality to dancers’ nearly incoherent shrieking and writhing; epileptiform ‘seizures’; uncontrolled and spontaneous outbursts; convulsions; ambivalently white and black cultural roots; pantomimic motion, ‘regressive’ and ‘automatic’ at once, tribal and ecstatic, aimless, and apparently drunken; and the final anesthetization of all sensation (and sense) in an exhausted collapse. The description bears quoting at length. In a chapter titled ‘Syncopated Rapture’, in Dance Craze and Sacred Dance (1961), Meerloo writes:

Once I witnessed a spontaneous outburst of Rock ’n’ Roll in a small town. Here, in a combination of drugstore and diner, a juke box sent forth a seductive rhythm supported by a whining set of sounds. From the very first note, the young people near the small bar became untamable. They started to dance; no, that is hardly the right word. A frenzied rhythmic seizure took possession of them: they yelled and shouted and rocked themselves more and more into a rhythmic trance until it had gone far beyond all the accepted versions of human dancing. Before the music had started, the place had been the usual, rather dull meeting place. Suddenly, as if by magic, the quivering rhythm gets hold of the teenagers and lures them from their high perches at the counter. The music brings to life an age-old inner complaint, a nagging melody. It is the crying and hopeless sorrow of deprived and frustrated mankind, aroused by all the pouting and self-pity we feel for ourselves. The forgotten and rejected baby in us awakens and pants for new satisfaction, for new rocking and endearment. 

Negro-blues and cowboy song and jazzy rhythm are united in a seductive rocking and blubbering. There is squealing and whimpering, whining and yelping, writhing, rocking and rolling, aroused by a tortuous rhythmic monotony. The stepped up tempo and beat may go over into the madness of oblivion and self-destruction. From now on, the youngsters forget their boring civilization, and the infant and prehistoric man in them comes to life. A wild pantomime is displayed, resembling the rhythm of tribal utterances and the convulsive outcry of revivals. This is neither music nor plain, unadulterated sex, as some authors claim, but merely suggestive rhythm, a common return to the Nirvanic dance. The music is full of baby sounds. The dance means being energized by one’s own body rhythms and by the desperate ecstasy that wants to cast off control.

True, it is also an outburst of sexual rhythm of the pelvis without real erotic fulfillment, and with an aimless shaking of the hips. It is the exalted trance of a dream without reality; it is an outlet, an act of common frustration without joyful rapture. This glamorous show of ecstatic abandon covers up an empty feeling of something lacking deep inside them. It is the incoherent expression of living in a seemingly love-lorn world. It is sleep-dancing and mass-hypnotism, a collective trance. It is boredom and frustration concentrated into a rhythmic trance of the body, while the mind is benumbed. Awareness is gone, personality is gone, shame is gone. In the rocking trance, man is like drunk—dance drunk. He may attack, he may foam with rage, he may yell, he may destroy, he may use some vulgar movements that are usually taboo—civilized restraint is gone.

Such regressive rhythm can give the illusion of life as a passive rolling on, as a self-revolving automatic movement of whirling sensation. It can make people whine constantly because they do not want to step out of their lullabye into reality and responsibility. But this very craze can help the dancers to overcome frustrations and to give them the vitalizing regression that makes them more tolerant to the world afterwards.

In Meerloo's account, rock 'n' roll dons all the characteristics of choreomania: crazes that erupt in a collective, organic return to primeval substance without form; to motion without choreography. As with the romantic recuperations of choreomania that I discussed in the previous chapters, and as in Leiris's account, this experience of formlessness paradoxically enabled the fantasy of a new world order to emerge, in contrast to the stark, machinic rhythms of modernity and the childlike, nearly animal power underlying them. The sexual rhythmicity without sexual reproduction was excessive but presented the possibility of a translation or transfiguration: from sheer anger and energy to revolt. Yet, in spite of its revolutionary potential, all this energy was redirected to economic ends and the money-making frenzy of contemporary American capitalism. 'Swept on by a tremendous money-making potential of those who make the musical records', Meerloo wrote, rock 'n' roll 'demonstrated the violent mayhem long other popular 'manias', 'frenzies', and 'madnesses'. 104, Joost A. M. Meerloo, Dance Craze and Sacred Dance (London: Peter Owen, 1962), 32-34. Monstrous Grace + 295 repressed everywhere on earth transformed into capitalist greed.1° In the new age, ‘[ancient] chorea has become the raving frenzy of the highways’.1° St. Vitus's dance was now a mad choreography of fast and slow lanes, a four-wheeled rage displaced onto automobiles and aeroplanes." McCarren describes the modern rhythmicity and choreography of cars and machines in Dancing Machines: Choreography in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (2003), concomitant to what Sloterdijk has called ‘infinite mobilization’, the ceaseless roar of movement for movement's sake in the hyperindustrial age. This movement for movement’s sake further corresponds to what I have called, after Agamben, ‘meaningless gesture’, a ‘pure’ choreography denoting the tautological relationship chorea holds to dance: as movement deprived of ulterior purpose, movement performed without end. This book has described the pathologization of such movement surging up seemingly without rhythm or structure. I have argued that the pathologization of such apparently excessive and uncontrolled movement—tics, jerks, swaying, hopping, running, prostration, shaking, and falls—constitutes an ideological underbelly in the long history of a transnationally mobile scientific modernity, a prejudice still rampant in contemporary approaches to crowd control and to the rapid popping and krumping of hip-hop, breakdance, and other historically black forms of popular dance and music culture.

RAVES, BURNING MAN: CAPITAL RECUPERATION

As this chapter itself moves rapidly forward in time to the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, we see that the remnants of the ‘choreomania’ prejudice are strong. The awkward concatenation of speed culture with the figure of the primitive beatitude of the horde morphed in the 1990s into a new Dionysian paradigm. Rave parties—in which thousands of revellers gathered to drop MDMA (methylenedioxymethamphetamine, aka Ecstasy) and dance for days or weeks to machinically fast-paced electronic music—were transforming into (typically non-orgiastic) bacchanalia that re-romanticized counter-cultural movements and their imagined antecedents in the Grecian past. This return to the Dionysian myth of collective manias, partially divested of colonial undertones, recast them in the guise of a new millennialist enthusiasm recuperating premodern antiquity into the postmodern. New romantic interest in the primitive and the enthusiastic embrace of technology made rave parties at once classically ecstatic and hyper-modern: electronic beats spun by all-night DJs graced outdoor dance parties in a back-to-nature—yet technophilic—setting. Large fuzzy pants, water bottles, and tiny backpacks stocking energy bars, MDMA, ‘speed’, and other methamphetamines, as well as other rave-party paraphernalia, turned rave culture into a movement of international and, soon, international commercial proportions. The Berlin Love Parade, which mobilized millions of dancers beginning in 1989, four months before the Berlin Wall fell, and was intended to be a party whose spirit was ‘healing’ through music and dance, also became an instrument of capital gain. McFit, a European fitness club, poured 1,000,000 euros into the party, which was expected to attract at least 750,000 people in 2006. In 2010, the Love Parade came to a close, after twenty-one dancers died and over five hundred more were injured in a crush. The epic Burning Man events have similarly offered modern-day partygoers an opportunity to engage in a "neo-pagan" dancing experience since 1986. Tens of thousands of celebrants flock to this week-long festival annually to enjoy the "immediate experience" of "contact" with the "natural world."1 Similarly, in the last ten or twenty years, a surge of renewed interest in the tarantella as a dying cultural form has shifted anthropological discourse into the sphere of cultural heritage, casting it as a local tradition to preserve and emotionally to reconnect with. The surge in popularity of tarantella culture among younger generations has yielded an explosion of festivals, concerts, and recordings throughout the Italian south.

The Notte della Taranta (Night of the Taranta), held every August in Puglia, has brought a mass-scale culture of international pop stardom to revivals of the tarantella, with performances for audiences of up to four hundred thousand people eager to cultivate a sense of historical continuity in the region, boosting local revenue through national and international tourism. Hip-hop and techno remixes of traditional tarantella tunes are widely available on street corners and YouTube, updating the trend with an urban beat, further boosting local revenue and cultural pride. However, this particularism—seeing the tarantella as quintessentially southern Italian—also recycles and nearly eliminates a complicated medico-historical node, taming and repackaging it into a bundle of local cultural practices.

The translatio from a medical to an anthropological and now a 'heritage' discourse moves the tarantella, with its cast of discursive others, out of one scene of observation and into another, revealing—staging—yet another transfiguration of the 'past'. The coda that follows moves to my own field of observation and final reflections on modernity and the Bacchic choir: what I conceive as the deep configuration of crowd politics as a politics of border control, stemming tides of migration and 'spill'. Simultaneously, the boisterous, unwieldy transformation of bodies—their public appearance and occupation of space—figures a productively contestatory disorder.

AT THE conclusion to Les mots et les choses: Une archéologie des science humaines [The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences] (1966), Foucault argues that ‘man’ is a relatively recent invention—and, more so, that ‘man’ has only recently (at most in Europe since the sixteenth century) figured at the centre of a web of social and human sciences, an object of scientific and social scientific analysis and biopower. In her recent reading of Foucault’s lectures on biopoli- tics, Wendy Brown further notes that Foucault by and large avoids discussion of the demos, the plural body, the organized grouping of the individuals that make up a democratic ‘society’.

This book does not quite deal with the organized group but with another sort of plural body conspicuously absent from Foucault’s analysis of biopower; another account of the scientific and social scientific language—the historical epistemology (or discursive history)—of ‘man’. With choreomania, the demos is in disarray. The discursive black hole Foucault describes as ‘madness’ emerges as a discursive zone of articulation around which scientific knowledge about chaotically moving bodies organizes itself. This book offers another way of doing—and writ- ing—biohistory, as a history of (moving) bod- ies disorganized in scientific discourse, collaged and transposed onto one another through the very literary operations of comparison and anec- dote. These movements, occurring in scenes, petits récits, and minor displacements, never- theless present tidal shifts: what Foucault, after Canguilhem, called conceptual displacements and transformations,’ which I have further described in terms of the geopolitical, trans-discursive movements of translatio.

This alternative history of ‘man’, at the heart of a demos in disarray, reveals choreopolitics at the core of a complex interplay of modern imaginings. But the demos (or its dishevelled other half, choreomania) does not become con- stituted any more decisively than does ‘man’. Rather, ‘man’, like his shaking, plural conceptual counterparts, at closer scrutiny melts right back into the seascape Foucault alludes to at the con- clusion of The Order Of Things: ‘man’, Foucault writes, just as he was conjured into being in recent centuries, might just as soon become ‘erased, like a face drawn in sand at the edge of the sea’, dissolving back into the plural and het- eromorphic formations he emerged from. Yet if 'man' in Foucault's analysis is a sand drawing, at the limit of the sea, liable at any moment to be washed away again into the discursive vastness of scientific thinking before 'he' (and arguably 'she') was imagined, written, drawn, then the Dionysian throng emerges as the oceanic fiction at the limit of which this 'man' emerges. I have argued that 'man', in broadly 'modern' Europe—by which I mean a Europe and its colonies constantly preoccupied with looking back over their shoulders at an ever-receding past—conceived himself in relation to the nearly intangible figure of the organic mob, the movement of pre-individuated bodies, cast, as I have argued, as a rumbling horde.

I have further argued that this horde was frequently imagined as feminine (though not always female) and dark, obscure (often black), animal, and childlike, in Khanna's terms, after Freud, a 'dark continent' of ultimately indescribable—yet paradoxically again and again described—alterity. This horde appears as the phantasmatic negative against which a fiction of scientific lucidity (and cultural universality) arose, in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, paradoxically, anecdotally. The fiction and fantasy of the unthinking horde is not new but emerges with force in the nineteenth century, morphing and passing across discursive terrains through the twentieth, and arguably still subtly in force today.

In his 12 November 1965 diary entry 'Dance in My Experience', Oiticica describes the 'Dionysian' dance as one that is 'born out of the interior rhythm of the collective, [and] exteriorizes itself as a characteristic of popular groupings, nations, etc.' Contrary to the '[excessive] intellectualization' of ballet and 'opposed to organized choreography', the 'Dionysian' dance for Oiticica thrives on improvisation. Improvisation allows 'immersion into rhythm [to take] place', yielding 'a flux where the intellect remains obscured by an internal mythical force that operates at an individual and collective level'. The flux is so strong, Oiticica writes, that the distinction between the individual and the collective vanishes. The quotation marks around 'Dionysian' are significant. By his own admission, Oiticica is not talking about the literal Dionysian dance—the ecstasies and rituals of bacchantic men and women dramatized by Euripides in the fifth century BCE and decried by Plato a few decades later; though arguably even those accounts were fantastical conjurings. Oiticica does not purport to offer a historical reconstruction or reperformance of Greek events. But he has a strong felt sense of the Dionysian and what it means to him and to his readers: a rhythmic, pulsating force that calls up nations and in which the experience of individuality dissolves.

DROMOGRAPHY: DANCE AND THE SPEED OF CHANGE

This coda brings the discursive history of choreomania back to a consideration of 'discipline', to argue finally that the choreopolitical dimension of the dancing crowd as a constitutive force of social and discursive government poses the question of borders and border policing. In this sense, conjuration of the 'discipline' of dance—and discursive disciplinarization of dancing bodies recounted in this book—reveals an ambivalent disciplinary move on my part, at once claiming 'choreomania' in or as a history of ideas about 'dance' and performance and refusing such a neat disciplinary alignment. The borders of fields are always in motion, I have argued with Martin, subject to performative re-enactments and displacements, even while institutions and markets (and governments) find it far more efficacious, Foucault decisively showed, to keep knowledge and bodies aligned. A recent news story serves as a case in point. A few Israeli soldiers briefly joined in a dance with some Palestinian wedding revellers in Hebron. This temporary shared social space resulted in the Israelis' dismissal from service on the grounds of reckless 'exposure to unnecessary danger',1 and the viral spread of their disciplinarization on social media. The Israeli Defense Forces chiefs' message was clear: these soldiers should have stayed apart, actors in a theatre of war, performing, without flinching, their role as guardians of a state of emergency without release. Engaging in this communal dance ripped the fabric of opposition and impasse; a symbolic hole was torn through the wall separating the two camps. The soldiers' reprimand was staged for the Israeli public and for the world at large. Yet YouTube uploads suggest a proliferation of moments of play rippling through the fabric of military deadlock: soldiers breaking out in a playfully choreographed dance while patrolling eerily quiet streets, or in one case leading a group of Palestinian children in an impromptu game of mimicry to the 1970s disco tune 'Hands Up, Baby Hands Up', perverting the usual policing choreography requiring the weaker party to put their hands up in a gesture not of play but of surrender. These moments of common dance subvert a political fabric that allows only tightly choreographed moments of crossover and no moments of improvised breaks.

The irony in the Israeli case is patent: the soldier leading the 1970s disco dance still holds a machine gun strapped to his back, and he and the children are separated by an electric fence. He is standing on a tall concrete block many feet higher than they are. Perhaps he covertly mocks their willingness to join in a game in which he has them put their hands up. But they all wave their arms right and left, up and down, doing the wave, bobbing their knees, and bouncing around; the children seem to be enjoying themselves, as does the soldier, and for a moment the encounter suggests a different sort of relation, predicated not on martial discipline but on the loose play of imitation. Projected to a deferred audience via YouTube, the dance shows a moment of respite and rapprochement framed by the absurd arsenal of military technology. Moments of shared intensity shift the performance of power balance and provisionally its experience, emerging as excrescences in the fabric of everyday life that serve to contest the status quo, to mark time, and to join people temporarily in crowd formations that spill out into public space and transform private homes. Some of the cases this book has described have been more dance-like; others might not have been recognized as such by those engaging in them. The figure of dance as an aesthetic formation privileging movement encompasses forms that might elsewhere be described as sport, ritual, or, in cases here, movement disorders and epidemic disease. But uniting these, I have shown, was a discursive genealogy that linked modern notions of energetic efficiency and somatic normativity with social movements erupting worldwide. The journey of these corporeal and discursive formations reveals how events linked to disorders of the nervous system and altered states of consciousness, as well as crowd contact, have shaped our understanding of choreomania. The concept is multi-stranded and polydisciplinary, showing how concepts move and fields emerge and transform with them.

The history of a concept is not the history of its progressive refinement, but rather the story of its passage through various fields of elaboration and validation. Choreomania has had a peculiar life, emerging in its early modern form with Paracelsus, peaking in the mid- to late-nineteenth century, and petering out in the early days of the twentieth century.

Choreomania has had a plastic and malleable, slippery and abstruse life. The concept itself mimicked its object, moving as rapidly and raggedly as that to which it ostensibly referred. While literary works on the twist, the mambo, raves, flash mobs, big dances, and even the viral spread of the Harlem shake or Psy's 'Gangnam Style' borrow from the lexical field particular to choreomania, its medical mantle has largely been shed. Only the figure of the virus maintains a link to the modern language of contagion, and the long history of medical literature on dance manias has been largely occluded. The Persistence of Vision

Yet in medical literature and the popular press, dance manias continue to crop up as holdovers of some lost, more superstitious, and more irrational time that in this view is still curiously, dramatically with us: conversion hysterias, mass hysterias, and especially mass psychogenic illnesses are often referred back to older events, including, paradigmatically, St. Vitus’s dance. Not only does this view continue to pathologize a broad range of complex social phenomena, but the strangeness and apparent illegibility of ‘dance manias’ continues to grant them a special status as medical and historical curiosities.

Recent psychiatric literature, particularly in the field of transcultural psychiatry, links epidemic dancing to other forms of ‘culture-bound syndromes’ such as koro, or testicle-shrinkage anxiety, latah, and amok, describing these as culturally specific forms of medical (often hysterical) disease. Historians have continued to link 8. ‘Déplacements et transformations des concepts: les analyses de G. Canguilhem peuvent servir de modèles; elles montrent que l'histoire d'un concept n'est pas, en tout et pour tout, celle de son affinement progressif, de sa rationalité continiment croissante, de son gradient d'abstraction, mais celle de ses divers champs de constitution et de validité, celle de ses régles successives d'usage, des milieux théoriques multiples ou s'est poursuivie et achevée son élaboration’. Foucault, L'archéologie du savoir, 11.


Wen-Shing Tseng, ‘Epidemic Mental Disorders’, in Handbook of Cultural Psychiatry (San Diego: Academic Press, 2001), 265-290. Tseng argues that epidemic mental disorders can be traced to the dancing epidemics of the 1300s-1600s; he links these to the possessions of Loudun, witchcraft trials, and H. G. Wells’s War of the Worlds before connecting them in turn to koro in Singapore, Thailand, Southern China, and India, as well as to a nervous twitching epidemic among high school girls in 1939 in Baltimore and a range of other anxiety and panic attacks and collective delusions. See also Wen-Shing Tseng, Clinician’s Guide to Cultural Psychiatry (Honolulu: University of Hawaii School of Medicine, 2003). On koro see esp. Pow Meng Yap’s original ‘Koro—A Culture-Bound Depersonalization Syndrome’, British Journal of Psychiatry 111.470 (1965): 43-50.

Moving Fields, Modernity, and the Bacchic Chorus + 301 ‘dancing manias’ to collective hysterias obliquely rehearsed in amateur scientific and medical historiography, bemoaning the inexplicable, ‘strange’ quality of the dances as if they were exceptionally peculiar and remained forever locked out of contemporary modes of understanding. In Rosen’s terms, dancing manias were ‘bizarre’ phenomena redolent of a faraway past, explicable if anything only by reference to the ill-defined notion of ‘stress’."* Historian John Waller upped the ante and called these ‘deadly dance[s]’ ‘terrifyingly bizarre’ and ‘extraordin- ary’ reminders of the ‘ineffable strangeness of the human brain’. Arguably dance manias were rarely bizarre, though they were described at great length as such. Indeed, a range of dance-like events appeared on the scene of modern thought as instances of a broader pathological condition, a disorder of erratic, excess motion. Baffling by the sheer breadth of phenomena supposedly encompassing it, the discursive history of ‘choreomania’ unravels a cross-disciplinary language of pathological contagion that sug- gests persistent discomfort among writers with the imagined incursion of an unwieldy past into the present. Modernity, in this view, wrestles with the spectre of childlike, exuber- ant spontaneity, a myth that is cultivated and repeated. By projecting this myth onto colo- nial people and political underclasses, sci- entific modernity wraps itself in a figurative counterpoint: a straight, white, pure, and vir- tually motionless being, aseptic and ascetic at once. Not even modern architecture’s straight edges—epitomizing functional, anti-baroque aesthetics—were ever so clean. They, too, like the triumphalist scientism they represented, are always haunted by the phantasm of a dirty and uncontainable past that might at any point come back to unhinge them.

PLURAL AND POLYMORPHIC HYSTERIAS

Thus the discursive history of choreomania has maintained a strong link to medicine and neur- ology, movement disorders and psychiatric epidemiology. Transposed onto contemporary medical frames, the notion of choreomania gels into the figure of collective hysteria awkwardly mapped onto the medical history of movement disorders, including various forms of dyskinesia, a general term used to describe the irregular and unpredictable motion of people’s limbs. Patients suffering from these are subject to concomitant voyeurism and ostracization,______ But chorea major, choreo-mania, continues to enjoy a minor, parallel life in the annals of neurological history. Classed as a disease, it is still routinely defined as a strange 12. Rosen, in Madness in Society, describes dancing manias as ‘one of the more bizarre episodes in the history of medieval Europe’ (196). John Waller, who popularized a sensationalizing history of the 1518 dancing ‘epidemic’ in A Time to Dance, a Time to Die: The Extraordinary Story of the Dancing Plague of 1518 (Cambridge: Icon Books, 2008), wrote that this was ‘one of the strangest epidemics in recorded history’. Waller, ‘In a Spin’, 117. In ‘Falling Down’, Guardian, 18 September 2008, his article on an outbreak of fainting in a school in Tanzania, Waller also wrote that for doctors studying this and related phenomena (he cites a laughing epi- demic in villages west of Lake Victoria in 1962) ‘the events were reminiscent of a far stranger and darker phenomenon: the dancing plague’ and goes on to note that it was ‘perhaps the most bizarre of all mass hysterias’.

Backman described the fourteenth-century dances as reaching a ‘terrifying intensity’ (Religious Dances, 190). In a slightly less hyperbolic vein, Midelfort argues that one of the major problems in dealing with early modern histories of madness is ‘the possibility, even the likelihood, that [they] experienced certain disorders that no longer occur. In cases like the dancing mania, we encounter strange diseases that do not fit into modern diagnostic categories very well’ (A History of Madness, 25). In Exorcism and Enlightenment: Johann Joseph Gassner and the Demons of Eighteenth-Century Germany (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005), Midelfort notes that we still do not know what St. Vitus’s dance was. Jean Fogo Russell argued that the ravages of modern war and dictatorships provoked contemporary forms of emotionally charged phenomena, ‘hysterical’ as in the Middle Ages but taking place in music clubs and jazz festivals. Russell, ‘Dancing Mania’, 191. Robert E. Bartholomew, who has writ- ten countless books, articles, and opinion pieces on the dancing mania ‘myth’, has opted for a mass psychogenic illness hypothesis, arguing that there never was any such thing as a dancing mania any more than there have been UFO landings or witchcraft. See for example Robert E. Bartholomew, Exotic Deviance: Medicalizing Cultural Idioms from Strangeness to Illness (Boulder, CO: University Press of Colorado, 2000); and Robert E. Bartholomew, Little Green Men, Meowing Nuns and Head-Hunting Panics: A Study of Mass Psychogenic Illness and Social Delusion (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2001). 13. Waller, ‘In a Spin’, 117, 121. 14. Maria Stamelou et al., ‘Movement Disorders on YouTube—Caveat Spectator’, New England Journal of Medicine 365.12 (2011): 1160-1161.

1. Chorea major, or choreo-mania, continues to enjoy a minor, parallel life in the annals of neurological history. Classed as a disease, it is still routinely defined as a strange phenomenon. Rosen, in Madness in Society, describes dancing manias as 'one of the more bizarre episodes in the______ * But the cultural imaginary of the hysteric is still strong, serving as a marker for all forms of acting out. So were the ‘choreomaniacs’ hysterical? I have argued that the history of ideas about choreo-mania sits alongside that of the so-called great nineteenth-century hysterias, of the Blanches, the Augustines, and the Anna O.s of Charcot’s and Freud’s clinics. But choreomanias occupy a space of collective motility that is more akin to collective ecstasy or enthusiasm, classed as hyperkinetic activity not always mapped onto neurological (or psychosocial) terrain. The history of their neurological description is significant, and Charcot’s sphere of influence ensured the global spread of the choreomania concept; yet the particular mixture of motile and mental disorders—and plural formations within which ‘choreomanias’ occurred—suggests that their discursive ‘field’ occupied a different space, proper to moving groups. In this regard, the hyperkinesis that characterized nineteenth-century views of choreo-mania put political uprisings and jerky physical disorders in the same light, seeing all hyperactive locomotion as part of a new world order that rehearses the old, but faster; and, significantly, more erratically. The lack of control described among choreomaniacs marked them against the orderly workings of political society and the normal functioning of biological mechanisms in the figure of a collective body politic that squirmed and threw tantrums at the dawning of a bleaker day, refusing to conform; and refusing to sit still. This acceleration and intensification suggests a restlessness in the modern age that is different from the neurasthenic or hysterical behaviors of women (and men) too sexually repressed to navigate a Victorian society asking them to control desire by denying it. Early formulations of hysteria suggested a non-sexual etiology, pitting childishness against corporeal control and intellectual reserve. I have argued that this culture of control has fed a modern narrative describing regimented activity and especially work, resulting not so much in the disciplining or policing of individuals and social groups that Foucault describes as in the self-propelled—and mutually reinforced—hyperactivity of an industrial society that is divorced, paradoxically, from the pleasure of non-material expenditure (expenditure of time and energy) that its wealth could occasion. This hyperactivity leads to action exercised without recourse to an affective or corporeal practice of joy, except inasmuch as the latter contributes to a perpetual increase in material gain. Rest, as such, and conviviality become valuable only inasmuch as they feed heightened output. Yet surely we do not dance or congregate so as to work more efficiently later but engage in moments of effervescence so as to perform a present rift in the fabric of everyday life that is more vital than productivity measures or performance indicators allow. This is play not as reward but as good. Choreomania, in this view, recuperated as a term positively to denote communality, offers a moment of exuberance and a temporary joining together that can play a vital part in reinscribing our body politics with sweat, touch, dreams, and occasional collective jolts.

MOVEMENT, MODERNITY, AND THE CHORUS
As a history of modernity, then, the story of choreomania breaks with notions of the machinic new, suggesting a corporeal history obsessed with returns to the past, the primitive, and the Dionysian. Martin Puchner has argued that the history of modernity is founded in the myth of novelty and a revolutionary rupture with the past; so, too, Lefebvre argues that modernism is the 'cult of innovation for innovation's sake, innovation as fetish', a trend that becomes fully fledged at the end of the nineteenth century."

Moving Fields, Modernity, and the Bacchic Chorus

At the same time, modernity is theorized in every era, from the seventeenth-century querelle des anciens et modernes (quarrel of the ancients and moderns) to Rousseau's diatribes against modern music as opposed to what he saw as primitive, natural, primeval sounds.'9 Yet I have shown that modernity—even as myth of the new—never took place except in relation to fantasies of return; on the contrary, productive conjunctions between history and historicity, the classical and the avant-garde, the Edenic and the apocalyptic, the primitive and the civilized, offer a scene of writing wherein the perennial Bacchic chorus—the collective legend of the choir?19—finds a discursive habitus peopled by the figures of the past. Modernity in this regard is not rupture but relation. It is ghosted, haunted, by primitive scenes against which it sets itself and which constitute its fiction of sameness and difference: modernity seeks to situate itself on a continuum with other worlds—geographic and historical—while folding new forms of collectivity into prototypes putatively dug up from the past. Modernity is anxious to wrest itself from its inheritance and just as anxious to find grounding in it; this dual pull creates a kinetic moment, in which movement itself is at stake, and the relative velocities connecting past and present, here and elsewhere, produce intensities that converge on choreic and choreographic tropes, striking slightly different chords in every new era according to these differential relations.

The dancing chorus, as a crowd that represents the public sphere connected to ancient ways of moving and rioting, judging and imagining, serves, in the story I have told, as a trope and crucible, through which may be viewed the advances and strains of modernity from the mid-nineteenth to the mid-twentieth century, a time of intense intellectual and kinaesthetic convergences. No longer heroes in a tragic drama in which the chorus stands in judgment to one side, modern men and women find themselves swept up—or risking being swept up—in a tidal wave of bodies and thoughts that constitutes a social corpus which requires the cohesion of the choir while denying itself such comfort and familiarity; the 'choreomaniacal' body is chaotic, jumbled. It is not cohesive. As such, it stands as a signature for all forms of collective motility against the supposed rationality and efficiency of industrialization.

SCIENTIFIC ROUTES
My emphasis on the scientific routes of exchange must be taken to include in 'science' the cultural, anthropological, and performative vectors of thought and scenes of writing that 'science'—through the bodies of scientists observing, recording, and staying dutifully out of the way of dancers—managed (culturally) to produce. In effect, choreomania was written as a trans-cultural literature by a cast of medical men who were increasingly watching bodies up close and were, in tandem with or in proximity to but not in exactly the same way as the administrative powers deploying them overseas, concerned with performative uprisings as symptoms of biopolitical disorder. Choreomania, then, emerges as a conceptual node articulating an approach to disorder that does not exactly map onto today’s medical, political, social, or dance histories but reveals an underlying cross-pollination across these spheres.

With choreomania, we see a history of thinking moving, and a history of the way thinking in motion about movement was configured at a time of intense change: where displacement itself became a subject of scientific détournement or deviation, what I further call translatio. The problem is not confined to the age of empire; on the contrary, the circulation of bodies that intensified with colonialism continues in today’s migration patterns. White-collar workers tend to be considered proactively and productively to move, to circulate; lower classes moving across borders, or in unsanctioned spaces, continue to be described (in spite of stark economic imperative) as unproductive, excessive, unnecessary, contagious, and thus nearly unstoppable: a condition, understood nearly in terms of epidemic disease, that requires more than laws—state violence—to stem.

Appearance in public space, then, is at stake. Most prominently, appearance into public space comes to 19. Lefebvre, Introduction to Modernity, 168-169. 20. Rancière gestures towards a space of thinking about the choreographic and political potential of the choir—a term he uses ambiguously to denote what I would describe as the frame and form of action performed by what he calls a new humanity (‘le choeur en acte des hommes nouveaux’)—as well as a Symbolist figuration of a ‘collective legend’ (‘figuration symboliste de la légende collective’), in Jacques Rancière, Le partage du sensible: Esthétique et politique (Paris: La Fabrique-éditions, 2000), 15-25, 22. 304 + CODA be contested in the terms of a dancing disease, a term implying (all too) heightened mobility. Yet moving bodies—what I have also described (‘perhaps anachronistically’), with Muecke, as demonstrators—sought to assert their due; in the case of the ramanenjana (chapter 8), they obtained it.

There are two kinds of circulation, then: the circulation of bodies across lands (according to choreopolitical processes of displacement and travel) and the circulation of ideas, their re-indigenization and discursive translatio; neither mapped exactly onto the other, and in this mis-mapping, the fantasy of choreomania appears. Concept formation (in Taussig’s terms, the magical work of making ideas appear as ‘things’, and making things and events concomitantly appear as singular ‘ideas’) is never smooth, nor are diagnoses and definitions more airtight than the choreopolitical worlds they attempt (often haphazardly) to describe. Rather concepts, often made up of diagnoses, form and unform, and in this (largely aesthetic) operation, whole literatures emerge. Scenes appear to offer dramaturgical consistency—they seem patently to ‘stick’—and so become ‘scenarios’ (in Taylor’s terms), which then underpin disease and conceptual categories, as their narrative ‘proof’. This process of reification—what I further describe, with Stimson, as a gesture of abstraction—constitutes, Taussig argues, the process of diagnosing ‘disease’ in a Western (largely colonial) paradigm in which the empirical sciences take it as their task to decode the borderline between appearance and essence, duplicity and truth. Spirit possession, spiritual agency, and other seemingly abnormal feats of bodily transformation or unaccountable effects on the material world, according to the Western scientific (empirical) worldview, Taussig reminds us, have an actual basis in reality that fantasies regarding spirit belief occlude. Western science is dedicated to uncovering what it construes as lies. In this respect, 'choreomania' signals the fantasy of a particular lie that Western and Western-trained scientists seek to reveal: the 'lie' according to which bodies in disrepair are actually subject to the nefarious workings of an overactive imagination, not real material conditions. This reveals a subterranean world of fantasy, dreams, and ambitions whose slips and trips it is the physician's special task to decipher.

In colonial outposts, postures unfamiliar to Western-trained scientists appear as disorderly inasmuch as the source of their movements could not always be grasped except through comparison. The spectacle of these bodies' contortions constituted a 'disease', abstracted and mapped onto appearances similarly observed or read about elsewhere. In this way, 'choreomania' was construed as a set of apparently similar appearances, and the task of diagnosing it as that of comparing them to one another.

AGON: DANCE AND THE SCENE OF WRITING

'These scenes of disarray were patently difficult to write; medical writers struggled with them, and very few choreographic descriptions of 'choreomaniacal' dances exist: they state only that men and women shook, frothed, fell, and raved. Yet these dances, as a counterpart to increasingly upright and orderly dances such as the sanitized waltz or minuet, encompassed everything primitive, dangerous, weird, or unsavoury that the imagined past and the figured other had to offer. Ranciére notes in Le partage du sensible: esthétique et politique [The Politics of Aesthetics] (2000) that opposed to the Bacchic dancing Plato decried was a healthier and more politically desirable form of collectivity representing the authentic expression of a community in motion: the chorus served as an orderly polis, a form of social life—and a symbolic political formation—removed from the world of the bacchanals and the theatre, both of which Plato had wanted outlawed.

These contradictory motions, embracing the chorus (and military choreography) while rejecting poetry and theatre, situated Plato at the vanguard of generations of writers puzzling over history's repetitions and returns, as Dionysian mysteries and their rumoured look-alikes cropped up again and again, occasioning sightings in various parts of the world. The chorus was a form whose figure could be incorporated into the political realm, as a representation of social order and public opinion, unlike bacchanals, which fell just outside the realm of orderly citizenry; they were too messy, dark, confusing, and obscure properly to write or to fit into a clean kinaesthetic taxonomy.

Dances that appear erratic and disrupt a smooth, facile bodily integrity worry viewers who are seeking explanations whispered from the wings. So, too, dancers possessed by the figures of the past—haunted by ancestors, moved by otherworldly presences—do not 'read'; they do not offer clarity of form or language. So the messy dances, the bacchanals and the choreomanias, fell together into the black hole of Dionysian ecstasy, not quite choruses and not quite mobs or crowd formations either. They were written in terms of what one may understand as anti-aesthetic properties, including incoherence and primitive archaicity, yet they were complicated, mobile, and always, to reappropriate Bhabha’s iconic phrase once more, ‘not quite’ art." Choreomania, then, as a form of movement and form of thinking which flits back and forth between disorder and disease, joy, pleasure, and rapture, revolt, and restlessness and agitation, appears on the scene of modernity as a chorus in disrepair, a social body that configures itself around a new aesthetics and a new politics linked in their aspirations to a myth of the old.

As I have shown throughout this book, modernity is haunted, whether through the fantasies of antiquarian enthusiasts believing that they are stumbling upon contemporary incarnations of historic phenomena or through dancers conjuring up the dead. This is not so much a haun- tology in the sense Derrida describes—figures of thought hovering between presence and absence, existence and non-existence"*—but a distinct imaginary peopled by revenants, those who return, to bolster and support, and to serve as guarantors of, a new world order. By coming back, these revenants underpin the present and so, too, the future, to make it less anomic, less lonely. Figured as corporeal and affective mem- ories, they people a world stripped of its coordinates, counterbalancing the speed of change, the dromology of everyday life, anchoring it in a sense of home and an affective and corporeal history.

These figures of the past are conjured—called up—discursively and corporeally: medieval dancers, bacchantes, the ghosts of dead monarchs in Madagascar and of Native American Indians in the Plains, appear out of pages as if to constitute a new order of things pell-mell; yet this is an order of things that returns. In choreographic terms, it turns again: it performs yet another volte-face. This theatre of returns performs a double movement, at once looking forward and reaching back in a quickstep that finds balance only where it teeters just at the limit of an intellectual abyss.

Every time, movement conjured up from the past plays against corporeal and affective abstraction and alienation in the present: offering the illusion (and experience) of a ‘canny’ moment, homey, opposed to the uncanny whirl of modernity. SPATIAL PRACTICE, MOVING FIELDS

Rest, then, is the anti-story in this story; and modernity in this regard is a breathless, restless moment. It is defined by edginess, agitation, and erratic gestures, as well as distrust of spontaneity, collectivity, and lack of control. So the choreozones in this book cluster concepts and practices and their relational velocity, their rate of change. This is a dancing history that moves in a tragic frame, an eternal return, a past that is always renewing its relation to the past (to its historicity), in what Ranciére calls the aesthetic regime of the arts: a regime that does not ‘oppose ancient and modern’ but posits contrasting regimes of historicity." The present is always a return to past structures; it defines itself by the differential increment that separates it from a portion of the past and, as such, it is always relational. The present looks backwards and in so doing configures a new relationship to what it sees, and to its mode of looking. I submit that Ranciére’s model describes not only an aesthetic regime but more broadly a manner of conceiving politics, economics, and social life in the present that undoes narratives of linear progress, as well as archaeology and genealogy. Instead of layers of history, historical accidents or fortuities, the discursive choreographer uncovers constantly renegotiated relations, played out as networks, imaginings, recuperations, and interactions: movements of thought. Each era, in the view I propose, is characterized by a unique set of relations, which determine the ways of moving and seeing, as well as the dialogues and conversations it engages in. Discursive practices shifted and moved intensely in the story I have told, stimulating the emergence or crystallization of modern disciplines not so much as hegemonic forces of knowing but as mobile entities, clusters of concept-events, crisscrossing one another, cross-pollinating with and pilfering from their neighbors as they found new fields in which to grow before moving on—shifting ground—again.

The history of fields thus has also been at stake in this book, as ways of seeing and performing relationships to history and dance morphed in the latter part of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Going out 'in the field', as a space saturated with particular modes of seeing, doing, moving, and being, provoked occasions for discursive and interpersonal relations different from those acquired at home. Fieldwork in this regard constitutes its own methods of choreography: its own ways of organizing bodies in space. In Clifford's terms, the field conjures 'an act of physically going out into a cleared space of work'; it is an 'embodied spatial practice', one whose border is unstable, constantly remapped—discursively—and corporeally negotiated.

The process of disciplining a field may begin in the early days of its institutional life, but it is constantly reworked through institutional practices and individual bodily histories. Displacement and travel, journeys and rifts, rather than belonging, move these fields along. In the same way, performance itself, like dance, emerges as a mobile entity, an object and methodology situated between moving and doing, showing and writing—one that lurches, skips, rattles, and starts. It presents the figure of a comedic body, messy and corporeal, not so much striving to achieve (to perform) in an economy of productive makings but falling and dreaming, hopping, lifting, jiving, and joining hands in a motion focused in towards a group; like a jester, it creates a break and an opening in the rhythm of everyday life, gesturing at bodily failure. Performance in this view moves, speeds up and slows down, it is not a theatron, a seeing-place, but morphs and splits, obfuscating, triumphant, and puckish. Like Dionysus, it laughs, contorts itself, and changes shape. This creature is all action and all transformation, non-teleological and undisciplined. It is also all kinesis, though it can morph into figures of order and control or chaos and spontaneity, only to slip out again to rebecome pure velocity, pure féte, a temporary zone of intensity, a carnival and an uprising, disorder and insurgency. This text is about the figure of change in performance, a concept-event that dances and philosophizes on the tombs of its ancestors, shifting gears before it can be pinned down. The industrial and capitalistic connotations of the field have been reconsidered, favoring a model where raucousness and play present protean intellectual and corporeal formations. The appearance of meaninglessness in choreomanias, which are characterized by highly contagious and erratic whole-body gestures, is also discussed. Choreomanias are described as a discourse on gestural futility and pure gesture, with no purpose other than to reproduce itself.

In Agamben's perspective, dance as gesture is the exhibition of a mediality, signaling the possibility of communication and the ethical dimension for human beings. Dance communicates the very possibility of communication and ethics, and politics.

In conclusion, chorea in the nineteenth century signals the dissolution of dance as a meaningful site for articulating community. This does not suggest that the idea of chorea is tantamount to its historical reality, but rather that it reflects the social body's disarray. But following Agamben's analysis, chorea as a figure of thought helps articulate an experience of modernity as that which moves without going anywhere or meaning anything. Chorea signals modern rootlessness and anomie, a loss of social laws. Liberated from the requirement to 'mean', that is, to articulate the way language does, chorea becomes bodily movement shorn of history and linguistic symbolism. It does not come from or reach towards another world; it is its own meaningless world. It becomes 'merely' aesthetic, just as it loses its potential for politics. Chorea, in this view, is non-teleological and non-purposive, non-signifying and non-representative: it cannot become 'democratic', as it represents the event of modernity's disarticulation.

I have shown throughout this book that choreomania as a figure of thought does something very similar, though slightly different: whereas chorea signals meaningless gesture, choreomania is the dizzying epidemic eruption of meaningless gesture and bodily dislocation reproducing itself, and therefore the terrifying power of the headless crowd. This crowd is not just frightening on account of its seeming lack of control; it is frightening (to some observers) inasmuch as it moves jerkily and spontaneously, without signifying anything except its own intensity. Choreomania becomes a figure for thinking large-scale gesture that has apparently no semiotic value except to reproduce itself. The nineteenth century thus represents the dissolution of meaningful gesture and the descent of politics into chorea. Chorea becomes the fantastical litmus test against which the nineteenth century measures its capacity for gesture, meaning, and sense. 

Agamben's 'Notes on Gesture' in 'Means without End' discusses the loss of social code and the end of communicating with others in a shared ethical, political (and aesthetic) sphere. 'Chorea' becomes anaesthetic: not just ugly and inelegant or unrefined, but shapeless. When 'choreomanias' appeared in heightened political contexts—wars, uprisings, rebellions—their medical interest and the urgency of their analysis as public maladies became ever more acute. In those cases, the appearance of meaninglessness was trumped by the intensity with which movement and gesture showed the tendency to spread. In these cases, the contagiousness of such seemingly meaningless gesture was worrisome above all: it signalled the rapid proliferation of irrational behaviours and thus the extensive influence of the mobile and gesturing yet apparently inarticulate and directionless horde.

AFFECTIVE AGGREGATES, PUBLIC SPHERES

This collective agitation amounted to a class of kinaesthetically expressed affective profligations that oscillated between joy and grief, showing unchecked movement in the public sphere and taking national and international intensities to new peaks of exhibitionist fervour. In Athanasiou's and Butler's analyses of political uprisings in Greece, Egypt, Syria, and elsewhere, however, exhibitionism constitutes social politics, in a positive affective space of affirmation. Crowds perform mutual vulnerability and states of being-with one another in public space that signals, by the presence (and presencing) of these bodies, the political value of an otherwise barely intelligible corporeal subjectivity. These are bodies that are not making juridical demands other than asserting a right to live, to take place, and to express passion and emotion in the aggregate. That in itself is a demand that claims movement and affect as political goods not superior to or different from individual agency but operating in a mutual force field, predicated on individual responsibility and liberty just as it asserts a common right to be together, to appear together, to expose the publicness of the public sphere—the polis—for what it is: a common area in which bodies circulate, rest, and occupy space.

These bodies perform a collective 'thereness' that refuses to go away but obdurately resists the tyranny of material precariousness, insisting that life flows through passionate, sensitive, and enraged aggregates of people that embody and enact the everydayness and banality of bare life. This is not a state of exception but a state of ordinariness making itself present: it is a bare crowd, bodies acting out, moved, shifted and shifting, refusing to perform except inasmuch as they are making themselves known in a capital economy that denies them the essential demands of sentient life. These are lives instead that laugh and love, hurt and cry, fear and dance, as well as work: lives too full, too exuberant, too emotive, perhaps too sentimentally feminine and primitive, in Athanasiou's terms, to withstand the dehumanizing effects of contemporary corporate capitalism.™ These bodies speak a discourse of exclusion by creating performative acts of inclusion and empathy against the grain. They are not just imitating one another mindlessly, childishly, but drawing strength from one another by their co-presence in a public sphere that becomes—and is shown to have always been—theirs to inhabit. These individuals, banding together in public and revolting against the obliteration of warmth and affection in a social, economic, and political regime that instrumentalizes bodies and minds to the point of annihilation—literally killing or provoking some citizens to political suicide*—speak by showing supportive plurality and so refusing alienation. I have shown that the grounds for this acting out were set at least as far back as the mid-nineteenth century, in an industrial context in which collective bodies rising up and showing their penchant for performative play were folded into a discourse on affective exaggeration. The result was a discursive temperance or abstemiousness that sought to quell passions, redirecting flows into the workforce. This was a workforce that one might imagine too brittle—too inelastic—to adopt organized systems of capital accumulation without the respite offered.


Crowds, discursively and politically abstracted from the corporeal desires and kinesthetic bonds that hold them together in public space, lose the vitality that makes states into nations and aggregates into meaningful, passionate, and emotionally vibrant social groups. The nation becomes an empty shell, until these bodies can reclaim public space and reinvest the group, the locality, or the square with the spirit of animation that the political system—any political system—might be meant, in the final analysis, to protect.

FORWARD/BACK

I have suggested the ‘archival repertoire’ as a term to designate the ever-moving, plastic quality of the paper trail that makes up the material stuff within which choreomania, the dancing disease, took shape. But, fittingly, the archival repertoire extends into a living, present act. I have deliberately echoed here Schneider's title from her afterword to Performing Remains: Art and War in Times of Theatrical Reenactment (2011), ‘And back—Afterword’, in order to underscore the perpetual acts of repetition and rehearsal that we perform in writing all the time, the community of citation, sometimes more explicit, sometimes more implicit, that make up every act of writing and every encounter.

Performing Remains argues that theatre and performance are always taking place again; but also, significantly, that they are therefore never entirely dead or alive. Theatre, as that which uncannily doubles life, hovers in a space of repetition performed always with a measure of difference, a hop—step that never falls in the same place and always attempts to move forward but does so inevitably by looking back, behind its shoulder, at what is always already gone. In disappearing, constantly, and in appearing, constantly, theatre, dance, and _performance_ perform renewal and ghostly returns, returns that are ghostly before they have even had a chance to purport to die; in this half-living, half-dying state, traditions, canons, and concepts are formed. I had a chance to ‘reperform’ Meige’s archival return to Echternach, following in June 2011 the steps—or my imagination of the steps—he took over a hundred years before. Meige, as I showed in Chapter 6, sought to see, in context, a live example of the hystero-epileptic convulsions that he knew from Charcot's clinical lectures. He sought to see these convulsions in a town that purportedly still rehearsed a processional festival that feted the dancing disease. He found only a shell of this supposedly once vibrant tradition: a policed, choreographed theatre of civic pride, recapitulating again and again a history that had already by then entirely forgotten its predecessors.

In attempting to return to this site to see the Echternach dancing procession for myself a few years ago, I found that the blare of the brass horns and the monotony of the repetitious steps—traditionally, five steps forward, four steps back; five steps forward, three steps back; or three steps forward, two steps back (the most traditional number, according to the tourist literature provided to pilgrims)—assaulted my senses and, in the end, dulled my desire compliantly to perform.

I had agreed to attend 'in a spirit of pilgrimage', as tourist literature and event organizers prompted. But my pilgrimage was to an archival source; not even that, it was to the spectral reperformance of an archival site once undertaken by a French physician now long dead. What had I sought to find? What had he sought to find in returning to this site?

Fieldwork for a historian of dance—and, even more evanescently, for a historian of ideas about dance—provides a strange conundrum: at once chasing after shadows and perpetually mired in words, we must nevertheless convince ourselves that there are places—books, towns, events—through which we might access other ways of seeing the world, ways that might unravel our own understandings about the past and its chimera, as well as about our own presents.

Of course, this notion of the past recedes as we find ourselves consistently confronted with our own stubborn presence, our own presentness, and the infuriatingly tenacious way in which this constant being in the present moves along forward in time with us. We are always only ever in the present moment. So what have I been able to say of the past? What have I been able to imagine?

I have shown that presents, whenever they may be, are always suffused with a particular color and tone of imagining their own relationship to a past. In this regard, history is always already theatrical: it imagines itself ghosted by something that came before, and which it rehearses again, with difference. It is the measure of 'difference' that makes every present what it is: a version of the past cast in this or that particular flavor or style of new garb, this or that particular rendition of the medieval, the Dionysian, the Roman, or what have you.

I have argued that 'modernity'—a particular facet of modernity, a clustering of 'modern' self-imaginings—appears to have been haunted throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries by a version of the past conceived as erratic, fitful, and collective. Yet, uncannily, this past was also present, elsewhere. It emerged spectrally, mysteriously, in colonial places, in faraway lands; it even re-emerged in the present day among lower or 'superstitious' classes. Modernity, then, was—and is, arguably—a force of difference and alienation, inasmuch as it separates and alienates itself from what it sees as having come prior. As a performative trope, this version of modernity posits the new as stuffed to the gills with the old, unable to shake its heritage but prancing about in a shiny new costume that suggests (to itself) that it has. Like the pilgrims’ steps at Echternach, this book has felt at times—most times—like a dance over lost and invisible bones, three steps forward, two steps back. I hope, if anything, to have suggested that diagonal steps, tumbles, strutting, shaking, ticking, and swooning are all also fruitful ways of moving, and that syncopated beats and irregular rhythms might constitute an alterkinetic aesthetics, a way of seeing ‘beautiful’ movements as those which may also be erratic, unpredictable, chaotic, and yes, dis-eased. Performance maker Jess Thom, who styles herself ‘Touretteshero’, boasts as her motto: ‘Changing the world one tic at a time’. She bursts into apparently nonsensical language bits constantly (‘biscuit’, ‘hedgehog’), has seizures, speaks highly articulately in conversation, and smiles infectiously in equal measure, exuberant and confident in the knowledge that her involuntary movements and speech acts are creative outbursts—what she calls a creative language machine—inaccessible to ‘neurotypical’ people.Chorea, epilepsy, and other neurological disorders are complex fantasies imbricated in centuries of imaginative associations, putative precedents, and horizontal affiliations. I have shown that the history of what may now be construed as movement disorders has by and large typically been associated in scientific and popular literature with uncomfortable political uprisings, intense group sentiment, and expressions of emotion, including ebullience, anger, and grief, as well as a highly racialized notion of colonial mimicry and pantomimic theatre. But by this token, the same disorders can also be seen positively as outbursts and outpourings, rehearsals for other possible worlds, other ways of seeing the strictures of social choreography in everyday life, and other ways of imagining our relationships to our presents and our pasts. In this view, choreomania, the dancing disease, in all its plural manifestations, is also arguably a choreographic cataclysm in the history of human progress, a set or series of very varied disturbances in the rhythmic order of ‘black’, ‘white’, ‘Latin’, and so many other intermixed strands of popular music and social dancing; also a figure of thought infiltrating innumerable disciplines, a modern fiction that is simultaneously antimodern, irregular, fleeting, and evanescent but intuitive and enduring. And it is none of those things. Like any chimera, or any ghost, choreomania hovers spectrally over (and under) the modern imagination, reflecting our worries and anxieties back to us in an elusive, distorted, and constantly changing form. I began this book by suggesting that it told the story of a fantasy: a complex, morphing, travelling idea about the dancing disease as it moved through modern scientific and social scientific literature. Like any fantasy, and any concept, it is also a reality, ineluctably in the world, affecting (and affected by) real lives. In pulling this fantasy apart at the seams—without ever being able to ‘catch’ the ghost—I hope to have provided the groundwork for rearticulating other fantasies and concepts, in which uncontrollable, spasmodic, sporadic, and apparently inexplicable kinaesthetic acts are welcome as symptoms of a diverse body politic, as diverse as it is new and old. As the Echternach dancing procession evolved in the first half of the twentieth century, the increasing regularity of the steps suggested that earlier convulsions had come to be choreographed into a tightly knit social performance of religious cohesion—a far cry from the heterodox gatherings and claims to miraculous intervention of the preceding centuries. When I attended, a friendly francophone local explained to me that the Germans hopped forward, while the francophones hopped to the side, a very subtle distinction I only started to make out by the end of our round; and indeed, this myth—which he was keen to present to me—belied the fact that to my left, a friendly, quiet German man seemed to hop the same way as everyone else. We all respected a pattern which I noted in my diary as 'Left hop right hop left hop right hop left hop right hop ...', in rows of five, neatly kept in place throughout by little white handkerchiefs which we held between us.

In the organizer Pierre Kauthen's account, a slightly more sophisticated choreography had come to be meticulously observed by Boy Scouts and civilians, who were effectively brought into line by municipal authorities keen to preserve a common national heritage with as little boisterous disturbance as possible.** Stipulations that dancers should proceed four or five abreast®® seem also to have passed out of favour in the interwar period, most plausibly because it was too difficult to find space for performance in the street, given the new mass appeal of the event. Streets were crowded with cars, and now that journalists were converging upon the site, while radios blared and police officers kept everyone in check, there was little room for the kind of chaos that the procession had previously been known to engender.

The new, politicized dancing procession excluded the truly ill, beggars, and other potentially disruptive people, turning the event into a parade for the glory of the modern nation and the wealth of the tourist and leisure industry.** Guy, my French informant, and the parish priest I happened upon the next day, Father Théophile Walin, both assured me that there was no more talk of movement disorders and hardly any memory that this had ever played a part in the procession. Father Walin knew of one woman who had suffered from some condition, which he could not exactly recall, and who had asked her son to hop in her stead. This had alleviated her suffering, he informed me. But he knew of no other cases.

This theatre of normalcy had gradually supplanted a far unsteadier public procession, in which all sorts of ‘disorder’ were at play. Today, nine thousand dancers and three thousand spectators gather to rehearse an event that has long since refantasized the fiction of a medieval tradition. When I attended, like Meige, I looked obliquely for signs of movement disorders, Moving Fields, Modernity, and the Bacchic Chorus + noting a first aid van parked outside the basilica on the evening before. Older spectators lined the parade in wheelchairs, surely gladdened at this expression of coordinated—if subdued—motion (fig. C.1). Others watched from in front of a fairground, reminding me of the ghostly quality of this event as entertainment (fig. C.2): not a mania but a form of intensity, an enthusiasm, enacting 313 the orderly and the haphazard, the methodical and the disciplined, as well as the spirit of fête; in an event that partook, for all of its solemn overtones, of both (fig. C.3). It was a repetition of something that had served as a sort of yearly frenetic activity, crystallized through the centuries, transformed after a couple of world wars, whose imprint on the local walls was still patent, as Guy pointed out, gesturing towards bullet holes. Yet through this rehearsal of an idea about the past, the event spoke only of the present: the present as something, precisely, that returns. Something that is relational, a reminder of other presents; something that one can look forward to, by remembering that it has always or almost always occurred in more or less this way. It had outgrown its status as a dancing disease, but this procession, linked through a chain of associations with St. Vitus’s dance, the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, and Charcot’s clinic, presented the modern tourist-participant and reperformer (myself) with a sort of nostalgia for or phantasm of what may never have actually existed. These leaps at and around tombs, either for a cure or, in this case, nothing better than a collective day out in the nearby town, gestured towards a performance of history for the pleasure and joy of it—for the common, joint experience of repetition. A theatre of repetition performed as if always anew; or, one might add, always moving, hopping if not hobbling along, in a circle around the basilica. Here, the theatre of returns did not attempt a strict movement backwards; it did not try to capture what was ostensibly gone, archived, long dead. It continued, forward and back, forward and back, reconfiguring the historicity of the event in the ecstasy of progressive amnesia.


===========================================\n\n\n

Tarantism: From an Ancient Syndrome to a New Form of Heritage in Southern Italy

Introduction

Folklore has always dealt with the relationship between humans and animals and how an animal can harm a human. The famous myth of Adam and Eve in the Genesis, about a snake that deceives a human couple, is a good example of this. However, it is not necessary to dig too much into the oldest pieces of folklore to discover tales about harmful animals. A contemporary legend collected in the United States tells about a woman who meets a spider while lying on a beach during a holiday. The spider bites the woman on her arm and lays some eggs into her skin. Baby spiders eventually hatch from those eggs and come out of the woman's body (Brunvand 1986: 76-77). This legend is undoubtedly interesting as a specific example of the relationship between humans and spiders in folklore.

While there are species of spiders that can actually be harmful and poisonous to humans, some are just believed to be dangerous. For example, Southern-Eastern Italians have alleged for centuries the existence of a spider called taranta, which could bite people and affect them with the syndrome of tarantism, a disease treated with music, dances, and the intervention of Saint Paul. It was a unique phenomenon, impossible to explain scientifically and intertwined with complex cultural symbols and meanings. Due to its cultural value, tarantism, although extinct as a syndrome nowadays, has been reused and transformed into a representative piece of local heritage.

Tarantism has been a popular topic among Italian ethnologists, anthropologists, and folklorists. Being an Italian researcher myself and interested in tarantism, I decided to discuss this phenomenon in my Master's thesis after conducting fieldwork on this topic in Italy in 2018. The aim of my thesis is studying tarantism as a contemporary element of folklore and heritage in the Southern-Eastern Italian region of Salento and highlighting the current importance and influence of the phenomenon.

I already had a preliminary knowledge of the topic of tarantism before approaching it in the field. During my bachelor program in Anthropology in Bologna, I came across tarantism because it was a research interest of the ethnologist Ernesto De Martino (1908-1965). De Martino is a famous and broadly studied personality in Italian ethno-anthropology, not least because he has published several works on cultural phenomena of Southern Italy, including tarantism. De Martino conducted fieldwork about tarantism in 1959 and published a book about his ethnographic experiences two years later. This book, published in English as The Land of Remorse in 2005, is still a classical work of Italian ethnography and frequently quoted in academic classes and conferences in Italy.

The Land of Remorse helped me also in the fieldwork process and I would consider it as the starting point of a wider research that has involved also other books, documentaries, visual and acoustic sources. In this regard, several books and articles, three films and six webpages will be included in my references. Furthermore, I will rely on the data that I collected in the field. Speaking of my fieldwork, I have arranged it independently in the two weeks between the 20th of June and the 4th of July 2018. I decided to stay in a town called Galatina in the Salento region, where people affected by tarantism would gather in the past to be healed by the grace of Saint Paul. This gathering occurred every June 29 in the local chapel dedicated to the Saint, and today, re-enactments are organized in the town in memory of that ancient ritual. I chose to be in Galatina during that period to observe and participate in the events held in those two weeks of summer 2018. I took pictures and videos of the re-enactments and their rehearsals, bought relevant books, and took vocal and written notes about my experience. I also recorded three interviews and two non-structured conversations with people in the field, including activists, assessors, scholars, and organizers of cultural events. Speaking with them, I discovered more details about the ancient syndrome of tarantism and understood the most recent aspects and issues regarding the phenomenon as heritage of Salento in the present day.

The thesis consists of an introduction, a theoretical and methodological part, a conclusion, a list of the references, and a final summary in Estonian. The theoretical and methodological part is divided into two chapters, which examine the history of tarantism and research thereof and the current issues regarding heritagisation and authenticity of tarantism, respectively. The first chapter and the second chapter are also divided into subchapters, respectively four and two.

In the first chapter, I presented the main features and historical transformations of the phenomenon. I defined the syndrome of tarantism and described the related healing rituals in the first subchapter, proceeding a historical overview of tarantism and related studies, from the earliest medical enquiries to the latest ethnographic writings. In the second subchapter, I mentioned Italian physicians like Caputo (1741), Baglivi (1828) and De Raho (1908), who have studied tarantism in the 18th and 19th centuries and suggested the possibility that the syndrome was not caused by spider bites. In the third subchapter, I moved to the 20th century and analyzed the work of De Martino (2005), whose research about tarantism has had an undeniable historical role for Italian ethnography. Finally, in the fourth subchapter, I referred to more recent authors like De Giorgi (1999 and 2007), Chiriatti (2011), Pizza (2012 and 2015), Inserra (2017) and others, who have noticed and analyzed the gradual transformation of tarantism into heritage and how this heritage has become popular within and outside of Salento.

In the second chapter, I moved to the contemporary analysis of tarantism as a heritagised phenomenon, with the help of my own fieldwork experience in Galatina in 2018. I described this experience and the outcomes of my research in the first subchapter, before coming to the more recent issues regarding heritagisation and authenticity of tarantism in the second subchapter. A broader discussion about those aspects of tarantism nowadays is necessary to understand the historical transformations that the phenomenon is constantly facing. In this regard, I based my analysis on recent articles and books by several contemporary scholars. Among them, I should mention Regina Bendix (1997, 2009 and 2018), Dorothy Noyes (2006, 2015 and 2016) and Valdimar Hafstein (2018), due to their reflections upon the issues of authenticity, heritagisation and folklorisation. In sum, I described tarantism as a culture-bound syndrome within its historical context and then discussed the current transformations of this phenomenon into heritage and the related discourses from a fieldworker’s perspective. Since it has been heritagised, tarantism nowadays is preserved and promoted by locals as an element of the identity of Salento. Studying tarantism as heritage means studying it as a living tradition of a community and relating the topic to its contemporary issues, like authenticity. This focus on contemporary tarantism can be interesting and important for folklorists and ethnographers. However, it can be intriguing also for people from Salento, who may want to explore the issues regarding their own heritage and its impact on their own community and their own region. In this sense, ethnography is very helpful, since it is possible to get directly in touch with the locals and understand the issues regarding heritagised tarantism from their thoughts and their words.

Ending this introduction, I would like to thank Ulo Valk and Elo-Hanna Seljamaa for their support in the process of writing this thesis. Their work of supervision, their feedbacks and their suggestions have certainly improved the quality of this thesis and helped me to make it academically valuable. 

1. Historical development of tarantism and overview of previous research
1.1. What is tarantism?

This thesis will be an analysis of a cultural and historical phenomenon of Southern-Eastern Italy, called tarantism. This phenomenon occurred mainly in a sub-region of Italy called Salento (part of the larger region of Apulia) and was witnessed historically from the Middle Ages to the 20th century. Tarantism can be defined as a culture-bound syndrome, experienced after the alleged bite of a spider called taranta or tarantula. Although the bite occurred once (generally during the individual’s early adulthood), the bitten people would often feel sick periodically and every summer.

The historian of medicine Jean F. Russell (1979: 410-411) provided a good description of the symptoms of the alleged bite:

"Those who were bitten were anguished and depressed, had dyspnoea in addition to cyanosis, syncope, weakened pulse, and hyperpyrexia. [...] Many complained of headache, vertigo, anxiety, palpitation, disorder of the stomach, thirst, heart pains, and fatigue. Some said their bones ached as if they were broken, and some said they were seized with lethargy. Sometimes the onset was sudden, and sometimes slow. The attacks varied, some victims were so morbidly excited that they could not sleep, and would sing or laugh and dance continually. Others would leap into the air uttering wild cries, or hurl themselves to the ground arching their bodies in grotesque convulsions. Many were dejected and would weep constantly as if pining away; a few had constant tremor, a number were drowsy, others were scarcely in possession of their senses, and some were completely mad; indeed some even died.

I would like to add a further symptom to this list: the altered state of consciousness. Quoted by many scholars (De Martino 2005; Lapassade 2001; Nocera 2013), this state was often accompanied by mystic and religious hallucinations, with Saint Paul as the main interlocutor for the affected people. The role of Saint Paul is crucial. According to a widespread local legend, the Saint stopped in a town of Salento, Galatina, to avoid the persecutions of the Roman Emperor Nero. Caputo reported the legend in a passage of his book De tarantulae anatomiae et morsu (1741). This passage has been translated into Italian and printed on a sign exposed in the chapel of Saint Paul in Galatina nowadays. Persecutions towards Christians. Hosted by a religious man, the Saint decided to reward him and his native town with the immunity from the bite of the taranta and the consecration of the water of his well. This legend explains why tarantati never came from Galatina historically and instead reached the town every year to drink the water and receive the grace of the Saint. Moreover, the anthropologist Gino Leonardo Di Mitri observed in the documentary Latrodectus (2009) that people from Salento have always considered Saint Paul as the chief of spiders. The link between the Saint and spiders is strong, which explains why the Saint has always been an interlocutor for tarantati during their moments of altered state of consciousness.

The documentarist Gianfranco Mingozzi showed in his short film Tarantula (1962) an example of this interaction, with a woman affected by tarantism dialoguing with the Saint in front of a picture of him. The woman heard the Saint asking her to donate money for a service in his honour; therefore, the Saint would have healed her after her donation. Broadly speaking, the interactions between the tarantati and the Saint were crucial for the final healing process, since the Saint always gave to the person the instructions to recover. However, healing was not always definitive as people would often experience the symptoms every summer after the first bite.

It is important to mention a further detail about tarantism: the healing therapies, for a tarantata or a tarantato, consisted mainly of dancing with the accompaniment of music. This music belonged to a specific genre, called pizzica (from the Italian verb pizzicare, to pinch), played also nowadays in Salento for recreational purposes. Pizzica is the local variant of another genre of music and dance called tarantella, named after taranta, and widespread in the whole Southern Italy. This has led some scholars to assume a larger diffusion of tarantism in the past (Inserra 2017: 7). The family of the affected person used to pay musicians to play and make their sick relative dance, since the frantic movements were believed to help him or her to get rid of the poison of the spider (De Martino 2005: 37-40). Music and dances were the basic elements of the so-called “domestic therapy”, held in the house of the tarantata or tarantato. This therapy took usually place every year in June, lasting for one or more days and always before the date of June 29, when the final healing therapy occurred in the chapel of Saint Paul in Galatina.

People affected by tarantism, in Italian. I will also use in this text the variants tarantato, male singular, tarantata, female singular, and tarantate, female plural. Please note also that the male variants can be used also to refer to both female and male objects and people, according to the rules of the Italian language. The ritual of drinking the sacred water from Saint Paul’s well, built on the external side of one of the walls of the chapel, happened always in that circumstance. I will come afterwards to the description of those therapies. Although the state of illness of many people was real, scientists have never found and described the so-called taranta. Indeed, although the names taranta and tarantula inspired the scientific denomination of the real animal Lycosa tarantula, the local descriptions of the spider and its symptoms do not match with this animal. There is instead a closer similarity with the effect of the bite of another local spider, called Latrodectus tredecimguttatus (De Martino 2005: 35), even though the rarity of this arthropod and its scarce aggressiveness towards humans do not explain at all why the phenomenon was so frequent and widespread (Bettini 1964: 93-102). Broadly speaking, many peculiar elements seem to question the idea that a spider or a similar animal can be responsible for the symptoms of the syndrome. Therefore, the explanations for tarantism are different from the alleged bite of a spider and are more likely intertwined with the symbolism inherited within the cultural context of Salento for centuries.

For example, the idea of biting (or pinching, to be more precise) is often linked to the sphere of sexuality and sexual frustration, since the bite of taranta usually involves genitals (as explained, for example, by Gilberto Camilla in Nocera 2013: 11). The ethnographer and expert of tarantism Maurizio Nocera (2013) mentions also links with Greek mythology. Pinching reminds of the classical Greek symbol of the oistros, the stinger who has affected the mythical figure of Io. The figure of the spider and its relationship with a deity is instead explored in the tale of Arachne. The connection between the spider, the bite and these classical myths suggest a more ancient origin of the symbolism of tarantism than the Middle Ages.

Tarantism may have indeed originated during the first millennium before Christ, with the arrival of Greeks in Southern Italy or even the more ancient migration of the ancient people of Messapians to Salento. Nocera (2013: 27) suggests indeed that Greeks or Messapians gave birth to the phenomenon in order to deal with the consequence of a collective trauma (perhaps a war or the migration itself). Tarantism, according to Nocera, turned afterwards into a strategy to deal with something different, namely sexual frustration, and started to acquire a deeply ambiguous symbolism.

The clearest expression of this ambiguity is certainly the figure of Saint Paul, who is both a pincher (as said in some folk songs, reported by Carpitella in De Martino 2005: 269-285) and the final healer for the bitten people, who could even experience altered states of consciousness after the bite and talk with the Saint himself. Going throughout centuries, tarantism has been able to preserve its cultural specificity, allowing the survival of its symbolism even nowadays, when the phenomenon has disappeared in favour of new related forms of local heritage in Salento.

I will come back later to the development of tarantism and to its inner symbolism. However, before analysing the historical witnesses of tarantism, I would like to clarify a further detail about the origins of the phenomenon. Nocera’s opinion about the birth of tarantism is almost impossible to prove as are the different assumptions by other scholars and experts. Since there is no written source about tarantism until the 14th century, every possible hypothesis regarding its origin remains purely speculative. The link with Greek mythology and the Greek symbols of the stinger and the spider is not easy to demonstrate, for the same reason: the historical discrepancy between the classical civilisation and the earliest written sources. A significant transformation of the phenomenon should have occurred in the in-between centuries, and with no documents about this process, it is almost impossible to trace it. It is even not possible to say whether tarantism is the result of this historical transformation or something that originated independently. Therefore, I will not come back to the speculative debate about the origins of tarantism or the link between the phenomenon and Greek mythology: this is not the purpose of my work. I will try instead to expound how tarantism developed throughout centuries, with the help of some significant historical sources and academic studies.

1.2. Early history of tarantism and the first related studies

The first source that talks about tarantism dates back to the Middle Ages: that is the Sertum papale de venenis, a text written by the physician Cristoforo Degli Onesti in the second half of the 14th century. Degli Onesti, from Firenze and living in the 14th century, wrote about tarantism as witnessed in the following manner:

"For what reason do those bitten by the tarantula find miraculous recovery in various songs and melodies? It must be said that, music and song being a reason for cheerfulness, both are thought to be useful for almost every poison: and since the bite of the tarantula produces a melancholic disease, and because the melancholy is treated in the most suitable way with cheerfulness, it follows that songs and music are quite healthy for those who have suffered such a bite." (Thornedike 1882: 534)

Degli Onesti described the methods to heal tarantism as just "thought to be useful," revealing his scepticism towards those methods. This was certainly due not only to his background as a physician but also to the complete unawareness of the cultural symbolism related to the syndrome. Many physicians have in fact written about tarantism, interpreting the phenomenon as a peculiar disease to be studied, according to the knowledge of their time. We may think, for instance, about Epifanio Ferdinando, Giorgio Baglivi and, broadly speaking, the Neapolitan school of medicine, which developed after the Middle Ages in Naples (De Martino 2005: 223-226). Naples was for centuries the biggest city and the capital of the Southern part of the peninsula. Thus, it is not surprising that Naples was the centre for the most prestigious medical studies in that geographical area. Salento, on the contrary, was a marginalised area, quite distant from large urban contexts and populated by peasants with their rural habits and their peculiar diseases. However, Naples was close enough to Salento to attract many physicians, who studied tarantism in the 15th and following centuries, observed the phenomenon in its original context (conducting hence a sort of ante litteram fieldwork) and consequently provided clinical descriptions of it.

Despite the similarities, their approach was radically different from contemporary ethnography, due to profession and their cultural background. In fact, the influence of scientific revolution, enlightenment and positivism led those physicians to look for the physiological causes of tarantism, ignoring instead the cultural symbolism and significance of the phenomenon. However, talking about tarantism, some physicians realise that it could not be explained only as the physiological symptom of a spider bite. For instance, according to the conclusions of Giorgio Baglivi in the 17th century, two types of tarantism were recognizable: a true one and a false one. Being in touch with the locals, he could realize that the spiders really bit some people, while some other individuals were just "celebrating their little carnivals" (Baglivi 1828). According to him, some people who danced to recover from the poison of the tarantula were in some way faking their illness, due to their alleged superstition and ignorance. This ideological statement was reaffirmed in the following century during the spread of the Enlightenment by the physician Francesco Serao in his Lezioni in 1742 after further medical experiments conducted by his informants in Apulia. Serao even assumed that the "fake tarantism" postulated by Baglivi should have been extended to the entire phenomenon, observing that every disease in the region during the summertime was locally described as tarantism and, consequently, that actually no one was bitten by any spider since there were other physiological reasons for those diseases. Therefore, he thought that all the beliefs and rituals related to spiders, dances, and music were just part of an "institution" with the function of healing a local "melancholy" not directly caused by the bite of the tarantula (De Martino 2005: 231-232). Baglivi and Serao, thus, implied a social and cultural reason for tarantism, excluding the idea of a real spider affecting people locally.

In particular, Baglivi received some credit from the erudite writer Francesco Cancellieri in a letter from 1817. This letter, written about tarantism, shows a clear statement regarding the nature of the phenomenon, defined as "a true melancholy, or mental disease [...] to be satisfied with corresponding music" (Cancellieri 1817: 5). To demonstrate that tarantism was just a mental disease, Cancellieri quoted Baglivi, who had reported an experiment conducted in 1693 by a physician who made an actual Lycosa tarantula bite him in presence of witnesses and a notary; this physician, according to Cancellieri and Baglivi, could not experience any physical pain or the symptoms of tarantism (1817: 5-6). In sum, neither physicians nor erudite people since the Modern Age, approaching the study of tarantism, could believe that a spider could cause such trouble.

In the meantime, as studies proceeded and scholars kept researching the phenomenon, the institution of tarantism faced a gradual but relevant transformation, due to the conflict with more powerful and influential institutions. For instance, I have already mentioned Saint Paul's chapel in Galatina. Originally, this building was not a sacred chapel but just a profane and public house. Nevertheless, people affected by tarantism have always gathered there to receive the grace of Saint Paul, who, according to the legend, consecrated that house after being hosted there. The house became a chapel only in the second half of the 18th century, coming directly under the institutional influence of the Catholic Church. Nowadays the chapel has become private property, and having a significant historical value, its owners have preserved it carefully from possible damages during public events. That is the reason why a sign in the chapel forbids dancing there, although the owners could allow it during traditional events like the Night of the Rounds, as happened in 2018. I will discuss this more in detail in the next chapter. It is possible that the institutionalization of the chapel has been the first step to the gradual deconstruction of the original belief system of the region, leading to the almost complete extinction of tarantism nowadays. However, the phenomenon survived in the 1920s and until the second half of the 20th century. During those periods, anthropology and ethnology entered academia, influencing the studies about tarantism too, as the example of Francesco De Raho shows. De Raho worked with tarantati between the 1920s and 20th century and wrote in 1908 a monograph called "Tarantism in Superstition and Science." The title of the book shows a clear positivist approach (due also to the medical background of the author), even though the phenomenon was studied and documented in an ethnographic manner (De Martino 2005: 242). He wrote notes and took photographs about some peculiar features of the domestic healing therapy of his time, like the "rope dance" (De Martino 2005: 89-90), that had been described by his colleague Nicola Caputo already in 1741:

This woman [a tarantata met by Caputo] had suspended a rope from the ceiling of her humble dwelling, the end of which, just touching the floor in the middle of the room, she tenaciously squeezed between her hands; throwing herself upon it, she abandoned herself with the weight of her whole body, her feet planted on the floor, turning her head to and fro, her face glowing, with a surly look. (Caputo 1741: 111 ff.; translation by Dorothy Louise Zinn.)

The rope dance, as well as other ancient elements of domestic healing therapy of tarantism such as the sword dance, the symbols of water and mirror and the outdoor and bucolic setting for the therapy itself became extinct in the first half of the 20th century (De Martino 2005). In about fifty years, from the publication of De Raho's monograph (1908) to the fieldwork by De Martino (summer of 1959), many of these elements had gradually disappeared and tarantism turned into a dying phenomenon. A broader and more insightful look at De Martino’s research can explain this statement and give a significant example of ethnography about tarantism in Salento.

4 The Night of the Rounds (in Italian, notte delle ronde) is an event traditionally held in Galatina between the two dates of June 28 and 29. It takes its name from the rounds formed by people (ronde, in Italian), who spontaneously gather in the town to dance and play pizzica.

12 1.3. Ernesto De Martino and tarantism

Ernesto De Martino (1908-1965), born in Naples (Italy), is considered one of the most influential anthropologists and ethnologists in Italy and worldwide. While The Land of Remorse helped him to be publicly acknowledged, his work is certainly wider and aimed to ethnographically and ethnologically describe the cultural context of Southern Italy of his time. His interest was also encouraged by his studies, conducted at first in the University of Naples, where he graduated in 1932, and then with the help of the influential philosopher Benedetto Croce (1866-1952). Croce inspired De Martino about the so-called “historicist” approach within ethnology, with the purpose of relating ethnology itself to history rather than to philosophical naturalism. This approach emerged in De Martino’s first publication, a monograph called Naturalismo e storicismo nell'etnologia (“Naturalism and Historicism in Ethnology’, 1941). This book was also the first milestone for his longer epistemological project of tracing and describing the religious history of Southern Italy. As explained by the Italian scholar himself in his book Magic: A Theory from the South (2015), “this is a religious history conceived as the exact measurement of the participation of Southern thought in the great opposition between magic and rationality, so important for the birth of modern civilisation” (2015: 132). We can also understand from this quote why De Martino was interested in Southern Italian religious history. Indeed, Southern Italy was not only his birthplace but also an intriguing research field for those interested in the historical relationship between magic and rationality. We may think, for instance, about the Neapolitan physicians who studied tarantism with a rational approach to understand a complex and typical phenomenon of Salento, with its spiritual, magical, and religious subtext. According to De Martino, Southern Italy (as well as the entire European continent, to a certain extent) took its unique identity by the encounter of rationality and magic. And, as said in the quotation, also modern civilization is a product of this encounter, making De Martino's long-term project important from a historical perspective.

Dorothy Zinn, who has translated De Martino’s works into English, recognized three of his books as tracing the religious history of Southern Italy (De Martino 2015: 132, in the footnote): Morte e pianto rituale nel mondo antico ("Death and Ritual Mourning in the Ancient World", 1958), Magic: A Theory from the South (2015, originally published in 1959) and The Land of Remorse (2005, originally published in 1961). All these works encompass some typical pieces of Southern Italian folklore, like funerals, magic, and, obviously, tarantism.

The reason why this last phenomenon was considered crucial for De Martino's historical religious research is explained in the introduction of his book The Land of Remorse (2005: 10-12):

The initial idea of carrying out an ethnographic investigation of Apulian tarantism — and thus beginning the projected series of contributions toward a religious history of the South[ern Italy] — came to me as I was looking at some of André Martin's excellent photographs° of the scenes which take place in the Chapel of St. Paul in Galatina each year from June 28 to 30. [...] These photographs could be seen as images of strange, eccentric behavior, arousing a momentary curiosity, and so they would indeed have been “incidental” for the onlooker. But for me, they were a stimulus for anchoring the planned religious history of the South[ern Italy] to a circumscribed episode to be analyzed, to a phenomenon which recalled the commitment to historiographic coherence in an exemplary manner precisely because it appeared as a knot of extreme contradictions.

De Martino then describes the photographs and the contradictions behind the behavior of the portrayed subjects:

The young woman jumping on the corbel of the altar, the supine old man yelling with raised arms, the other young woman and the mystic bride did not have much in common with the Apostle to the Gentiles who had so authoritatively anathematized the disorders in the Church of Corinth. [...] The knot of contradictions thus became still more intricate, since the bite of taranta [the same as tarantula, editor's note] could be interpreted on the one hand in a realistic sense as the bite of a poisonous arachnid — for example, Latrodectus tredecimguttas; on the other hand, the behaviors typical of tarantism seemed to be drawn from definite cultural choices, from mythical-ritual symbols. [...] There were, then, good reasons for choosing tarantism as the topic of a first concrete contribution to a planned religious history of the South[ern Italy], as conceived in the perspective described above.

De Martino saw in Martin’s photographs the portrayals of the contradictions between the cultural and mythical-ritual context of Salento in the late 1950s and the institutionalized domains of Catholic religion and science. 

These contradictions are part of André Martin's work, a French photographer who visited Southern Italy in 1958 and stopped in Salento to take some pictures of tarantate. More information available in Caruso 2016: 98-100.

The contradictions are similar to the aforementioned ones between rationality and magic, which was the basis of the European civilization according to De Martino himself. Tarantism became a significant example of the discourse about the religious history of Southern Italy, prompting De Martino to conduct a fieldwork research in Salento in the summer of 1959.

A team of scholars and professional workers joined the Italian ethnographer in his expedition, lasting for three weeks (De Giorgi 2007: 35). The team included the psychiatrist Giovanni Jervis, the ethnomusicologist Diego Carpitella, the photographer Franco Pinna, and the anthropologist Amalia Signorelli (De Martino 2011). Their task was to collect materials and analyze them, providing a broad and interdisciplinary perspective on the phenomenon.

The team reached Salento on June 20, 1959. Prior to their arrival, everyone had studied the phenomenon from previous sources but had not made any contacts with tarantati. Their clear intention was to get acquainted with them directly, as they were having their traditional domestic healing therapy.

According to De Martino (2005: 38), "this was not an easy task, since we lacked a network of informants in the province [of Lecce, namely Salento; editor's note] who could notify us in season and scattered over a relatively wide area." However, he and his team were able to establish a useful network of informants, starting with the owner of their hostel in Galatina, who had been a traditional musician. They then met some of his acquaintances who were still hired to play during the domestic healing therapies.

Four days after their arrival, following the instructions of the owner, De Martino and his collaborators left Galatina for the nearby town of Nardo, where they met the musicians and attended a real traditional domestic therapy for tarantism. The protagonist was a young woman called Maria, or "Maria from Nardo" (as De Martino did in his work).

The therapy took place in a room of her house, re-arranged with a white sheet on the floor and no furniture on the walls, allowing her to move freely. Some objects were placed in the room, such as the sacred images of the Saints Peter and Paul and a jug of the miraculous water from Saint Paul's well® (De Martino 2005: 39). Interestingly, the water became inaccessible from the well due to an ordinance from the mayor of Galatina issued exactly in June 1959 for reasons related to public health (the water was stagnant and dirty).

The therapy started with Maria in the center of the room and the musicians in a corner. The instruments were played slowly and calmly but with a clear rhythmic pattern, followed by the tarantata while lying on the sheet and nodding her head. The music became louder and louder, encouraging Maria to stand up and dance frantically, moving her entire body in harmony with the music itself and jumping around in a circle repeatedly. Sometimes she also fell down and started to crawl, mimicking a walking spider (the taranta or tarantula, obviously). At a certain point, Maria got tired and interrupted the therapy to rest, lying on a sheet with a pillow under her head. However, as she recovered her strength, she was able to start the therapy again, continuing until she tired again. These cycles of dances and rest could last for more than one day, taking into account the physical needs of both the tarantati and the musicians. The cycles eventually finished when Maria heard Saint Paul's voice, announcing her future grace on June 29 in Galatina.

Maria experienced different visions and acoustic hallucinations related to the Saint during the cycles. She heard the last voice on June 25, after two days of dances. De Martino and his team witnessed her healing process in the last days of June 1959. They also interviewed 20 other people affected by the syndrome, mostly women, increasing the number of ethnographic documents used in The Land of Remorse.

The team spent the last days of June in different villages in Salento, conducting interviews, performing psychometric tests, and listening to personal experiences of tarantati during their three weeks in the field. The culminating moment of the research was the final healing therapy in Saint Paul's chapel in Galatina on June 29. Many pictures were taken by the team's photographer, Franco Pinna. De Martino also reported the witnessed behavior of tarantati and commented on the link between this behavior and the cultural and historical symbolism of the well.

De Martino noticed that tarantati acted in a disorganized way, climbing on the walls, screaming, and moving around without a precise direction, inside and outside the chapel. This phase of disorder generally preceded the ritual of drinking the miraculous water from Saint Paul's well. However, an ordinance by the mayor prohibited it in 1959 due to the bad hygienic conditions of the water.

In the book, De Martino introduced the theme of the "disarticulation of tarantism," the gradual separation between the pathological mental condition of the so-called tarantati and the old mythical-ritual context that has shaped this condition as a culture-bound syndrome throughout centuries. In the epilogue, De Martino stated that with the disarticulation of the organic and culturally conditioned link between crisis and choerutical-musical exorcism, and with the symbol of the taranta having entered into open conflict with all the hegemonic forms of cultural life and with the values expressed in them, tarantism began to recede to disease, and the historically conditioned efficacy of its horizons of recovery and reintegration gradually diminished. To the extent that the cultural defenses available to tarantism were dismantled and rendered inoperative, and their irremediable conflict with the motion of modern civilization was by then evident, what survived of tarantism got reduced to a bare crisis, exactly what we see in the extreme disorder of the Chapel of St. Paul in Galatina: the last, miserable local residue of a historical struggle which began with the disorders of the Church of Corynth and the polemic of the Apostle.

In this quote, we can find De Martino's opinion about tarantism during his time, certainly not so positively stated. Reduced to a “bare crisis” and a “miserable local residue” of a wider cultural phenomenon, tarantism was going to lose its peculiar symbolism (according to the Neapolitan scholar) and in some way, it seemed to become not anymore useful as a therapeutic ritual for people encountered in the field. This statement can match the definition of folklore as formulated by the Sardinian philosopher Antonio Gramsci. Gramsci, imprisoned by the Italian fascist regime due to his political ideas, started to write in jail in 1929 his Notebooks from the Prison, a collection of essays [7] where his idea of folklore came out and which inspired De Martino's works.

Folklore “can be understood only as a reflex of the lifestyle of a people, even though it often persists when conditions are modified to a greater extent”, according to Gramsci (2012: 89). The Italian scholar Fabrizio Ferrari expanded this definition in his monograph about De Martino, declaring that Gramsci had explained folklore as the “meaning given to world and life by the historical subordinate classes” (Ferrari 2012: 45). Folklore, in sum, was for Gramsci the distinctive product of subordinate classes (opposed to the hegemonic ones and their culture) and a relic of the past, surviving in contemporary times despite its lack of significance within modernity.®

De Martino was indeed influenced by this conceptualisation of folklore as the culture shared within socially subordinate people, despite being not so bounded to the original definition by Gramsci, who also added that “folklore is an obstacle to the cultural unification promoted by Marxism” (Ferrari 2012: 45). More precisely, even though he had shared with Gramsci the same political ideas after the end of the Second World War, unlike Gramsci, De Martino was not interested in talking about folklore as a form of subordinate culture to be overcome in order to establish socialism and destroy the bourgeois hegemony. De Martino’s purpose was mainly theoretical rather than political. This is also the reason why he theorised, in an article published in 1951 in the Italian newspaper L'Unita, the idea of “progressive folklore” (Zinn 2015: 6-7). According to De Martino, folklore was not as an obstacle for development but the exact opposite thing, at least from the perspective of the subordinate people who were sharing it. Indeed, he tried to re-evaluate it as “progressive”, defining it in the terms of a “conscious programme to comment on or express the struggle for emancipation according to local historical and cultural patterns” (Ferrari 2012: 46, quoting De Martino’s article). In other words, folklore did not impede but, on the contrary, helped criticism and struggle towards bourgeois power. Folklore could become a tool for resistance against the hegemonic culture of the bourgeoisie itself and re-affirmation of the social identity of the subordinate people. The purpose of folklore indeed should have been the social progress of the lower classes (which explains the adjective "progressive") or, at least, the not complete subjugation of those classes.

As suggested before, this statement about folklore can help also to understand tarantism better. There is a link between the depiction of the phenomenon in the epilogue of "The Land of Remorse" and both De Martino’s and Gramsci’s definition of folklore. Folklore, according to the Sardinian writer, is a survival of an ancient context (with its, even though dying, symbolism) within a nation like Italy which was going to face the positive effect of the economic boom in the upcoming 1960s and, consequently, a general process of modernisation.

Furthermore, there can be also a link between tarantism and the idea of progressive folklore, since the syndrome could be a tool for social redemption of the affected people. Tarantati, both men and women, were in fact victims of poverty and marginalisation within the context of Salento. Their behaviour, above all their dances during the month of June, was therefore a way to cope with these not good life conditions and find a way to overcome their psychological consequences.

Quoting again De Martino (2005: 46): "Among other things, the case of Maria of Nardo had highlighted how tarantism constituted a symbolic apparatus for evoking and configuring on the mythical-ritual level those psychic conflicts which had not found a resolution on the level of consciousness and which operated in the darkness of the unconscious, with the risk of appearing as neurotic symptoms. These conflicts were periodically released and produced on the mythical-ritual level, relieving the periods between ceremonies of the weight of their urges, and facilitating a relative psychic equilibrium in those periods."

In this way, we outlined the possibility of considering tarantism in a perspective in which certain conflicts found a horizon in a symbolic system of "first bite" and "re-bites" lived out according to traditionalized and socialized ways, times and places: the ways of the musical-choreutical-chromatic exorcism, the times of the seasonal and festive calendar, the places of home, fiefdom and chapel. In this passage, thus, De Martino explained the function of tarantism as a way to solve psychic conflicts within the mythical-ritual symbolism of the tarantula and its bite(s). A psychic conflict that, as said, is undoubtedly tied to a social condition experienced by many people in Salento and explored broadly in the biographical data provided by De Martino in his book (2005: 331-332). The idea of "psychic conflict" is not new, stemming from the framework of psychoanalysis. The influence of this approach on De Martino and his team is undoubted. Indeed, the psychiatrist of the team, Giovanni Jervis, connected the crises of tarantati to the medical and psychoanalytical concept of neurosis. Jervis, adding his contribution in "The Land of Remorse" (2005: 260-261), quoted both Sigmund Freud and Erich Fromm as the inventors and definers of the term neurosis, intended at first as the result of a conflict between individual biological needs and external cultural pressure. However, Jervis problematized this definition, considering the more recent transformations in the framework of psychiatry.

Using his words (De Martino 2005: 260): "From a psychiatric point of view [...], the concept of neurosis was most radically transformed: the unsolved inner contrast which causes the emergence of the neurotic symptom no longer appeared related to conflicts between nature and society, between biological instinct and repression, but more simply to internal conflicts among contradictory conditionings." This led to the study of the objective contradictions of certain social conditionings. Jervis mentioned Karen Horney, a psychiatrist who had studied neurosis in the United States in the first decades of the 20th century. According to Horney, a neurotic person is someone who had interiorised as a child the contradictions and the conflicts of their cultural context without solving them afterwards (Horney 1937: 284 ff.). As a result, the person can express an anomalous behaviour and a specialist can recognise it as neurotic. However, Horney had written about American psychiatric patients and not tarantati, whereas Jervis, even though suggesting a comparison between tarantism and neurosis, could not propose a complete homology between the two conditions.

Moreover, tarantism appeared clearly as a more complex phenomenon than just a psychiatric symptom, being something completely understood if analysed within Salento and its cultural context and symbolism (De Martino 2005: 267). Talking about Jervis, his main contribution to De Martino's fieldwork consisted of some psychometric tests given to tarantati. From one of those tests, specifically the one given to Maria from Nardo, De Martino named his book about tarantism "La terra del rimorso," translated then literally into English as "The Land of Remorse."

Maria indeed associated the Italian term "morso" (bite) to the further Italian word "rimorso," remorse intended as re-bite, as the comeback of a shameful past represented symbolically by the cyclical comeback of the symptoms of the bite of the spider. Maria's remorse was connected by the ethnographer to her personal life experience (like her unhappy childhood) and above all her sexual and sentimental frustration: she was engaged with a young man who decided to break up with her and she then married a man whom she did not choose. Between these two moments, she was bitten for the first time and started to have visions of Saint Paul who ordered her not to marry. Being obviously not satisfied after Maria's wedding, the Saint then punished her disobedience with the syndrome of tarantism. De Martino interpreted instead this punishment as the consequence of bad life circumstances and choices. In other words, as a consequence of a remorse, both in the literal sense and as a re-bite.

Going further with De Martino's interpretation and reporting his words (2005: 45-46): In the mythical-ritual horizon of tarantism and the Christian graft of St. Paul's figure, Maria periodically released her conflicts and converted her frustrations into symbols, lightening the periods between ceremonies—that is, daily life—of the burden of unconscious stimulations which would have been extremely dangerous had she not found a socialized and traditionalized project of calendrical, festive treatment in tarantism. Through the mythic order of “taranta’”, “bite”, “poison” and St. Paul, Maria gave a form to frustrating psychic conflicts, and through the ritual order of music, dance, and colors, she got in touch with these conflicts through an annual treatment which evoked them in time and place and made them communicate with the plane of symbolic creations proposed by the myth. At the same time, Maria released aggressive drives against her undesired husband in an alienated form; she upset her conjugal life, economically harmed the family she did not love, and clamorously drew public attention—normally uninterested in her—to her drama.

In sum, De Martino's position about tarantism is undoubtedly tied to the context of frustration, poverty, isolation, and lack of freedom in life choices experienced by people affected by the syndrome. All the tarantati met by De Martino were people with unsolved issues and in search of a stable role in their society. This is evident mostly thinking about the gender of many tarantati, who were in fact tarantate, that is to say women. Women like Maria were not only sexually unsatisfied but also without a husband, without children, and instead completely involved in their manual job in tobacco plantations. The social deconstruction of their traditional role as wives, child-bearers, and mothers brought them to experience a real existential crisis. De Martino had called this crisis the “crisis of the presence” in many of his works and, although not mentioning it in The Land of Remorse, he showed a link between the condition of the tarantati and his ideas regarding the presence.

De Martino elaborated the concept of presence from the idea of Dasein, developed within philosophical existentialism and defined as the condition of being in the world (De Martino 1948). Presence is hence a synonym for “individual existence” but also refers to historical roles and conditions that individuals experience throughout their lives. A job, a marital status, a place to live are just examples of the elements that constitute the individual's presence in his or her historical context. When the individual goes through a negative change, for instance, losing his or her job or moving to a different place, he or she experiences a crisis, namely the crisis of presence. According to De Martino (Pavanello 2013: 30-31), magic is usually the symbolic act that can solve this crisis. However, in the context of Salento, tarantism and the related healing rituals could solve the crisis of presence more efficiently.

A tarantata who had experienced the deconstruction of her historical role as a woman could indeed solve her crisis reaffirming her existence with the healing rituals for tarantism. This is evident from the domestic therapy, a ritual when relatives should take care of the affected person and hire and pay the musicians. In addition, a reaffirmation could come from the final ritual in Saint Paul's chapel, when a tarantata (and a tarantato as well) could gain the attention of a crowd showing her unusual behavior. Both healing rituals serve as solutions for the crisis of presence, since the affected person could establish a stronger relationship with her or his familiar and social context. Going through their experience of illness, healing, and grace, tarantati could hence overcome isolation and recover their presence within society and history (Zinn 2015: 11). De Martino's contribution to the understanding of tarantism is undeniable, as well as the epistemological solidity of his work. For example, during my fieldwork, I approached and read The Land of Remorse as a real guide for my own research, trying to establish a link between my experience and the ideas, concepts, and interpretations that I have found in the book. However, before coming directly to my field experience, it is necessary to take a closer look at the history of tarantism (and some examples of the related studies) after De Martino.

1.4. Recent development of tarantism and current debates
De Martino's research and his work The Land of Remorse became extremely popular among anthropologists and ethnologists in Italy. It is easy to find references to De Martino’s work in several authors' books, mostly about tarantism but also about broader anthropological topics, such as manuals for students (for example Fabietti 2011). This has happened mostly in Italy, where scholars interested in tarantism have often referred to De Martino’s work in their studies (e.g. De Giorgi 1999 and 2007, Chiriatti 2011, Pizza 2015, Inserra 2017). At the same time, tarantism faced relevant transformations too, disappearing as a widespread disease and turning into a heritagised historical phenomenon, catching the attention of several scholars interested more in tarantism itself than in De Martino’s work.

Starting from the 1960s, it is worth mentioning Annabella Rossi (1933-1984), one of De Martino's disciples, who decided to conduct further research about tarantism between 1959 and 1965. Rossi's contribution was valid not only because she highlighted the influence of social and cultural environment on the onset of tarantism but also because her study was quite innovative. She based her research on an epistolary exchange with a tarantata named Anna, publishing then her results in 1970. On the other hand, Rossi's work seems to be the swan song of De Martino's investigation.

Apart from the Neapolitan scholar, his team, and his disciples, few people seemed interested in tarantism and almost nobody decided to conduct ethnographic research about it autonomously, at least until the end of the 1970s. In the meanwhile, several essayists approached the topic of tarantism and wrote about it. However, they chose to rely on second-hand ethnographic sources and historical documents instead of conducting fieldwork personally. Some relevant names of those essayists are Joan M. Lewis, Luigi Maria Lombardi Satriani, Brizio Montinaro, Miriam Castiglione, and Luciana Stocchi (all quoted in Chiriatti 2011: 64-71 and all writing in the 1970s). These scholars focused above all on topics like gender and the relationship with the natural and human environment, trying to explain how being both a woman and a peasant could easily lead to social subordination, frustration, and then the symptoms of tarantism. One of the reasons could have been the gradual disappearance of tarantism as a form of disease, as De Martino had predicted while talking about the “disarticulation” of the phenomenon (2005: 79). For example, as reported by the scholar and musician Luigi Chiriatti (2011: 108), only eight or nine tarantate were witnessed in Galatina on the 29th of June 1970; on the same day, in 1994, two people (again, only women) affected by tarantism were asking for Saint Paul's grace in the chapel. Nowadays the old ritual of asking for grace to the Saint during the morning of the 29th of June has completely disappeared and been substituted by a public re-enactment, held by character actors. Some spontaneous dances in the chapel still happen: I personally witnessed those dances in the night between June 28 and 29, 2018. However, the traditionally witnessed phenomenon has gradually come to its end.

Specifically, during the 1960s and the 1970s, the lack of public and ethnographic interest towards tarantism followed a general effort for modernization in Salento, due to the rapid changes in the entire Italian peninsula known as “economic boom” or “economic miracle” (Raftopoulos 2009; Castronovo and Paris 1975). It is important to focus on this historical period to contextualize the public attitude towards tarantism in the decades after the Second World War.

After the end of the Second World War, Italy was experiencing the consequences of the conflict: poverty was widespread and there was a public urge for infrastructures and new job opportunities for people. Due to the Marshall Plan (1947-1951), a new political stability given by the birth of the Italian Republic (1946) and entrance into the European Single Market (1958) Italy was able to overcome the initial difficulties and to establish itself as one of the leading countries of the West in the following decades. The increase of industrialization, mostly in the Northern part of the country, helped the economic reprise too. Productive companies like FIAT, Pirelli, and Eni were able to hire many workers and, therefore, produce wealth for the entire peninsula (Raftopoulos 2009; Castronovo and Paris 1975). On the other hand, in the South, there were fewer industrial companies and agriculture remained the leading sector of the Southern Italian regions. This happened also in Apulia and, specifically, in Salento with tobacco plantations. However, also Southern Italy could benefit from the economic boom, mostly after 1950 due to the effects of the Southern Italy Development Fund (in Italian, Cassa per il Mezzogiorno) after 1950. The Fund consisted of several initiatives for the industrial and infrastructural development of the Southern Italy, with intended occupational benefits for the locals (Raftopoulos 2009; Castronovo and Paris 1975).

De Martino did his fieldwork in Salento in 1959, facing a social reality that seemed to be stuck in time. War had been over for almost fifteen years, but economic growth seemed not to have reached the place, as shown by the extremely poor life conditions of tarantati recorded in The Land of Remorse. However, as said, the situation was about to change, leading tarantism to become rarer and rarer throughout time and to confront the issues of modernity and modernisation. This symbolic conflict mainly emerged from the relationship between the inhabitants of Salento and tarantism during the 1960s and 1970s, rather than from academic studies. This topic was addressed in the documentary "Tradinnovazione — Salento, una musica glocal" (2011), which focused on how folk music from Salento was transformed into a piece of heritage and promotion for the territory. The documentary also addressed the topic of shameful tarantism, explaining how the processes of heritagisation for the local music and dances have helped to overcome the shared negative feelings towards the phenomenon.

This process and the contemporary disappearance of tarantism as a syndrome (or its "disarticulation", to use De Martino's words) have completely changed its public perception within and outside the community of Galatina and the entire Salento. Scholars and intellectuals gave a further contribution to this new perception at the beginning of the 1980s, as reported by Luigi Chiriatti (2011: 30-35), a musician and scholar interested in tarantism. He mentioned a multidisciplinary project run by the University of Lecce in 1981, called "I/ ragno del dio che danza," with the purpose of re-enacting the phenomenon of tarantism. The meaning of the title is "The Spider of the Dancing God," referring to Saint Paul as a vernacular god and as a dancer, like tarantati. Chiriatti himself joined this project, making a documentary called "Morso d'amore" (which is also the title of his book, published in 2011) with the help of a film crew.

The documentary came just two years after Chiriatti's graduation, in 1979, with a thesis about tarantism and its historical development after De Martino's fieldwork. These few years between the 1970s and 1980s have been hence fundamental for the reprise of the phenomenon of tarantism, at least in the framework of heritage and promotion. Indeed, not only scholars or tourists interested in the local folklore, but also the inhabitants of Salento started to re-discover tarantism in that period and kept on doing it in the following decades. For example, the administration of the small town of Melpignano, in Salento, started in 1998 the summer festival of the Nights of the Taranta. This event consists of concerts by different folk and pop artists from Italy in different towns of Salento each year in August, with the final and biggest event in the town of Melpignano. The festival is the demonstration of how the symbol of the spider, the taranta, has lost its poisonous and shameful nature and become just a simple icon of Salento and of the Nights. The taranta is indeed part of the title and of the logo of the festival, being a recognisable brand for both musicians and tourists from the whole country.

As said, again, by Chiriatti (2011: 46-47; my translation) about the recent transformations and evolution of tarantism: "The phenomenon has lost its ritual roots. It does not show itself anymore as a disgrace and a duty. At the end, we have overcome the culture of sufferance. [...] Then, how is it possible to conjugate the new happenings with the past? [...] I want to deduce that in some way tarantism has come back, in new forms and modalities, but it has come back! Practiced by a social middle class, by young adepts, who almost choose to be tarantati, who look for the spider to be initiated within a path that will possibly bring them to their own personal, social, political and cultural identity." 

Tarantism comes out [from this recent process] as broken, cut into several pieces. Each symbol of it, unique part of the whole, is used autonomously and lives by its own. Saint Paul does not exist anymore! It does not pinch anymore! He has stopped exercising his power over the tarantate and has started his life as a Saint. It does not create cultural discomfort anymore. In brief, Salento has not only recovered but also redeemed or "folklorised" tarantism, considering it as a crucial part of its local identity and using it as folklore and heritage for the entertainment of locals and tourists.!7 However, as suggested by both Chiriatti and De Martino, the phenomenon appears certainly disarticulated and fragmented into different elements, which are not anymore reciprocally functional. Saint Paul, the local folk music (pizzica), the local dances, the symbol of the spider are examples of historical elements connected to tarantism, often used separately nowadays.

On the contrary, according to De Giorgi, these symbols still had their value and their role in the social context of Salento in the late 1950s, they still contributed to the formation of a complex phenomenon, consisting of an elaborated process of disease and healing within a symbolic horizon. According to De Giorgi, De Martino also underestimated the positive value of the trance as a form of communication with the sacred and the supernatural. Accordingly, De Martino did not recognise the importance of the consequent mental dissociation of the individual and could not compare properly tarantism with other cultural phenomena involving altered states of consciousness (2008: 58-59). Following these criticisms, it cannot be clear for scholars who want to approach tarantism if the phenomenon has faced a total disarticulation or it has just transformed into something different. In any case, tarantism maintains its symbolic complexity and value, despite its huge changes. Transformations have indeed occurred and turned an ancient and painful syndrome (and the related healing therapies) into a new form of distinctive heritage, which has kept, on the other hand, many of its historical aspects. Chiriatti and De Giorgi are just two eminent examples of scholars who have studied tarantism considering also De Martino's contribution. More recently, the Italian anthropologist Giovanni Pizza (2015) has referred to De Martino comparing his results in 1959 to the more recent development and heritagisation of tarantism. According to Pizza, the increasing interest towards De Martino's work in the last thirty years has encouraged not only new studies towards the phenomenon, but also new strategies of preservation and promotion of the old symbols and features of tarantism, like the Nights of the Taranta. Pizza has also published a book about possession in Europe in 2012, referring to tarantism and describing it as a form of possession by a spider towards a woman, similar in his opinion to further phenomena of possession throughout Italy and Europe. Pizza's comparative approach received some criticisms, due to some inaccurate interpretations of phenomena of possession and hysteria. According to Davide Ermacora (2014: 180-185), for example, there are few similarities between those phenomena and tarantism; above all, the involvement of a small animal as the first reason for the 27 possession or the disease seems to be a peculiarity of tarantism and not shared with other phenomena. On the other hand, Pizza's works have certainly introduced new perspectives about tarantism, not just centred on the historical analysis of the phenomenon and focused instead on a comparative approach and on the framework of heritage studies.

Talking about heritage, I can mention two studies. The first one, an article from Elina Caroli (2009), focuses on the idea of heritagisation of tarantism, that she calls “neo-tarantism”, and expounds the current influence of this process. An even more recent contribution comes from Incoronata Inserra and her book about Southern Italian folk dances, published in 2017. Based on interviews with Italian musicians and bibliographical sources, Inserra could enlarge her perspective to the global spread of Italian folk dances and to their significance as heritage nowadays. Her approach, as well as the ones of Caroli and Pizza, is hence comparative rather than just limited to a single context like Salento. Furthermore, all these scholars are from Southern Italy and with a background in comparative studies and anthropology. They are indeed interested in both their own regional background and in the recent developments of their own contexts within the larger framework of European and global society.

In spite of the increasing number of studies about the heritagisation of tarantism, interest towards the origins and the history of the phenomenon continues. One example of this is Gino Leonardo Di Mitri (2006) and his historical overview of medical research about tarantism in the 18" century. Di Mitri observed how physicians tried to explain the symptoms of tarantism and to define the species responsible for the alleged bite, mostly comparing the folkloric taranta with the existing Latrodectus tredecimguttatus. Some other recent historical studies come from non-Italian authors, like the one by the British researcher Jerri Daboo (2010). Daboo's work is mostly a summary of the history of tarantism, from the alleged origins to the most recent transformations. One of the chapters is dedicated to De Martino, his fieldwork and his concepts of “presence” and “crisis of presence”, which Daboo mentions and expands with a wider reflection on the bad social and economic conditions of tarantati and tarantate. In addition, Daboo comes to the most recent processes of revival of the phenomenon in the last chapter of her book, highlighting the peculiarity of neo-tarantism, which is different from the original tarantism and refers to the behavior of some people who suffer from psychological disorders and try to treat them with music, dances, and the contact with Saint Paul. I will discuss this phenomenon in the next chapter and avoid using the word “neo-tarantism” to refer to the heritagisation of tarantism. The importance of this topic has acquired in the current framework of studies related to tarantism is significant. As recent studies have shown, it is not possible to think about tarantism nowadays without talking about heritage and heritagisation. Ethnographers who want to approach this topic should keep in mind that studying tarantism means studying heritage too, since the old symbols and features of tarantism have been turned into pieces of heritage.

In the next chapter, I will explore the process of heritagisation of tarantism, its popular perception, and its effects on the social and cultural context of Salento nowadays. Moreover, I will do it with the help of my own ethnographic experience in the town of Galatina during the summer of 2018.

2. Tarantism and heritagisation

2.1. A fieldwork experience about tarantism in 2018

Tarantism is, to a certain extent, an extinct phenomenon. It is not extinct as an element of heritage for the locals, but it is definitely not around anymore as a syndrome. It is impossible to find nowadays women or men from Salento who claim to have met a spider that has bitten them. Almost nobody nowadays would intend music and dance as therapies, despite the strong role of both elements in local and regional folklore of the region. The inhabitants of Salento still venerate Saint Paul and still dedicate songs to him, but his role as a grace-giver is notably reduced (Pizza 2015).

An ethnographer nowadays should take all those recent transformations into account and approach the field in a different way than, for instance, De Martino did in 1959. For example, a contemporary researcher could not directly interview or observe people affected by tarantism, since they are not anymore alive. Nobody holds domestic therapies and final healing rituals either, and it is possible for an ethnographer to witness only the re-enactments of these crucial events related to tarantism.

Broadly speaking, a researcher cannot approach the phenomenon as a syndrome in the 2010s and should instead focus on the modalities and the strategies adopted by the local community to link its identity to the phenomenon: in brief, tarantism is a form of heritage for Salento nowadays. Making ethnography about tarantism means analysing this heritage closely and asking how it affects the self-perception of the locals.

There are also advantages about making fieldwork in Salento in the 2010s. Compared to decades like the 1950s or the 1960s, an ethnographer can refer to a wider range of academic writings about the topic. The huge number of publications about tarantism and the relatively easy access to them on the internet or in local libraries are a significant help for the current anthropologists, ethnologists, and folklorists. Books and even audio-visual materials are crucial tools for the research, not only as preliminary resources but also as primary sources for the analysis of the phenomenon.

I have witnessed two re-enactments in the field: the first one of the domestic therapy and the second one of the final healing ritual. The first re-enactment took place in the former nunnery on the 28th of June, whereas the second one in the square next to Saint Paul’s chapel on the 29th of June. Both re-enactments consisted of performances of musicians and actresses who reproduced the ancient healing rituals for tarantism, as witnessed by locals, scholars, photographers, and documentarists in the 20th century. 31 reading but also as guides during the fieldwork. For example, I have considered De Martino and his writing extremely useful for my own research. I have even told one of my informants in the field that I have used The Land of Remorse in the same way as the archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann did with the Homeric poems to discover the location and the ruins of Troy. In fact, I did not know properly what I was looking for and where I should pay attention to at the beginning of my research. Luckily, on the other hand and as well as Schliemann, I was able to use the book that I was reading as a map for orientation within the complex topic of tarantism. Furthermore, I have collected other materials and documents that, even though not always significant for this writing, have been a precious tool for the comprehension and the connection with Salento and its peculiar culture and folklore. Therefore, I will use my own fieldwork experience to show an example of ethnographic research in Salento nowadays. Even though I arranged it independently and could only spend two weeks in the field, the research has brought interesting outcomes. Above all, I could collect enough materials to reflect upon the process of heritagisation of tarantism and to compare what I have witnessed with the results of previous studies. I then reached the goal that I set in the first place when I organised my research: analyse the transformations of tarantism nowadays.

I spent my two weeks of fieldwork (from June 20 to July 4, 2018) in the town of Galatina, which could be regarded as the “centre” of tarantism since it is the only place where tarantati could receive the grace of Saint Paul. I decided to stay in a local countryside house (in Italian, masseria), about a kilometre away from the walls surrounding the town centre of Galatina. As I discovered that the walls physically separated the centre and the close periphery, it was easy for me to think about everything inside the walls as my main field, considering also the presence of the chapel of Saint Paul and other historical monuments in there.

On the same day of my arrival (June 20), I decided to explore the centre and look for my informants, whom I was not able to contact before. After that resolution, my actual fieldwork started: I have put a summary of my whole experience in this table, dividing the activities per date. Due to space limits, some crucial reflections about some informants and situations are missing in the table, but I have added them in the following text.

In the Pro Loco office! And further conversation about tarantism; in the night, second public event related to tarantism in the ex-nunnery (performance with music and dances before showing the film Pizzicata, 1996); interview with professor Nocera before the movie 27/06/2018.

Further general rehearsals for the re-enactment - in the ex-nunnery but not opened to the public - and third public event related to tarantism, as well in the ex-nunnery: performance with music and dances before showing the documentary Latrodectus (2009) 28/06/2018.

Re-enactment of the domestic therapy in the ex-nunnery; meeting Davide, whom I interviewed, and going with him to the town centre for the Night of the Rounds (public dances on the streets); during that night, I could meet two young women dancing in St. Paul's chapel, the so-called neo-tarantate 29/06/2018.

Re-enactment of the arrival and definitive healing (by St. Paul) of the tarantate in Galatina, in the morning; in the evening I met professor Nocera and other people debating about the historical nature of tarantism, again in the ex-nunnery 30/06/2018.

Walking in the town centre and meeting the local artist Salvatore R., sceptical about the efficiency of tourism economy in Salento '5.

A Pro Loco is a common association in Italian small towns. It is a group of local amateurs who organise events related to their citizenship and its promotion. Every town has a Pro Loco and each of those associations usually do not belong to a unitary network of Pro Locos. 32


After the 14 days of|Transcriptions of recorded interviews and conversations fieldwork

In sum, my fieldwork consisted of a period of participant observation integrated with interviews and conversations, recorded and translated directly into English during the process of transcription.°

My participant observation consisted mostly of attending rehearsals and events organised in the month of June, with the immediate purpose of collecting documents like pictures and videos. Almost all those audio-visual documents portray the rehearsals and the re-enactments of the therapies of tarantism. I took notes too: I reported many of them in written form, whereas some other notes are vocal recordings of mine. I took written notes on an agenda each day before going to sleep, after spending the daytime in the town centre. I recorded the vocal notes while being in the field, in order to avoid forgetting important concepts and ideas that could suddenly come to my mind (Blommaert and Jie 2010: 31-32).

Since some time was free from social activities and encounters, I have spent this time reading materials related to tarantism, which helped me to dive into the phenomenon in the best way possible.°

I could find other sources for my fieldwork through participating in social activities, like the film screenings and other events in the former nunnery (from June 25 to June 27). In particular, I saw the film Pizzicata (1996), directed by Edoardo Winspeare, a fictional but historically accurate story of a young woman becoming a tarantata after her lover’s murder during the Second World War. I also saw the documentary Latrodectus: qui mord en cachette (“Latrodectus: it bites without revealing its presence”, 2009), a French and Italian co-production that included a conversation with professor Nocera and other people on June 29 in a room of the former nunnery. While I recorded the conversation, its length and partial non-audibility convinced me not to transcribe and translate it. However, I considered some pieces of the conversation relevant for my thesis, like the details about the neo-tarantata that I met in the night between June 28 and 29.

Among the writings I read were the entire book The Land of Remorse in Italian, as well as many passages from De Giorgi (2007), Chiriatti (2011) and Nocera (2013). I have discussed these works in the previous chapter. I conducted 33 interviews with scholars like the ethno-psychiatrist Georges Lapassade and the anthropologist Gino Leonardo Di Mitri. Talking about interviews, I followed a semi-structured model (Jamshed 2014: 83-84). I recorded and transcribed three interviews with the retired professor Maurizio Nocera and two younger people: the activist Davide Miceli and the assessor Cristina Dettu. I prepared some questions for the interviewees to develop a longer discussion about the themes I was interested in. Depending on my interlocutors, some interviews had a clearer and more organized structure (Cristina and professor Nocera); another one started from general questions and developed in a broader and more digressive way (Davide). I tried to adapt the questions that I wanted to ask from my interlocutors to the situation that I was experiencing and to the people to whom I was talking.

I also recorded and stored two conversations about tarantism that I came across during my fieldwork. I just asked questions and expressed my thoughts when necessary, but I preferred mostly listening. The reason is simple: people involved in these talks were scholars, namely the professors Domenico Scapati and Maurizio Nocera. Respecting their experience and their authority in the field and in the subject, I decided to step back in these circumstances and become a mere listener. I translated and transcribed the conversation with professor Scapati, but I did not do the same with the one involving professor Nocera (for reasons explained in footnote 16).

I have not met just professors and researchers in Galatina, obviously, but different people with different opinions and ideas about tarantism. The diverse expertise, backgrounds, and interests of people towards the phenomenon is something that I decided to focus on from the very first day of my fieldwork. My purpose was to get in touch with the variety of perspectives and contexts in which native people (re-)thought and (re-)discussed tarantism and to understand how they perceived the phenomenon and their own knowledge about it nowadays. However, I mostly interacted, conversed, and made interviews with scholars and authorities related to cultural heritage (including politicians and organizers of events). People in the field considered those scholars and authorities as experts, and I have followed this emic definition, distinguishing experts from non-experts. "Also, I avoided interviewing non-expert citizens. The reason for this choice was lack of confidence that many people who did not consider themselves experts showed towards their own ideas regarding tarantism. According to the Italian law, Galatina is a city, although populated by less than thirty thousand inhabitants. I will hence refer to local people as “citizens”, even though I will not refer again to Galatina as a city, due to its small population.

They displayed knowledge about tarantism as a social performance (Bauman 2012: 102). Those locals could explicitly ask not to be interviewed. However, I tried my best to avoid a possible underrepresentation of non-experts during my fieldwork. In fact, I considered all the opinions that I have come across as equally valuable and important for my research and for the definition of the emic point of view about tarantism.

In this sense, it is important to talk about my experience with the owner of the bookshop, an old woman called Emilia, on the very first day of my fieldwork. Working and living for many years in Galatina, she has got used to scholars and students who approach tarantism and its complexity after many readings and, presumably, many days, weeks and years of fieldwork. In my case, that was my first time in that field, I knew the topic just from readings and I could not consider myself an expert at all. Emilia noticed it immediately and for that reason she decided to introduce me to a local expert, a teacher who could indeed “teach” me what tarantism is and, therefore, make my research possible.

Furthermore, she did not consider herself an expert on the topic and, thus, she appeared not confident in illustrating her view on tarantism. Indeed, while speaking with me, she refused to have me record her voice while saying that the recent re-enactments connected to tarantism are just bad imitations of the original phenomenon. The reason was that she felt embarrassed as well for my request, due to the better evaluation that she has given to the opinion of the experts rather than hers, as she also pointed out.

Her position as a non-expert native is significant also as the consequence of the disappearance of the syndrome of tarantism, not anymore part of the everyday life of the local people. At the same time, the improvements in primary and secondary education and the increasing contacts with tourists, ethnographers and scholars among the inhabitants of Galatina have presumably influenced the perception of their knowledge about tarantism. Common people, therefore, cannot help comparing their notions about the phenomenon to the ones of scholars and perceive their own knowledge as wrong or inadequate, mostly if they are directly in touch with some academic sources. This is the case of Emilia, who works in a bookshop and constantly deals with texts due to her job.

This sense of inadequacy towards academic figures and sources can be also the consequence of the influence of ethnographers, anthropologists and folklorists in the public sphere regarding the processes of folklorisation and heritagisation (Hafstein 2018: 147). In other words, communities consider the work of those scholars undeniably important for themselves and hence respect the academic authority of those figures. As said, Emilia introduced me to a young teacher of a local high school, named Andrea P., whom she called by phone and told to come to the shop." Andrea teaches history of art and had studied tarantism and the tradition behind this phenomenon out of personal interest. Due to his knowledge and his interest in local culture, he can be considered a provincial intellectual, as described by Dorothy Noyes (2016: 12). As I and Andrea met, and I talked about my research, we decided to have a small tour of the main monuments connected to tarantism in the town, like the chapel, the well and the church in front of the main square, the basilica of Saint Peter. We also decided to meet up in the following two days to visit other relevant places, like the town museum and, specifically, its section dedicated to tarantism. Andrea became one of my main informants and a very helpful guide in the very first days. He also introduced me to Roberto (around sixty years old), the exuberant owner of a small art gallery in the town centre of Galatina.

Roberto, as well as Emilia, has been a further, although different, example of the discrepancy between the knowledge of experts and non-experts about tarantism. Andrea and I met Roberto on the 21st of June. On the same day, Roberto invited us to his gallery to see some paintings, inspired by tarantism. While reaching that place, Roberto told me his personal interpretation of tarantism, undoubtedly unconventional if compared to the ones by scholars and other citizens. He thought that tarantate were just nymphomaniac women who used the excuse of the bite of the spider and of Saint Paul's grace to come to Galatina and have sex with the local males.

The connection between tarantism and sexuality (or, more precisely, lack of sexual satisfaction) is not original at all: the "little carnivals" mentioned by Baglivi (1796), the case of Maria from Nardo analysed by De Martino (2005) and more recent studies by Chiriatti (2011) and Nocera (2013) demonstrate this link. However, Roberto was explicitly sceptical towards all the academic knowledge about tarantism and its definition as a painful disease, connecting it just to a hyperbolic sexual desire. Since he used also some partly inappropriate language, Andrea scolded him, feeling responsible for Roberto's behaviour in public despite being younger. Andrea was also criticising his hypothesis about nymphomaniac farantate, being more attached the academic idea of tarantism as a disease provoked by the alleged bite of a spider.

Differently from Emilia, Roberto was not at all ashamed of giving his personal opinion about tarantism, but he just did not receive any serious consideration from his more expert friend Andrea. This behaviour shows how some emic points of view are marginalised, mostly if they look reductive, purely speculative and in some way inappropriate, like Roberto did. On the other hand, this marginalisation appears to be mainly part of a systematic process of increasing authority of scholars and decreasing contact of common people with tarantism. The inhabitants of Galatina and Salento, indeed, not experiencing anymore the disease in their everyday life, can occasionally have some vague idea or memory about this phenomenon, whereas scholars can develop a knowledge that positions themselves as experts and reliable authorities about tarantism. Scholars and experts like Andrea are actually useful to get in touch with the phenomenon and start studying it in the field. However, it would have not been possible to do fieldwork adequately ignoring completely the point of view of people like Roberto, Emilia and others who did not position themselves as experts about tarantism. Talking about those experts, I certainly considered their reputation within the field. For instance, I noticed that everybody knew Professor Nocera and referred to him and his authority regarding tarantism, especially during the public events held in the last days of June. All the scholars in Salento are obviously experts, but not just scholars. Other experts obtained indeed their knowledge and experience participating actively in the preservation and promotion of local heritage. The majority of those people are from Salento and, specifically, from Galatina: they grew up with tarantism and its cultural significance and they could not help studying the phenomenon or at least knowing it to a certain extent.

This is the reason why many of those non-academic experts could be in charge for the organisation of the events in June, as happened with the UNESCO club of Galatina. According to the website of the organisation, a UNESCO club "is an association of volunteers operating in a local, regional, national or international territory and promoting the ideals of UNESCO". UNESCO clubs have an official link with UNESCO, since they can use the name and the logo of the international organisation. However, at least in the case of Galatina, the club is not interested in the larger political framework of UNESCO and takes instead care of some small initiatives, intended mostly for the locals.

Indeed, the members of the club in Galatina put a significant attention towards the heritage related to tarantism, and I could appreciate their efforts during my fieldwork. In particular, I could not only witness directly the re-enactments of the domestic therapy and the final healing ritual, but also the rehearsals beforehand. I could meet the members of the club through a further informant, Andrea C., on the 22nd of June. Around fifty years old, he works in the tourist office in Galatina and has direct contact with travellers and ethnographers in summertime.

Approaching him, he immediately introduced me to Leo, a fifty-year-old member of the UNESCO club, by phone. So, Leo invited me to the rehearsal of the re-enactment of the domestic therapy on the 24th of June. As I met Andrea C., I asked him about his memories of people affected by tarantism, but I found out that he did not remember much due to his lack of interest towards the phenomenon when he was younger. On the contrary, in June 2018, he cooperated with the UNESCO club and joined himself the re-enactment of the domestic therapy as an actor, interpreting the father of the tarantata who bears the daughter to the place where she will dance.

Thus, both Andrea C. and I needed to participate at the rehearsal on the 24th of June, held in the countryside house of a further member of the club, Salvatore. UNESCO club members decided to arrange one of the rehearsals for the events in 2018 in this house due to the available space for musicians and performers. Leo and his wife accompanied us by car to the house, where I could meet the further members of the club. I also met two ethnographers from Switzerland, some young local musicians and the two actresses, both around twenty, who were preparing for interpreting the role of tarantate during the upcoming events on the 28th and 29th of June. The actresses were not professional but had studied acting and dancing during their school years. One of them, Irene, told me that at first she learnt how to imitate tarantate just by watching some old videos of original domestic therapies and final healing rituals. Her performance (as well as that of Adele, the other actress) was then the reproduction of what she had watched throughout historical documents and it could not be differently. Both actresses were from Galatina and declared that they prefer relying on audio-visual documents and academic writings, since they do not have memories of the old and currently extinct syndrome. Moreover, being turned into a public performance, the re-enactment of these rituals were not spontaneous at all and required instead a long and elaborate preparation, as well as a certain training in dance and acting. For that reason, Salvatore constantly monitored and advised during the rehearsal, asking them to follow some precise and standardized instructions. Irene, for example, was not good at screaming in public and Salvatore often asked her to do it, with the clear purpose of making her look like a real tarantata. Largely, I noticed that the standardization of tarantism nowadays and the attempt to reconstruct it according to the historical and academic sources have crystallized the phenomenon and stuck it in time.

In fact, I could see a gap between the institutionalized knowledge and events, organized by the UNESCO club, which try to reproduce tarantism as historically witnessed, and the spontaneous, often accidental, circumstances where the phenomenon looks still alive and influential. In particular, I have witnessed this gap during the two dates of June 28 and 29, 2018. Indeed, in the middle of the historical re-enactments of the domestic therapy (the 28th) and the final healing ritual (the 29th), the town of Galatina was preparing for the traditional Night of the Rounds. During the night between these two dates, many people from Salento gathered together in the main square of Galatina, leaving just some circular gaps (called “rounds” or, in Italian, ronde) for occasional couples of dancers, accompanied by some musicians (mostly drummers). These couples could be a man and a woman or entirely male and female, like the two girls who, after spending some time dancing in the square, decided to move to Saint Paul's chapel. It was 1 AM of June 29, 2018. In this building, accompanied by a drummer and an accordionist, they kept on dancing in front of the fresco of the Saint. At some point, one of the two girls started to move frantically, trying to reach a state of trance and to communicate with the Saint. Some spectators joined the improvised ritual, including me and the two ethnographers from Switzerland that I had met during the rehearsal in the countryside house.

Specifically, our ethnographic activity motivated us to overcome the huge crowd gathered on the entrance of the chapel and to enter the building to film the event, which lasted for some time before 2 AM. During that hour, the crowd around the chapel and within the main square decreased gradually, and at the end of the ritual, it was possible for the owners of the chapel to approach the entrance of the building and close it to the public as everybody went out. At this point, it is important to refer again to the sign in the chapel that forbids dancing there. The sign is one of the first things that I have noticed during my fieldwork and I have heard some criticism about it, as it happened with Gioacchino, the 16-year-old accordionist who played during the historical re-enactment and its rehearsals. Gioacchino told me that the sign in the chapel should not be there because nowadays there are people who need to dance for their own health. I had already heard about those people during my 21-day fieldwork in Galatina, from Emilia and Andrea P., even though they looked sceptical towards their actual need. However, Gioacchino's statement persuaded me that something like the old tarantism, which I thought to be dead, was still part of the local experience of disease and healing. This conviction became a confirmation when I witnessed the dance in the chapel during the Night of the Rounds and asked the participants, after the end of the ritual, about what had just happened and how they were feeling while playing and dancing. The answers focused on the incredible and extraordinary nature of this experience, assimilated to a state of trance and altered consciousness.

After few minutes, I tried to approach the girl who was in a state of trance to ask her the same question, making a mistake by defining her dance a "performance." She, indeed, answered me sadly that her dance was not a performance at all, underlining that what she was doing was not a fake dance, but she really needed it. Feeling embarrassed and disrespectful towards her and the nature of her dance, I then decided not to pursue that conversation.

I just discovered from Salvatore, after few days, that this girl had some unspecified psychological disorders and used the dance and the contact with the Saint to overcome her problems. Something like that could have happened to Maria from Nardo and other tarantati during the old healing rituals. Both experts and non-experts in the field called this phenomenon "neo-tarantism," to underline its continuity with the traditional illness of tarantati, but also the crucial differences from the old syndrome.

Indeed, on the one hand, the state of psychic crisis and trance, the dances as healing therapies, and the relationship with the Saint look familiar to whoever knows about tarantism. On the other hand, some elements like the relationship with the spiders and the water seemed to be less relevant than in the past. Moreover, the social role of women has changed from marginalized collectors of tobacco to middle-class workers with an improved economic status and a decreased necessity of finding a partner and having children. The current context of neo-tarantism is undoubtedly not the same as the one of the ancient tarantati, and this discrepancy impedes an easy comparison between tarantism and neo-tarantism.

Witnessing an improvised ritual of neo-tarantism and speaking with some involved people was probably the most interesting and fascinating thing that I have come across during my fieldwork. Unfortunately, I could hardly understand and access this new phenomenon, due to lack of time during my two weeks in Salento and physical and social distance from those dancers and musicians. Also, the dancers and "neo-tarantate" did not openly talk about their experience. Therefore, I decided to focus my research mostly on different contemporary aspects related to tarantism, above all the processes of heritagisation that I am going to discuss about in the next subchapter.

I started the chapter by saying that tarantism is dead as a syndrome, but alive as a piece of heritage. I must admit that neo-tarantism and its psychological expressions that I witnessed during my fieldwork made me reconsider this statement. However, I lack sufficient knowledge to discuss these hidden aspects of contemporary tarantism. Instead, I shall focus on the explicit and obvious idea that the old syndrome has been turned into heritage nowadays, undergoing the process of heritagisation.

To understand better what tarantism is nowadays, it is necessary to discuss what heritage is. Valdimar Hafstein has listed some relevant features of heritage, which provide a good definition of this term. Mainly, he has enforced the idea of heritage building as the result of efforts within the communities and between the communities and the authorities, like UNESCO or national organisations (Hafstein 2018: 105):

"Heritage reorders relations between persons and things, and among persons themselves, objectifying and recontextualizing them with reference to other sites and practices designated as heritage. Heritage assembles previously unrelated buildings, rituals, paintings, and songs, and it addresses them as something to be safeguarded, that is to say, acted upon through programs, schemes, and strategies carried out and evaluated by experts whose operation connect the calculation of authorities with the desires and the ambition of citizens."

Regina Bendix (2009: 255) has instead written on the more specific domain of "cultural heritage," built as a result of a cultural effort: "cultural heritage does not exist, it is made." Human agency has a crucial role in this process of creation, whether the result of this process is material or immaterial. Indeed, there is a further distinction between the two domains of material cultural heritage (for example, artworks) and "intangible cultural heritage" (like the current heritage related to tarantism). According to the "Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage," ratified by UNESCO in 2003:

"The 'intangible cultural heritage' means the practices, representations, expressions, knowledge, skills — as well as the instruments, objects, artefacts, and cultural spaces associated therewith — that communities, groups, and, in some cases, individuals recognize as part of their cultural heritage. This intangible cultural heritage, transmitted from generation to generation, is constantly recreated by communities and groups in response to their environment, their interaction with nature and their history, and provides them with a sense of identity and continuity, thus promoting respect for cultural diversity and human creativity."

A common aspect between material and intangible heritage is certainly the idea of community, a group of people who is in charge for the preservation and transmission of one or more pieces of heritage. The peculiar aspect of intangible cultural heritage, on the other hand, consists of something "constantly recreated by communities and groups" and hence transformed in response to historical processes. However, as Dorothy Noyes (2006: 32-33) noticed, the idea behind communities "“as bounded individuals [...] such that their traditions are distinctive and indeed unique" is quite problematic, as well as the definition of the boundaries of these communities. The point of view emerged primarily from the analytical perspective of folklorists, who often problematize the concept of community. In contrast, a native group typically ignores this problematization and aims to be considered a community with a specific identity to preserve. Heritage can help achieve this goal, defining "distinctive and unique" features for a single group and empowering it as a community within a national and international framework. This has happened to tarantism as well. Political authorities and cultural associations in Salento, particularly in Galatina, have used the phenomenon to enforce the unique identity of the territory, involve locals in organized events, and promote tourism from outside. There has been a precise and explicit intent of heritagisation regarding tarantism, mostly after the recent historical processes of disarticulation, extinction of the syndrome, and renewed interest towards the cultural specificity of Salento.

The re-enactments in Galatina are exemplary of how heritagisation affected tarantism. The ancient experience of disease and healing is now a dramatic public performance, modeled for the entertainment of locals, tourists, and even ethnographers. I can also refer to the words of Professor Nocera, whom I asked about the historical transformation of tarantism. He mentioned the confluence of tarantism and its symbolism into the dance and musical subgenre of pizzica pizzica. Pizzica pizzica is the type of pizzica played and danced for recreational purposes, whereas the other subgenre, pizzica tarantata, was intended for healing purposes and played during domestic therapy. The distinction between the two subgenres is merely functional, since they are identical, musically speaking (De Giorgi 1999: 88).

Nocera's words conveyed the idea that pizzica pizzica has reached a cultural status that never existed before, a status derived from the importance of tarantism as a fundamental element for the identity and specificity of the region. The large and warm participation of locals in events involving pizzica pizzica, like the Night of the Rounds, has furthermore improved its status and importance within Salento. Broadly speaking, pizzica and the geographically wider and related genre of tarantella have become relevant examples of heritagisation in Southern Italy, as some scholars have observed. Dorothy Noyes (2015: 303) has referred to tarantella as a traditional practice that nowadays belongs to the domain of intangible cultural heritage. Incoronata Inserra (2017: 31-57), whose book I mentioned before, has explained the development and institutionalization of tarantella and pizzica as cultural heritage in Italy and worldwide. According to Inserra, the process of heritagisation is actually a form of revival, a re-discovery of an old cultural environment that was gradually disappearing within modernity. Groups like Nuovo Canzoniere del Salento and Canzoniere Grecanico Salentino have helped this process in Salento since the 1970s (2017: 34), but the regional genre of pizzica became popular just after the 1990s (2017: 39-47). Apparently, this has happened due to a renewed scholarly interest towards the genre in the last thirty years. Many scholars are native scholars from Salento who occasionally dance or play instruments: the researcher and drummer Luigi Chiriatti is a significant example in this sense. I can also mention again the project The Spider of the Dancing God, carried out by the University of Lecce in 1981 and involving Chiriatti. However, there was even an indirect contribution of De Martino in that period, as Giovanni Pizza (2015: 68) noticed. In fact, libraries and bookshops started to sell and lend "The Land of Remorse" again in 1994, after a longer period when the book was not available at all. Consequently, new Italian readers started to approach De Martino's work and to rediscover tarantism and pizzica. Moreover, with the English translation of the book by Dorothy Louise Zinn in 2005, also non-Italian speakers could discover the phenomenon and feel encouraged to visit Salento or conduct ethnographic enquiries there. During my fieldwork in Galatina, for example, I met researchers from the United States and Switzerland as well as local and Italian scholars. Therefore, despite the end of the syndrome, the national and international interest towards the phenomenon looks more alive than ever.

Talking about the revival of pizzica and tarantism and its national and international reception, it is fundamental to mention again the festival of the "Nights of the Taranta," held in August every year since 1998. Inserra (2017: 40) described it using the singular form, referring to the biggest and last concert in the Melpignano, and connected the festival to the larger framework of revivalism and heritagisation in Salento after the 1990s:

"The increasing popular attraction to these [Southern Italian] folk rhythms since the 1990s is reflected by the extensive organization of both local and nationwide festivals, courses, and workshops. The most important example of this phenomenon is the annual 'Notte della Taranta' (Night of the Taranta) festival [...]. Following its large success, the festival has contributed to popularizing pizzica both nationally and internationally, while also boosting tourism in the region. Over time the festival's scope has become increasingly international, thanks to the presence of many artists from around the world, including artists from world music, rock, and pop music scenes. The importance of the festival is undoubted, as well as its impact on tourism in Salento. Melpignano is the town that has mostly benefited from the promotion of the Nights of the Taranta, more than other places in the region. Data taken from 2007 to 2010 prove that the final concert brings on average one hundred thousand people, whereas the previous events hardly catch the attention of more than seventy thousand people at all (Attanasi and Giordano 2011). The reason is simple and connected to the larger activity of promotion reserved to the event in Melpignano. Indeed, even the official website of the event, when opened, reveals immediately the date and the place of the last concert, without mentioning the previous events connected to the one in Melpignano."*

On the other hand, I prefer to mention the festival as the "nights" in plural, following the concerns and the perplexities that people from Galatina have expressed when I met them. For example, interviewing the activist Davide Miceli and the assessor Cristina Dettu, both brought up the issue with Melpignano and the reason behind it. According to Cristina, the idea of the Night, intended as the big concert in Melpignano, came at first to Sergio Blasi, an employee working for the town of Galatina. However, the structure of the website reveals that the main focus of the promotional activity is on the event in Melpignano.

44 unsuccessfully. Blasi then asked the mayor in Melpignano, who liked the idea and organized the first big concert already in 1998. Even though Galatina was the historical and symbolic center of tarantism in the past, its mayor was not interested in organizing this event in 1998. During my fieldwork, many citizens regretted the decision of the mayor of Galatina and saw it as a lost chance to improve tourism in the town. According to Cristina, on the other hand, the mayor certainly took a bad decision, but wanted at first to avoid an “extreme” depiction of tarantism and pizzica. In other words, the idea of heritagising tarantism by means of a big concert looked distant from the old and local dimension of the phenomenon in Galatina, altering its allegedly original and authentic nature. On the contrary, the same idea looked intriguing and remunerative in Melpignano, where the ethical issues regarding tarantism in Galatina were missing. Moreover, the historical relationship between Melpignano and the ancient phenomenon was less strong and less influential on the local identity than in Galatina. The larger number of visitors has proven that Melpignano was right in the first place and the success of the initiative has led other towns in Salento, including Galatina, to join the festival of the Nights with cultural events and concerts before the final concert in Melpignano. However, Galatina has irremediably lost its central role regarding tarantism and pizzica, becoming nowadays just one of the towns that host the Nights: this is the main reason for the public regret in Galatina over the decision of the mayor in 1998. The town that Saint Paul blessed and protected from the bite of the taranta, the town that could miraculously heal tarantati is nowadays just one of the many places in Salento connected to the phenomenon. This new reality is obviously hard to accept for the citizens of Galatina, who are currently trying to enforce their cultural role regarding tarantism with events like the re-enactments and the Night of the Rounds. On the other hand, many locals have expressed their concern about preserving the historical, original and authentic identity of the phenomenon, which looks altered after the recent processes of heritagisation. In this sense, it is important to explore the issue of authenticity, as addressed in the framework of folkloristics and heritage studies. Giving a definition of authenticity is not simple, but quite problematic. The term “authenticity” refers to something new and original, definitely not fake or copied. However, there are different explanations of this concept, according to the different frameworks in which it has been important to address the issue of authenticity. For example, according to Regina Bendix (1997: 15): One definition of authenticity, used in the realm of art and antiques, refers to the clear identifiability of maker or authorship and uniqueness of an artifact, relying on the "made by one's own hand" etymology. Folklorists, in a peculiar reversal, for a long time located authenticity within the anonymity of entire social groups, or the "folk. "Lack of identifiable authorship, multiple existence over time and space, variation of the items, and the social and economic circumstances of the 'bearers of tradition' served, instead, as ways of testing folklore's authenticity. Once individual performers or makers of artifacts entered the discussion, the criterion of anonymity or nameless tradition began to unravel, and the problem of authenticity could have rendered itself obsolete. In one word, the definition of “authentic” is controversial, in general as well as from the etic point of view of researchers in folklore studies.

Speaking about communities and their emic perspective, there is instead a different claim for authenticity within each distinctive culture and tradition. Bendix (1997: 21) says that “the crucial questions to be answered are not "what is authenticity?" but "who needs authenticity and why?" and "how has authenticity been used?"”. Therefore, instead of finding a universal way to define what is authenticity, these words suggest analysing the idea of authenticity from the point of view of people who produce folklore and claim it as authentic. This approach is useful, since it can help contextualising authenticity within a single community. However, finding the emic perspective regarding authentic folklore does not mean avoiding debates and controversies: there is not a unique emic point of view, but more different ideas regarding what can be authentic and what does not deserve this status.

This is the case of Salento and tarantism, as also seen in the field. Whereas the organisers of re-enactments, namely the UNESCO club, thought that the events were fundamental for the promotion of local heritage and certainly loyal to the historical witnesses of tarantism, some other people did not think the same. For example, the bookseller Emilia, introduced above. The re-enactments of tarantism were, according to Emilia, bad imitations and degenerate versions of what tarantism was in the past. Also, she thought that those re-enactments tried to imitate tarantism but failed miserably, since in her opinion they did not resemble it at all. In one word, the re-enactments were not “authentic”.

I registered a similar opinion, although less severe, from a woman working in a bar that she owned and where I used to eat sometimes. The woman, aged around fifty and from Galatina, thought as well that the phenomenon had lost its authenticity and become something different from the past, something not recognisable as tarantism anymore. For instance, she mentioned the loss of an iconic moment belonging to the rituality of tarantism in Galatina: tarantate reaching the town on a wooden wagon in the early morning of the 29th of June for the final healing in the chapel. She might have remembered this iconic moment from her childhood, when tarantism still existed (although almost dead) and motorised vehicles were not so common in Salento. This memory carried hence a strong emotional value, since it referred to the symbolic instant when the citizens of Galatina started gathering in the town centre after the arrival of the tarantate to watch their healing ritual. Thus, it is not just a memory of the past: it is a memory of a socially significant symbol, nowadays lost with the end of the old syndrome. However, I could have a glimpse of that old memory as well: the arrival on a wagon of the actresses interpreting tarantate was part of the performance of the re-enactment in 2018. On the other hand, it is true that the old image of actual tarantate reaching Galatina is something that nobody can experience nowadays and that locals can just remember." This example shows a strong connection between authenticity and memory in Salento, particularly in the context of tarantism. Tarantism becomes authentic, according to many locals, when they can recall the historical phenomenon and compare it with the new forms of heritagisation, perceived as fake or completely not inherent, like the Nights of the Taranta or the re-enactments. Nevertheless, talking just about the re-enactments that I could see in 2018, UNESCO club members re-arranged carefully the therapies for tarantism as historical sources and memories had reported. In other words, there was a significant effort in making the re-enactments as authentic as possible, despite their consideration as bad and inauthentic imitations of the original tarantism. This effort was thus not always effective on the locals, but certainly valuable for me, as an ethnographer, and for tourists who joined the events.

In the case of both tourists and non-native researchers, it is not possible to compare the experience of being in the re-enactments in Salento with memories that only locals obviously have. It is at least possible for non-native ethnographers to compare what is seen in the field with the bibliographical and audio-visual sources, but this comparison is not supposed to be judgemental in terms of authenticity. A non-native researcher (as well as a local researcher) can certainly notice the differences between tarantism and its contemporary heritagisation, but should be also aware of the ethical and terminological issues of authenticity in order to avoid labelling the new phenomena of heritagisation as inauthentic.

Consequently, both non-native researchers and tourists in Salento can experience the re-enactments considering them as distinctive features of the cultural context and useful efforts for the heritage preservation and promotion. Moreover, locals, tourists and researchers can also build a personal memory of heritagised tarantism, alternative but similar to the memory of the old phenomenon coming from some locals.

Bendix (2018: 79-80) has explored the idea of memory of tourist experience, referring to a perception of authenticity that differs from the one that locals have: "Touristic longing [...] seeks ever-new experiences. The pleasure inherent to what some people term an authentic — that is, never-before-had-and-never-to-be-had-again — experience, couched in terms of an overflowing soul and the visceral impact it has on our body, haunts modernity. Travel and tourism may contain the quintessential and oh-so-rare manifestation of authenticity. [...] The most powerful evidence of the search of the singular, unique and authentic within tourist experience, however, is narration. [...] The process of narrating the experience recovers the moment, if not its experiential singularity, and allows for its communicative restaging and its ever-new mental savouring."

In the case of Salento, tourists, ethnographers and locals who approach the topic of tarantism can experience a sense of being authentically in that place or in that field. The re-enactments in 2018 enforced this perception and served as something to be remembered and retold by the visitors. The re-enactments are thus designed to be both memories and authentic pieces of the culture of Salento for tourists, researchers and some locals. Some other locals can show instead some scepticism towards the re-enactments and the recent processes of heritagisation of tarantism, even though recognising the economic importance of increasing tourism in Salento. On the 30th of June, for instance, I met an artist from Galatina who was selling his wooden sculptures in the street. This man, named Salvatore (not the same Salvatore in the UNESCO club) and around forty years old, expressed his concerns regarding the initiatives of heritage promotion in Salento. According to Salvatore, institutions sometimes do not understand how to promote cultural heritage or, if they do, they have not started this activity of promotion in the right time. His words revealed the importance of tourism for the economy of the region, highlighting sadly how lack of competence and the deficiencies of the institutions impeded the growth of the sector in Salento. Also, Salvatore mentioned tarantism and how the phenomenon, originally tied to physical and psychological pain, could not have kept its negative nature in its process of 48 heritagisation. This is evident especially during the concerts of the Nights of the Taranta, when cheerful music and dances have substituted the original negativity of tarantism. However, I have also noticed a positive consequence of this historical transformation: tarantism is not anymore something to be ashamed of, as it was in the past. The re-evaluation of tarantism helped locals not only to reuse its symbolism to promote themselves, but also to cope with their historical heredity and heritage. This aspect, for example, is helping significantly Galatina. The old "capital town" of tarantism has lost nowadays its central role in favour of Melpignano, but is trying to recover its importance with the re-enactments and the events in which I have also participated. The initiatives in Galatina are clearly a consequence of the loss of shame towards tarantism, in a period when the symbol of the taranta seems to be an efficient attraction for tourists, at least in the rival town of Melpignano. In this sense, it is easy to understand those initiatives as targeted not only to locals, but also and perhaps mainly to visitors.

Being in the field as an ethnographer and not mainly as a tourist, I noticed also how Galatina did not ignore the impact of researchers about tarantism on the local economy. I could spend some time in the town centre, visiting two book shops, some bars, the office of the Pro Loco and the tourist office. Interestingly, all those places were full of books, flyers and brochures regarding tarantism, each one giving basic or broad information about the phenomenon. Moreover, I could find books and other writings among the souvenirs for tourists. This was not obviously the case of book shops, whereas in places like the tourist office or the bars it was common to see texts about tarantism between magnets dedicated to Salento and gastronomic products. Tourists who visit Galatina may be interested in tarantism and in buying books about the topic, but apparently they are not the main target for those texts. Perhaps they are in the case of shorter writings, like flyers or brochures, but books seem to be addressed mostly to researchers who look for useful sources or intriguing readings about the topic. Ethnographers, students and scholars from Italy and abroad often visit Galatina for fieldwork about tarantism and its heritagisation. This happens mostly in summertime and in the month of June, when the events connected to tarantism take place. The number of tourists and visitors increases, also from the surrounding towns, and ethnographers have more opportunities to meet people, interview authorities and participate into the events, as I did as well. Among those ethnographers, I mentioned students, namely university students who are writing their dissertation on tarantism or pizzica. I actually did not find other university students in Galatina except myself, but I knew that I was not the only one when I bought some books related to tarantism in a bar. While paying for the books, the owner guessed correctly that I was going to use them for my thesis, suggesting that the main buyers of those texts were students and that it was common to find them in the town in summertime. On the other hand, as mentioned before, I met older scholars in the field, from both Italy and abroad. It is clear that, whatever the academic level of ethnographers, Galatina is a popular field for them and their research.

Accordingly, ethnography in Galatina represents a vital and influential sector of the tourist economy in the town. Ethnographers are different from tourists due to the diverse purpose of their visit and to a longer permanence in a single town, if required from their research. However, ethnographers may be interested in touristic activities like sightseeing, shopping, or eating in restaurants. In addition, they can also attend folkloric events, rituals, and conferences and purchase books related to their research interest. Every activity has a positive impact on the local economy, increasing the incomes of hotels, restaurants, museums, and book shops, for example. A town like Galatina knows it and, therefore, exploits the opportunity of having many researchers as visitors, in addition to ordinary tourists.

In sum, tarantism has been transformed in the course of heritagisation and has become a crucial part of the identity of Galatina and Salento. Tarantism as heritage is now the object of a conflictual discourse between the claim for its authenticity and the need for cultural promotion and touristic activity in the region. However, despite the controversies, tarantism remains an undeniably distinctive element of Salento, with an undoubted historical, cultural, and folkloric value for the region.

Conclusion

Tarantism is not a simple phenomenon. While repeatedly defined as a "syndrome" in this thesis, a conventional medical framework cannot explain properly the insurgence and even the existence of tarantism. For example, it seems that the spider that provokes the symptoms of tarantism does not exist in the local fauna. Also, the idea that dances and the intervention of Saint Paul can heal the syndrome obviously does not match the usual medical treatments for the bite of a poisonous spider. Culture and folklore have hence a strong role in defining the phenomenon of tarantism and its resolution. This is the reason why tarantism became so appealing for ethnographers, interested in cultural analysis that could explain properly the existence and the meaning of such a complex phenomenon. Interestingly, tarantism still keeps its ethnographic appeal, in a period when the syndrome has disappeared. Historical changes to tarantism have occurred and helped transform it into a piece of heritage. Whereas many ethnographers have been interested in looking for the origins of and the reasons for the syndrome, many others have started to analyse the use of tarantism as a matter of regional identity, as done in this thesis. I explored the new interest in contemporary tarantism in this work, moving from the analysis of the earliest witnesses of the phenomenon to the most recent studies. After tracing the historical development of tarantism and analyzing its transformation, I focused on its current cultural and social significance. I drew on my ethnographic research in Salento in 2018 and the theoretical issues of heritagisation and authenticity from the perspective of tarantism. These issues were discussed in the field, leading to different points of view and controversies. For example, members of the UNESCO club, who organized the re-enactments in Galatina, aimed to make the performances as similar as possible to the original therapies for tarantism. However, other people in the field highlighted the inauthenticity of the re-enactments. Controversies also arose regarding the interpretations of the syndrome of tarantism. For instance, the voices of experts and non-experts can differ, and expertise can become a matter of authority over non-experts. This is the case of Andrea P., who criticized the vernacular interpretation of tarantism by his friend Roberto. The experts in the field were usually interested in tarantism as a historical phenomenon and not focused too much on the recent issues of heritagisation and authenticity. The UNESCO club and its members were the exceptions, as they used their expertise to organize the re-enactments, believing in the positive value of their efforts for heritagisation of tarantism. The issues of authenticity and heritagisation certainly influenced the current situation in the field. Reflecting upon their impact in the field, the analysis of these issues enabled me to focus on contemporary perceptions and interpretations of tarantism in Salento and on the social consequences of those perspectives and interpretations. The purpose of this work was to study tarantism mostly as a contemporary element belonging to the domains of folklore and heritage and related to the local communities of Galatina and Salento. Tarantism has become heritage for people living in Salento, who have formed their regional identity around the phenomenon and put significant effort into its promotion and the preservation of its historical significance. Secondly, the heritagisation of tarantism has pointed out the problem of authenticity. Nowadays, a symbol like the spider is just a promotional icon for the Nights of the Taranta, whereas music and dances have become exclusively recreational activities. The historical and original function of those elements is now lost. Also, events like the re-enactments are clearly not the same thing as the ancient therapies, even though imitating them; re-enactments are performances without a healing purpose. As emerged from the answer that I received from the neo-tarantata, a performance, in this case, is not something authentic from the emic perspective. A performance, even though well enacted, can be perceived often as fake, inauthentic, and a bad imitation of something original, pure, and lost in time. Tarantism nowadays is in the middle of this conflict between performance and authenticity. Historical and cultural processes have gradually changed its nature and turned it into heritage, preserving the symbols and the historical importance of the ancient phenomenon. It is still possible to witness tarantism through the re-enactments and to read and research about it. Until tarantism survives as heritage, scholars can study it, and their contribution is necessary. There are still details to discover about the phenomenon in the past and recent transformations to trace in the present. These enquiries will certainly increase the awareness about this region of Italy that has fascinated many scholars, while helping its distinctive culture to survive in the future.

Talking about this thesis and this research, it would not have been possible without witnessing the contemporary aspects of tarantism. Highlighting those aspects, I focused on the current importance and relevance of the phenomenon, making it possibly more intriguing for people interested in folklore and heritage. Hopefully, this work will inspire some future scholars and encourage them to pursue their studies regarding tarantism.


===========================\n\n\n

Resistance and Reappropriation in Rave Culture

This essay concerns the dynamic tension between resistance and reappropriation in the youth subcultural practice of raving. We argue that the transgressive potential of underground rave culture lies primarily in its privileging of communion, which is facilitated along the intersecting axes of social space, authorship, the body, and the drug Ecstasy. The commodification of rave culture is demonstrated to be linked to a shifting consciousness reflected in changing attitudes toward Ecstasy, the relocation of dance culture into clubs, and the redefinition of the DJ as artist and superstar. A concluding section considers the implications of resistance and reappropriation in rave culture for social change and the exercise of power.

Back in the days before America was online, computer geeks who liked techno music began hosting secret rave parties in San Francisco. Revelers followed treasure hunts, whispering passwords to strangers on street corners until a rave emerged in somebody else's warehouse or field. The drug ecstasy was passed around like Tic Tacs, and the music played until the cops showed up. Now, a generation later, underground raves have gone pop. Last weekend at 3Com Park, nearly 29,000 peaceful ravers queued up in broad daylight, $40 tickets in hand, for the largest, cleanest rave San Francisco has ever seen.

"Raves are more like concerts now," said James Olson, a rave promoter with B3 Candy who recently drew 42,000 people to the Long Beach Civic Center. "It's all about money; that breaking into the warehouse stuff is a thing of the past." (May, 2001, p. Al)

BRIAN L. OTT (Ph.D., Pennsylvania State University) is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Speech Communication at Colorado State University. Bill D. Herman (M.A., Colorado State University) is a Lecturer in the same department and a Colorado DJ (DJ Talk). An earlier version of this manuscript was presented as a competitive paper in the Critical and Cultural Studies Division at the 2002 National Communication Association convention in New Orleans, LA. The authors wish to thank Greg Dickinson and the many anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on previous drafts. It is, in short, a process that highlights the dynamic tension between resistance and reappropriation, between counterculture and commodification. Rave culture provides an especially instructive site for exploring this tension on at least two counts. First, in a postmodern consumer culture where identity is increasingly tied to the active consumption of images and styles (Kellner, 1995; van Poecke, 1996), music is among the most central and significant ways that youth articulate style and hence a sense of self (Christenson & Roberts, 1998; Hebdige, 1981; Shuker, 1994; Thornton, 1996). By studying a musical subculture—particularly one as socially, politically, and economically influential as raving—we hope to illuminate the varied ways that youth continually (re)negotiate difference in constructing their identities.

Second, an analysis of rave culture allows for a consideration of rhetoric’s widely overlooked material dimensions (Blair, 1999, pp. 16-17). Music is not merely a symbolic experience; it is also an embodied experience. Music acts directly upon and is quite literally felt by the body. In the case of rave culture, the rhetorical force of music on the body is shaped by both where (the venue) and how (drug use) the music is experienced. As we demonstrate, the meanings, functions, and politics of rave culture have mutated as the sites of raving and the drugs associated with it have changed. As such, this study stands to deepen our understanding of how the materiality of rhetoric is connected to corporeality and social space.

In exploring these issues, we contend that underground rave locates its transgressive character in the logic of communion.” We argue further that the commercialization of rave culture by the music industry subverts the logic of communion in favor of commodity spectacle through the relocation of dance culture into clubs and the redefinition of the Dd as artist and superstar.

Before proceeding with our analysis, however, we review the literature on resistance and youth subculture as a theoretical basis for interpreting the practices and products of raving. We, then, offer a brief overview of the origins of rave culture by situating it within the culture of music more broadly.

Theoretical Impulses: Defining Resistance

Resistance is a notoriously elusive category of analysis, as it raises the question, “resistance to what?” A common, though troublesome, answer to that question is domination because it suggests that resistance and power are independent of and diametrically opposed to one another. If domination was truly carried out in this manner, however, it is difficult to imagine how social change would ever occur. That social structures and relationships do change (if only slowly and subtly—short of revolution) suggests that the field of power—where meanings are made and contested (Brummett, 1994, p. 4)—entails a never-ending negotiation of competing ideologies. This is a point made ardently by de Certeau (1984) and Foucault (1980), who claim that there is no space outside power. Rather, resistance is always already situated within a network of power relationships and thus resistive practices must make creative and adaptive use of the resources of the other (de Certeau, 1984, p. 37). In keeping with this viewpoint, we define resistance as those symbolic and material practices that challenge, subvert, or suspend the cultural codes, rules, or norms, which through their everyday operation create, sustain, and naturalize the prevailing social structure in a particular space and time. Our aim here is to provide a definition that is both sufficiently broad enough to include a wide range of cultural practices and sufficiently conjunctural enough that such practices be thought of, not as universally resistive, but as "specific to particular times, places and social relationships" (Barker, 2000, p. 342). As we are defining it, then, resistance does not oppose domination from some space outside of power and history. It is, instead, a struggle over meanings that occurs within a "discursive formation" (Foucault, 1972, p. 38). Of interest to us is the precise ways in which the concepts of artist, authorship, and authenticity get negotiated and defined within rave culture.

Toward that end, we trace the changes in these concepts across the history of raving. Before proceeding, however, we offer two cautionary notes. Our analysis offers only a snapshot of an ongoing struggle within the culture of music. Like a photograph, our analysis imposes a frame on a process, and thus potentially creates an undue perception of unity and closure. Also, our analysis is not intended to romanticize early rave culture and to demonize its more recent iterations, only to demonstrate how the meanings of certain concepts have been reworked in one genre of music at a particular historical moment.

Roots of Resistance: Origins of Rave

Rave culture is the result of transatlantic musical and cultural cross-pollination, drawing influence from American and European 252 music scenes. The rave DJ's style of mixing multiple records originated in the disco era, when dance club DJs using variable-speed turntables began stringing together songs with similar beats in order to keep the dancers moving. Influenced by European electronic musicians—especially the German quartet Kraftwerk—disco artists on both sides of the Atlantic began producing electronic dance music. Built upon thick, synthesized, repetitive beats in 4/4 time, this music became increasingly useful to the mixing DJ. The predictable, electronically timed beats lined up nicely with one another, and DJs could mix together the sound from two records, playing them simultaneously for an extended period of time.

In the late 1970s and early '80s, electronic dance music became a vital outlet for gay communities in American cities—especially New York and Chicago, where garage and house music originated. Underground dance clubs in these cities filled with Black (and to a lesser extent Latino) gay men, who found themselves oppressed on two counts. Collin (1997) explains:

This contributed to a powerful, pent-up frustration which found its release in the clubs, the only place where they could truly be themselves and play out their desires without fear or inhibition. The explosion of energy, therefore, was enormous; the bonding too. The rhetoric of unity and togetherness which echoed down through club cultures to come was forged in these clubs, under pressure from an oppressive world.

Early DJ heroes Larry Levan and Frankie Knuckles—at the Paradise Garage in New York and the Warehouse in Chicago, respectively— provided the soundtracks for ecstatic celebrations that served as a locus of cultural resistance. Levan and Knuckles were innovative users of technology (employing reel-to-reel tapes to create their own remixes, for instance), and their style of music and the trend of electronic musical innovation soon began to spread. Driving back and forth to Chicago to sell records and visit the former Warehouse, which had reopened as the Music Box, Detroit producers such as Juan Atkins, Derrick May, and Kevin Saunderson established a new type of sound called techno (Brewster and Broughton, 2000, p. 254). Unlike New York’s garage and Chicago’s house sounds, which often contain and/or closely resemble traditional instruments such as bass guitars and drum kits, techno is alien and futuristic. As Brewster and Broughton explain, “it wants to free itself from the baggage of all the world’s previous music and take a few brave steps into the future.... It has rejected representation in favor of abstraction” (p. 320). While garage and house utilize digital instruments such as samplers, synthesizers, and beat boxes, techno is inconceivable without them. Instead of modifying traditional musical sounds with technology, technology becomes the means for creating music.

With a penchant for electronically-derived pop music, Europeans were a ripe audience, and house, garage, and techno quickly caught on in European dance clubs. Thus, American dance music helped fuel the popular, widely attended youth dance scene that was still years away in the States. For many youth, the commercial nature of clubs was unfulfilling, however, and by the late 1980s, youth in London and Manchester began throwing large underground dance parties in fields, warehouses, and airplane hangers. Within a few years, a recognizable rave culture had crossed the Atlantic, taking up residence in New York, Los Angeles, and San Francisco before spreading to the ski slopes of Colorado and the cow pastures of Wisconsin (Champion, 1997, p. 95).

By participating in these renegade alternative-venue events (later shortened to “raves”), dancers were challenging social norms and confirming the belief that, “Dancing is political, stupid”.

Underground Raves and the Ecstasy of Communion

But just what are the “politics” of dancing and of the dancing at raves in particular? In this section, we contend that the transgressive potential of underground raves is captured most fully in the concept of communion. Derived from the Latin communis, which means “common,” communion refers to the sharing of common substance, to an “intimate fellowship” in which traditional hierarchies are flattened. At an explicit level, underground rave culture fosters communion through the commonly articulated concept of PLUR. Coined in the early 1990s, PLUR—peace, love, unity, and respect—enunciates a set of moral guidelines and rules for participating in raves (LaGassa, 1996). As we are more interested in the unspoken practices of rave culture, however, our examination focuses specifically on how underground raves facilitate communion along the intersecting axes of social space, authorship, corporeality, and the drug Ecstasy.

Spatial Appropriation and Transformation

No analysis of power relationships should ignore the importance of social space. After all, the ability to control and manipulate power relationships hinges upon the victory of place over time. A subject with will and power becomes possible as soon as it “postulates a place that can be delimited as its own and serve as the base from which relations with an exteriority composed of targets or threats (customers or competitors ...) can be managed” (de Certeau, 1984, p. 36). The discotheque, for instance, provides the owner with a certain power over the customer, not least of all by constituting discotheque-goers as customers. The owner decides what counts as entertainment, establishes the price of entertainment (admission, liquor, etc.), and creates and enforces the rules of acceptable behavior. In short, the discotheque allows the owner to manage the crowd despite its changing face from night to night. Resistance, then, often involves spatial appropriation. Appropriated spaces are one version of what Foucault (1986) terms "heterotopias," which are "something like counter-sites, a kind of effectively enacted utopia in which the real sites, all the other real sites that can be found within the culture, are simultaneously represented, contested, and inverted" (p. 24). Since spatial appropriation entails the temporary poaching of place, rather than its ownership, time is privileged over place. These heterotopias, explains Foucault (1986), "are linked ... to time in its most fleeting, transitory, precarious aspect, to time in the mode of the festival. These heterotopias are not oriented toward the eternal, they are rather absolutely temporal" (p. 26). Foucault cites "fairgrounds, these marvelous empty sites on the outskirts of cities that teem once or twice a year" as an example of such counter-sites. But we contend that cow pastures, old theaters, warehouses, and other large spaces that are seized—often with the aid of a crowbar—to stage underground raves furnish clearer cases of transitory, carnivalesque spaces. Whereas the prevailing social structure typically sanctions the temporary appropriation of space for carnivals and fairs, it rarely did so in the case of early raves. In fact, most underground raves were not scheduled to last for a specified amount of time; rather, they continued—sometimes for several days—until the police arrived and ownership of the place was re-established. The co-optation of space and temporary liberation of it from the social structure, then, was absolutely central to the transgressive character of early rave culture.

"A rave," Brewster and Broughton (2000) note, "was an idealized version of clubbing. It wasn't about visiting some purpose-built venue, it was about creating something new; it was about building a city for a night. A club had a place ... but a rave was made of possibilities" (p. 370). Given the obvious legal issues raised by breaking into buildings or taking over fields, the location of underground raves was, in the early years, kept a secret until a few hours before the party. At that point, ravers would dial a phone number they had discovered on the Internet to hear a recorded message informing them of a "map point" such as a parking lot or record store where they would get directions to the rave (Hanrahan, 2001, p. El). The secrecy surrounding the location of underground raves also served to heighten a sense of community by uniting ravers in specialized knowledge and transforming the quest for the location into a ritualistic pilgrimage. By transforming a physical place into a festive moment, raves generated the possibility for a musical experience that was no longer driven exclusively by the logic of the socio-economic order (Gaillot, 1999, p. 20). With ownership (and control) displaced for a time, the festive moment of the rave, like carnival, "celebrated temporary liberation from the prevailing truth and form of the established order ... [and] marked the suspension of all hierarchical ranks, privileges, norms and prohibitions" (Bakhtin, 1968, p. 10). This flattening of hierarchy is further reinforced by the organization of social space within raves. Unlike most artistic, especially musical, events in the West, the stage is absent in underground rave culture. "The entire apparatus of the mise-en-spectacle is thereby shaken," observes Gaillot (1999); "Indeed, once there is no longer any privileged space, no more 'spectacular altar,' so to speak, there is also no longer a center toward which looking can be directed and focused" (p. 27). Whereas rock or pop enthusiasts attend concerts to witness and enjoy a musician or band, ravers attend raves to create and participate in an experience that cannot exist without their participation. The point is not that rave culture is wholly resistive and rock culture wholly complicit, but that underground rave culture resists the prevailing set of cultural codes concerning the organization of space at musical events. The carnival metaphor offers insight, as raves are "not a spectacle seen by the people; they live in it, and everyone participates because its very idea embraces all the people" (Bakhtin, 1968, p. 7). The highly temporal, festive, decentered, and participatory social space of raves opens the door for new types of discourse. It is to those discourses that we now turn.

Deconstructing the Author and Dispersing the Text

Discourse is typically thought of as an individually authored message addressed to an identifiable audience, with the author outside of and precedeing the text. The prevailing conception of the author is as an autonomous figure, originator of ideas and meanings. However, early rave culture deconstructs the function of the author, problematizes the notion of reception and consumption, and fosters a collaborative experience in which all participants contribute equally to a living text.

The capacity of raves to become living texts "experienced only in an activity of production" (Barthes, 1988, p. 157) is closely connected to the unique character of the music and its performance at these events. The music is mixed by DJs, using record players as samplers, and for most dancers, the identification of the original artists is both unimportant and nearly impossible. The electronic music performed by DJs is largely devoid of visible "musicians," and its appeal to today's youth does not lie in an empathy with lyrical content nor, to any great extent, individual "personalities" (Langlois, 1992, p. 229). Underground rave culture further decenters the notion of artist, extending the music in a perpetually unfinished fashion. Music at raves is mixed without the slightest interruption, even when DJs are changed. The DJ's primary purpose is to ensure that the rhythm is never interrupted and that the bodies of the dancers never stop moving. Unlike rock concerts, where artists play identifiable songs in established sets, the music at raves is continuous, fluid, and unidentifiable. In short, it calls into question the idea of the artist as original and autonomous author and the idea of the artwork as a finished form. Raves are an ensemble performance involving the interaction of music, DJ, and ravers, in which no element is more or less important than the rest. In early rave culture, Gaillot (1999) notes that "[DJs] did not consider themselves artists, even less stars ... [They] refused 'aura,' as attested by the widespread anonymousness in the movement ... [DJs] were not even announced or introduced, nor were they applauded for their performance; most of the time we did not even see them" (p. 52). Rock concerts, with their superstar artists and individual songs or artworks, are structured to encourage a particular mode of participation in which the audience consumes the artistic product.

Underground raves, by contrast, are living art whose subversive force is constituted precisely in the disruption of the categories of artist and audience. Though resistance is certainly not absent from rock concerts, it is typically not enacted in a manner that challenges the artist/audience dichotomy. One of the relatively unique transgressive characteristics of rave culture, therefore, is the implosion of the artist/audience dichotomy and the shift from the "music one listens to" to the "music one plays."

Barthes (1988) describes the difference in this manner: "The music one plays comes from an activity that is very little auditory... . It is the music which you or I can play, alone or among friends, with no other audience than its participants; a muscular music in which the part taken by the sense of hearing is one only of ratification, as though the body were hearing—and not 'the soul'... . The body controls, conducts, co-ordinates, having itself to transcribe what it reads, making sound and meaning, the body as inscriber and not just transmitter, simple receiver." (p. 149)

In light of the body's importance to the experience of music at raves, along with the recognition that "body-images 'speak' social relations and values with particular force" (Stallybrass & White, 1986, p. 10), it is worth examining the ideological function of the body in rave culture more closely.

Dancing Bodies and the Loss of Self

Electronic music is first and foremost dance music. The loud, pulsing bass and repetitive beats reverberate through the whole body, ensuring that dancers move in unison with the music and with each other. The mere centrality of the body in rave culture is itself transgressive. Binary concepts such as mind/body always entail hierarchy, and throughout much of Western philosophy and religion, the body has been coded as untamed and impure and subordinated to the intellectual and spiritual activities of the mind and soul.'° But rave culture inverts this hierarchy and celebrates Dionysian principles over Apollonian ones.

Whereas Apollonian logic signifies order, self-control, balance, and the mind, the Greek god Dionysus denotes irrationality, ecstasy, inebriation, loss of individual identity, and the body (Grosz, 1994, p. 130). Bodies can, of course, be coded in a variety of ways, and the image of the raving body suggests a second level of transgressive- ness. Unlike the classical body of Ancient Greece, symbolizing clean- liness and purity, and separated from its surroundings (or elevated above them by a pedestal), the raving body shares more in common with the grotesque body of carnival, "which was usually multiple, teeming, always already part of a throng" (Stallybrass & White, 1986, p. 110). At raves, bodies intermingle, often intimately and indiscriminately through touch and dance. Animated by the rhythm of the music, dancers move together in a trance-like state. When rave participants enter "trance-dance," the very notion of individual being is effaced and communion through dancing is achieved. "In his [sic] Dionysiac state," explain Silk and Stern (1981), "a man feels that all barriers between himself and others are broken in favor of a rediscovered universal harmony . ... [and] all things are as one. There is, in fact, no place for any distinctions, for anything that sets one thing off against any other thing: limits, forms, conventions, individuals" (p. 64). The loss of self characterized by the being-together of bodies in a state of ecstasy is referred to as jouissance by Barthes (1992), and carries great ideological significance. The body is a key site of social control and therefore among the most disciplined sites within any social structure. Social control relies, to some extent, on self-control (the body acting within prevailing norms and conventions), and self-control implies individually constituted subjects. The temporary erasure of individuality furnished by trance, then, is the loss of self-control, or more accurately the pleasure of the body out of control. It is also a loss of social control—an "evasion of ideology" (Fiske, 1989, pp. 51-2). Jouissance describes a way of experiencing music, and while other types of music can be experienced in this way, context often functions to inhibit it. At an opera or rock concert, for instance, attendees are constituted by the venue, whether symphony hall or football stadium, as an audience. The presence of a stage and the direction of attention to that stage affirm order (and social control), and subsequently the disciplined body applauds or cheers at the end of each number. At raves, however, there is no artist or audience, only the decentered and dirty body. Dirty does not refer to actual dirt, but to disorder, as in the mixing of categories, the deconstruction of artist and audience, the dissolving of self into the ecstatic body (Fiske, 1989, p. 90; Melechi, 1993, p. 35; Stallybrass & White, 1986, p. 23). In underground rave culture, Ecstasy is more than just a metaphor for the body, though; it is also the preferred cultural artifact. Ecstasy as Drug and Consciousness Every cultural group adopts or produces artifacts through which it articulates its overall values and structure. The concept of homology refers to a close fit between an artifact and the lived culture that surrounds it (Barker, 2000, p. 324; Hebdige, 1981). Homological analysis, then, explains Willis (1978): [We concerned with how far, in their structure and content, particular items parallel and reflect the structure, style, typical concerns, attitudes and feelings of the social group. Where homologies are found they are actually best understood in terms of structure. It is the continuous play between the group and a particular item which produces specific styles, meaning, contents and forms of consciousness. (p. 191) We contend that the dominant artifact of rave culture, and likely the most homologous as well, is the drug Ecstasy—or E as it is frequently called within the rave scene. As such, an analysis of this drug and its relation to underground rave culture serves to highlight the "focal concerns, activities, group structure and collective self-image of the subculture" (Hebdige, 1981, p. 51). In an attempt to develop an appetite suppressant, the German company Merck first synthesized Ecstasy or MDMA (methylenedioxymethamphetamine) just prior to World War I. MDMA, which stimulates the brain to produce serotonin, produces both physical and psychological side effects that include boosting one's energy, intensifying and enhancing the senses, and fostering a sense of uninhibited conviviality, empathy, and insight (Richburg, 2001, p. A16). MDMA is particularly well suited to raving for two reasons. First, the drug, according to Reynolds (1998), "[has] a uniquely synergistic/synesthetic interaction with music, especially uptempo, repetitive, electronic dance music... . [which] sounds better on E—crisper and more distinct, but also engulfing in its immediacy" (pp. 83, 84). Users of E report that the drug makes all sensations more vivid and that dancing on E feels like being inside the music. Second, of all the drugs associated with youth culture, MDMA is by all accounts the most social. "It's rarely used by a solitary individual," Reynolds (1998) explains, "because the [intense] feelings [of empathy] it unleashes would have nowhere to go... . Rave theorists talk of tribal consciousness, 'morphic resonance,' an empathy that shades into the telepathic.... When large numbers of people took Ecstasy, the drug catalyzed a strange wondrous atmosphere of collective intimacy, an electric sense of connection between complete strangers" (pp. 85, 83; Saunders, 1996, p. 35). Given the feelings of oneness that accompany the drug, the practice of taking E has itself become a communal ritual not unlike the Christian practice of taking communion. In the early years of rave culture, E was widely available and taken collectively by partygoers, who would engage in a wide and creative array of touching, massaging behaviors. But the characteristic of E that is perhaps most unique and homologous with underground rave culture is its dephallicizing effect on the male body. If rave culture truly flattens hierarchy, promoting oneness, a communion without borders, boundaries, and differences, then it must somehow disrupt the entire disciplinary apparatus of 'sexuality' that serves patriarchal and heteronormative social relationships (Fiske, 1989, pp. 94-95). Though E intensifies the pleasure of touching and hugging, it largely empties sexual intimacy of its aggressive, masculine content. "E may be the 'love drug,'" Reynolds (1997) writes, "but this refers more to agape than eros, cuddles rather than copulation... E is notorious for making erection difficult and male orgasm virtually impossible" (p. 88). Not surprisingly, women at raves report feeling much safer than in more traditional dance venues (Saunders, 1996, pp. 42-5). In addition to having an anti-libidinal effect on its users, MDMA helps efface gendered sexual relations. Since Ecstasy enhances feelings of collective love rather than targeted lust, the majority of users do not discriminate by gender, sex, or sexuality in their intimacy with others. In contrast to club culture, which privileges consumption, sexual conquest, and being an audience, underground rave culture privileges communion, the ecstasy of jouissance, and oneness with the music and the dancers—if only for a night.

Commercial Raves and the Rise of Commodity Spectacle
With tens of thousands of youth gathering in hundreds of cities each weekend to dance, the music industry simply could not ignore the potential profits represented by rave culture. Thus, throughout the 1990s, rave's dance culture was gradually reappropriated and largely relocated into clubs and discotheques—the spaces intended for traditional spectacles.1 The transformation of rave culture did not happen quickly or easily, however, and indeed, its success depended upon a fundamental shift in the consciousness of the participants from communion to commodity spectacle. At the heart of this transformation, we contend, was a media public relations war on underground rave culture and in particular, the drug Ecstasy, and the redefinition and promotion of the DJ as artist and superstar.

By 1993, "stories of people throwing up, then picking the half-digested pills out of the puke and gobbling them down again [and] rumors of kids using syringes to shoot speed in the toilets" were circulating widely. Anti-rave sentiment grew even stronger in the UK as news of a rash of Ecstasy-related deaths spread. What was not widely reported was that a vast majority of these deaths were not caused by Ecstasy, but by a rise in "cocktail" pills sold by profiteering drug dealers who cut or replaced MDMA with cheaper, more dangerous drugs designed to resemble the effects of Ecstasy.

In the United States, which until recently had no law comparable to the Criminal Justice Act, rave culture progressed along a somewhat different path, continuing in outdoor venues, though in a more commercialized form, even as it surfaced in clubs. Shortly after the introduction of rave culture in the US, music promoters began to sponsor spectacular outdoor raves, which attracted youth with large, powerful sound systems, laser-light shows, mass-marketed DJs, and funfair rides such as Moon Bounces. Advertised by local radio stations, "super" raves were drawing anywhere from 2,000 to 20,000 dancers for $30-60 a ticket.

But as in the UK, the growing popularity of raves brought the attention of the media, who again focused on the "scandalous" drug component of the culture, and ensured the scorn of the public. "Drug enforcement officials, lawmakers and health care experts in the United States are sounding a nationwide alarm about Ecstasy," reports Richburg, "calling it the fastest-growing drug in the illegal marketplace" (p. A16). Subsequently, the police began infiltrating raves and cracking down on drug use. At a daylong rave sponsored by Vinyl Lab Productions at the Ann Arundel County Fair Grounds in Maryland, 47 people were arrested on drug charges, and at Milwaukee's "Grave Rave," all 950 partygoers were arrested. Outdoor raves continued, but in a new form as the drug Ecstasy became less and less common. In the US, rave enthusiasts were not forced into clubs so much as they went willingly. The growing commercialization of outdoor raves contributed to the rise of superstar DJs, who were now being followed from venue to venue by loyal fans. Moreover, club raves were not that much different than the commercial outdoor variety, especially at first, since many rave promoters turned a blind eye to drug use in these clubs. Some promoters signaled the drug’s presence and acceptability at events through not so subtly coded messages on flyers—a publicity trick mimicked by the Denver radio station KTCL, who feature a nightly show titled “E-lectronica at E-leven” and recently sponsored a rave/concert titled “Weekend of E.” Other promoters, knowing that Ecstasy results in dehydration, even tried to profit off it indirectly by charging exorbitant fees for bottled water (Goldstein, 2001, p. C3). As a result of continued Ecstasy use, some elements of the communal spirit that had dominated underground raving survived the initial transition to clubs. But all of that was about to change. Ecstasy, whose effect is severely undercut by alcohol consumption, was significantly hampering the alcohol trade. In fact, a 1995 survey of college-aged students found that while E use had doubled in recent years, alcohol use had halved (Saunders, 1996, p. 23). Though underground raves are predominantly alcohol-free events, dance clubs depend on alcohol sales for their livelihood. So as long as Ecstasy was the drug of choice, commercialized raving was in jeopardy. Over the course of the next few years, attitudes of club owners and rave promoters toward E would change drastically. Many club owners, suffering from lagging alcohol sales, voluntarily began to police drug use, especially Ecstasy, in their clubs. Security guards posted at the doors of clubs would ask patrons to empty their pockets, confiscating glow sticks, pacifiers, Vicks Vapor Rub, and other E-related paraphernalia. But rave promoters, who make their money off ticket sales rather than alcohol, were less compelled than owners were to crack down on illegal drug use—that is, until the highly publicized and unprecedented case at the State Palace Theater in New Orleans. In this instance, prosecutors went after “three local rave promoters ... [who] profited off holding ecstasy-soaked parties,” filing federal drug charges that potentially carried up to 20-year sentences (Filosa, May 2001, p. 1). What was remarkable about this case is that there was no evidence the promoters were selling drugs. Indeed, it marked “the first time promoters and management have been brought up on federal charges for patrons’ private drug use” (Chonin, 2001, p. 52). To avoid jail time, the three men pled guilty, agreeing to pay a $100,000 fine and ban rave-related items from all future events (Filosa, June 2001, p. 1). Prior to settlement, the defendants in that case faced prosecution under the 1986 “crack house” law—a law designed with the prosecution of private residents, not commercial promoters and business owners, in mind. A year later, Ecstasy use at raves came under further attack when Senator Joseph Biden introduced the “Reducing Americans’ Vulnerability to Ecstasy Act of 2002” or “RAVE Act” into Congress—a bill designed to make it significantly easier to prosecute cases like the one in New Orleans. After this bill failed to pass, Biden renamed it “The Illicit Drug Anti-Proliferation Act” and attached it as a rider to the popular Amber Alert legislation—an unrelated bill designed to help locate missing children. This bill passed, as amended, in April 2003 (Boucher, 2003, p. 3) on its way to President Bush's eager signature. The new law readily exposes rave promoters, events coordinators, and property owners to federal prosecution for drug use on their premises or at their events. As the ACLU (2003) explains, "no matter how much security is put in place, owners could be held responsible for the actions of just one customer and would therefore be much less likely to allow raves to take place in their clubs or concert halls" (para. 2). In short, the State Palace Theater case is just the beginning of an official federal crackdown on rave culture. In combination with the economic pressure of selling liquor, the ever-increasing legal pressure has helped displace Ecstasy as the drug of choice in clubs, and rave culture's communal character has steadily given way to a more meat-market mentality.

The Changing Face and Function of the DJ

In its early incarnations, rave culture deconstructed the notions of author and work, replacing them with a living text that resulted from the collaborative performance of DJs and ravers and existed only in the moment of their interaction with the music. The challenge posed to the music industry by the idea of "author as fiction" is that there is nothing to market. For many years, DJs were not considered artists because public perception was that anybody with the right equipment could DJ. "[T]he elevation of all consumers to potential creators," explains Sanjek (1992), "denies the composer or musician an aura of autonomy and authenticity ...and the products no longer possess the meanings once assigned them" (p. 609). If the DJ was going to become a marketable commodity, s/he first had to be redefined as someone who does more than simply play other people's records.'* Thus, discourse in the music industry began to shift and DJs came to be known as "musicians, virtuosos who elevate turntables far beyond mere mechanisms for playing back vinyl LPs" (Reighley, 2000, p. 11).

DJs are now said to possess unique technical and artistic skills such as beat matching (keeping two songs at the same tempo), mixing (laying one track over another, often in segue from one to the other), juggling (using two copies of the same record to create a new and different beat), cutting and re-introducing tracks (turning the sound off and on in time), and scratching (dragging a record forward and backward). The more artistic and expressive aspects of DJing reside in the ability to create moods and to convey a sense of flow through the selection, juxtaposition, and blending of tracks. In short, the creative recombination of pre-existing material is now seen as a viable artistic practice in a postmodern landscape (Poschardt, 1998, p. 16).

As the DJ was transformed from someone who operates a turntable into an independent artist, the DJ also became a superstar (Mattila, 1999, p. 56). Inside the club, the DJ is no longer decentered or anonymous. The majority of clubs feature elaborate DJ booths, generally at either the head of the dance floor or right in the center. In repositioning the DJ, the grotesque body of the crowd that had characterized underground raves is displaced by the classical figure of the artist. The symbolic significance of such a shift is well captured in Stallybrass and White's (1986) analysis of the classical statue; "the classical statue is the radiant center of a transcendent individualism, 'put on a pedestal', raised above the viewer and the commonality and anticipating passive admiration from below. We gaze up at the figure and wonder. We are placed by it as spectators" (p. 21). The construction and celebration of the DJ as artist is further reinforced when DJs are changed. Rather than mixing her/his first tune into the previous DJ's song, as was the standard practice in underground raving, a well-known DJ might cut the power and allow the previous record to grind noisily to a halt; the break in music announces the new DJ who is often greeted by enthusiastic cheers (Brewster & Broughton, 2000, p. 384). In dance clubs today, fans clamor around DJ booths, watching every move, for DJs have "replaced supermodels as the new 'hot' celebrities" (Reighley, 2000, p. 203). In fact, as DJs have gained prominence in the media and record industry, they have become some of the most highly paid people in the entertainment world (Haslam, 1997, p. 150). But no one has profited more from the growing celebrity of the DJ than the music and record industry. Popular, trade, and industry magazines hype DJs as pop idols. They are interviewed on radio and television, and the right lineup of DJs on an event flyer guarantees music and event ticket sales. Today, fans frequently describe their musical tastes by referencing particular DJs, rather than particular genres of records (Brewster & Broughton, 2000, p. 386). By the mid-1990s, the legal DJ mix was born, and CDs featuring tracks of other artists mixed by popular DJs were selling in clubs and record stores under the DJ's name (Reynolds, 1998, p. 276). Commodification of the DJ and her/his music has been extended to include her/his lifestyle as well. Record stores feature DJ trading cards, bookstores sell DJ biographies, and shopping mall boutiques offer DJ bags. "Embossed with record company label logos... [and] 'originally designed for DJs to jockey their twelve inch vinyls from club to club'," Haslam (1997) reports, "these tools of the DJ trade are selling at fifty dollars a bag . . . 'as a new-school urban briefcase' " (pp. 150-1). The cult of the DJ has transformed rave culture into commodity spectacle.

Club raving is wildly popular today, but it bears little resemblance to the underground raves of the early 1990s. In contemporary rave culture, the DJ is constructed as an artist, a pop icon to be adored and emulated, and a hyper-masculine patriarch who directs and controls the bodies of the dancers. S/he is author—sovereign God of her/his characters, who have been transformed by her/his aura from participants into patrons. Hence, many of the hierarchies that are flattened by underground rave culture are reanimated in its reappropriation by the music industry. The commercialization of rave culture finds the heterotopia of the invaded field replaced by the official space of the club (or sanctioned use of the fairground), the performance of the ravers replaced by the artistic product of the DJ, the freeing pleasure of jouissance replaced by the disciplining pleasure of accepting ready-made meanings, and the logic of communion replaced by the logic of commodity spectacle. Resistance, Reappropriation, and Back Again

Our analysis of resistance and reappropriation in rave culture is marked by some important limitations. Chief among these limitations is the way our chronological organization and focus on space, authorship, corporeality, and communion constrains the analysis. Although organizing the essay historically allowed us to carefully trace the reworking of these particular concepts in rave culture over time, it also potentially contributes to the misperception that underground rave culture is inherently resistive to and commercial rave culture fully complicitous with hegemonic capitalism. This unfortunate consequence of our approach warrants further comment. Although underground rave culture suggests exciting and potentially liberating possibilities, one cannot escape discipline and control altogether. As Foucault (1980) states, some disciplining structure is always at work. Regardless of how decentered and disorderly underground rave culture may appear, it still adheres to certain "rules of disorder" through the construction of cultural norms (Featherstone, 1991, p. 20).

We did not write about the ways social hierarchies often emerge among categories of ravers at underground raves, even as they challenge the hierarchy between artist and audience. We also did not attend to the ways ravers at commercial venues enact their own modes of tactical resistance, such as subverting the capitalist structure by making and circulating bootlegged mixes. The current contours of club raving should not be regarded as an end state, as youth have already begun to poach it, transform it, and invent their own pleasures from it (Brewster & Broughton, 2000, pp. 407-8).

Despite these limitations, analyzing rave culture offers insights into resistance theory and the structure and function of the music industry. This study suggests that resistance is more profitably conceptualized as a process than a universal outcome. Simply concluding that subcultural practices like raving are transgressive neglects the ways the prevailing social structure negotiates subversive symbolic practices and adapts them to serve existing social relationships.

Too often, resistance is blindly assumed to promote deep structural change. The liberatory potential of resistance lies not in its capacity to alter the prevailing social structure permanently but in the capacity of cultural consumers to make do—to use the resources of the dominant economic order to invent their own meanings and pleasures (de Certeau, 1984, p. xiii).

Public attitudes toward Ecstasy indicate another important finding concerning the capacity of discourse to naturalize an arbitrary social structure. Since the US Drug Enforcement Administration classifies Ecstasy in its most dangerous category, Schedule 1, public opinion against the drug was mobilized with relative ease. However, MDMA, which the DEA notes, "produces profoundly positive feelings, empathy for others, elimination of anxiety, and extreme relaxation" (Drug, n.d.), "was not even illegal until the 1980s, when it was discovered that it was being used at the rave party scene" (Richburg, 2001, p. A16).

Alcohol, which often promotes increased aggressiveness and has been linked to violent crimes such as sexual assault (Abbey, 1991; Frintner & Rubinson, 1993; Koss & Gaines, 1993; Muehlenhard & Linton, 1987), is, on the other hand, not an illicit drug. Our intent here is not to advocate Ecstasy, which presents its own dangers, but to illustrate how discourse can make one drug appear deviant and another normal—not really a drug at all. It would be profitable to analyze further the apparent homology between commercialized dance culture and alcohol.

Finally, it is worth highlighting that the ability to influence the meaning of authorship is what allows for the commodification of dance music by the record industry. "It is not simply that the performer becomes the hook through which musical performances are given distinctiveness and marketed," explains Straw (1999), "Over the long term, the continuity of performer careers is seen as a way of bringing order to the musical marketplace by introducing a particular kind of predictability" (p. 112). Dance music, from disco to electronica, has always posed a challenge to predictability. Since the distinctiveness of an original performance deteriorates through its being sampled and mixed into an uninterrupted musical sequence of tracks, it becomes virtually impossible to identify the performer's style. What happens in commercial rave culture is that the site of authorship shifts from the original performer to the DJ, where style is redefined as creative recombination. The specific manner in which each DJ selects and mixes tracks is now the marker of predictability and the guarantee that the musical landscape has order. This order is important not primarily to the DJ, but to the promoters and record labels who would package it for profit.

"The ideology of creation, which makes the author the first and last source of the value of his work," Bourdieu (1993) argues, "conceals the fact that the cultural businessman [sic] (art dealer, publisher, etc.) is at one and the same time the person who exploits the labour of the 'creator' by . . . putting it on the market, by exhibiting, publishing or staging it" (p. 77). Without the "cultural businessperson," the DJ's music is simply a natural resource that may be turned by ravers into ecstatic moments. As with all cultural phenomena, the future of raving is uncertain. Where it goes and what it becomes next will be a product of how, on the one hand, music lovers invent their own meanings and pleasures from existing structures and resources and, on the other hand, how the music industry and major music promoters respond to and reappropriate subcultural practices and styles. The only thing that is certain in rave culture is that symbolic and material battles over the concepts of artist, authorship, and authenticity will continue to be fought as music lovers strive to make do and music promoters strive to make profit.

Morley and Robins (1989) explain, "identity must be defined, not by its positive content, but always by its relation to, and differentiation from, other identities]" (p. 10); thus, "difference is constitutive of identity" (1995, p. 45). We selected resistance as our primary theoretical framework because, as rave emerged, difference was defined largely in contrast to mainstream music culture.

It seems worth briefly reflecting on the authorial "we" at this point. One author is a media critic whose primary scholarly interests lie in theories of the everyday. The other author is an established Colorado DJ, who has been involved in rave culture as a participant and promoter for over five years now. In combining these two sets of experiences (and voices), our aim has been to offer a reading of rave culture that is well grounded in both theory and practice.

While the essay may appear to have a single unified voice, it is actually a blending of voices not unlike the mixing of music that characterizes raves. This is not to say that raving absolutely, indisputably began here. Given its shady legal standing, raving is a notoriously difficult practice to nail down. Historians of music frequently cite these two cities as a particularly important nexus in which essential elements of the soon-to-explode rave scene began to coalesce. It was here especially that the culture of Ecstasy, imported from the island of Ibiza, off the coast of Spain, would come to be closely associated with raves (Sicko, 1999, p. 114).

We do not mean to suggest that early or underground rave culture is utterly transgressive and recent, more commercial rave culture is not. Rather, we are attempting to show how spatial appropriation was a vital part of rave culture's transgressive character in the early years. Resistance continues to occur in commercial rave culture, but is articulated in different ways. As raves grew in popularity and hence visibility, promoters continually had to invent new methods of “safely” getting the word out about a rave. According to Brewster and Broughton (2000), “The promoters quickly realized the value of new technology like mobile phones and reprogrammable telephone message lines to keep the address secret until the last minute. Incredible scams were pulled off to secure sites and to deflect police interest” (p. 372). Unlike radio DJs, rave DJs do not let tracks play, as songs, from beginning to end. Instead, they use their turntables like samplers, snatching threads of different tracks to weave into a larger musical tapestry. In combination with the volume and equalizer adjustments on the mixer, the variable-speed turntable becomes a sampler. The DJ can choose one part of one track—such as a synthesizer riff—to isolate and add that part to an already-playing track, creating unique musical outcomes. Even the most basic DJ technique, mixing records to keep the beat going, produces a larger musical text out of samples from records. In this way, the turntable is transformed from a tool for playing records into a tool for sampling from records.

What authenticates the atmosphere or vibe of dance cultures, according to Thornton (1996), is the buzz or energy that results from the interaction of records, DJ, and crowd. “Liveness” is displaced from the stage to the dancefloor, from the worship of the [rock] performer to a veneration of “atmosphere” or “vibe.” The DJ and dancers share the spotlight as de facto performers (p. 29).

With the word “artworks,” we are trying to highlight the difference between music that is consumed by audiences and music that is performed by audiences. In “From Work to Text,” Barthes (1988) argues that audiences can use or approach discourse in one of two modes: as works or Texts. The greatest difference between these two modes is where they locate the activity of writing. Works respect the sovereignty of the Author-God (the individual artist) and privilege consumption (p. 161). They close down writing (textuality) by imposing limits on reading and creating the appearance of a finished discourse. The Text, in stark contrast to the work, begins with the “removal of the Author” (Barthes, 1988, p. 145). It conceptualizes discourse as “a multi-dimensional space in which a variety of writings, none of them original, blend and clash, a tissue of quotations,” and it locates the reader as “the space on which all the quotations that make up a writing are inscribed without any of them being lost” (Barthes, 1988, pp. 146; 148). Thus, “[t]he text is opened out and set going—produced—by the reader in an act of collaboration, not consumption” (Leitch, 1983, p. 107). So, whereas concertgoers typically consume works, ravers produce Texts.

Thornton (1996) argues that, “The constant pulse of the bass blocks thoughts, affects emotions and enters the body. Like a drug, rhythms can lull one into another state. With rave culture, this potentiality was ritualized as the ‘trance dance’ by dancers actively seeking an altered state of consciousness through movement to the music” (p. 60). 90). See also Grosz (1994, pp. 1-10) and Zita (1998, pp. 202-4). According to Melechi (1993), "trance-dance moves the body beyond the spectacle of the ‘pose’ and the sexuality (‘romance’) of the look, into a ‘cyber-space’ of musical sound, where one attempts to implode (get into [the sound]) and disappear ... the body is neither the subject of self expression nor the object of the gaze" (pp. 33-4). For a related discussion, see Canetti (1963; pp. 29-34): “In the rhythmic crowd, density and equality coincide from the beginning. Everything here depends on movement ... In the end, there appears to be a single creature dancing, a creature with fifty heads and a hundred legs and arms, all performing in exactly the same way and with the same purpose. When the excitement is at its height, these people really feel as one” (pp. 30, 32).

As raves have moved into clubs, the “logic” that animates them has become—at least in a sociological sense—more like that of fairs and amusement parks. In postmodern America, “fun fairs and theme parks such as Disney,” according to Featherstone (1991), “provide enclaved environments for the controlled de-control of the emotions, where adults are given permission to behave like children again” (p. 80; see also pp. 24-5). Similarly, club raving allows persons to “display a calculating hedonism” (p. 59)—one that, while privileging informality (e.g., relaxed standards of dress and behavior, as well as the exploration of previously forbidden pleasures and emotions), still depends upon greater self-control (p. 45).


=======================\n\n\n

The Public Sphere by Performance

This book focuses on the problem of the public sphere, whose articulation unfolds along a double conceptual axis, determined, on the one side, by the question of the public sphere as a social and political concept and, on the other, by the parallel problem of the performance of the public sphere as the object and site of its own performance. While the former calls for a social scientific approach—political theory, sociology, anthropology, and so on—the latter engages performance studies and the theory of performance in social, cultural and artistic terms. This double articulation doesn't make for an interdisciplinary study, which would imply a mobilization of expertise from two independent, equally pronounced disciplines intersecting through a common problem. We opted for another method here. Our expertise lies in the domain of performance and remains rooted therein, forgoing any ambition to extend and accompany itself with social scientific methods. At best, this book explores the advantages (and shortcomings) of transdisciplinarity by staying in the one field of study and pointing to other fields that it feels affiliated with. The affiliation is, however, motivated politically. It comes from a challenge we set for ourselves: what can we as citizens do with what we know and have “in our hands,” or in our case, with theoretical and practical expertise in the field of performance?

Public Sphere by Performance

Our position bears an affinity with two quite remote voices, both of whom, however, reflect on their own capacity and methodology for thinking critically and acting politically according to their theoretical and artistic professional competencies. Annie Dorsen, a theater director and performer from New York who reported on her participation in Occupy Wall Street, and Max Horkheimer, a sociologist and philosopher from the Frankfurt School of critical theory.

The scholarly specialist ‘as’ scientist regards social reality and its products as extrinsic to him, and ‘as’ citizen exercises Is interest in them through political articles, membership in political parties, or social service organizations, and participation in elections. But he does not unify these two activities, and his other activities as well, except, at best, by psychological interpretation. Critical thinking, on the contrary, is motivated today by the effort really to transcend the tension and to abolish the opposition between the individual's purposefulness, spontaneity, and rationality, and those work-process relationships on which society is built.

Dorsen describes one of the assemblies at OWS: "A paper was being passed around, and we were asked to provide email addresses, a list of our skills and of the equipment we owned that we could put into service. Of the 35 or so people at the meeting, I informally counted twelve filmmakers, six or seven editors, three video artists, a couple of sound engineers, and a director of commercials. Probably everyone there had been writing, shooting, recording, editing, and uploading their own work since grade school. The average age was around thirty, and the debate about software, platforms, and compatibility was fierce."

Dorsen dutifully wrote down "theater director" and listed her skills, questioning "what we can do with our familiarity with the plays and essays of Brecht." This is to probe citizenship practices of our time, investing the concept of performance in this exploration, aided with related inquiries from the social sciences and political theory. Hence, we liken our position to the Brechtian 'radical dilettante', the one who observes the problem from an external position, a position ignorant of the ruling paradigm that defines the problem and its solutions.

This book has been written, moreover, as an attempt to solve the problem Walter Lippmann identified in stating that "democracy has never developed an education for the public." Lippmann lucidly remarks that the public is lost as soon as it delegates the solving of this problem to holders of specialist knowledge, because in doing so, it accepts its ignorance regarding matters that concern all citizens. No one else can make and be the public but us citizens. Exactly for this reason, this study ventures beyond the regions of the discipline of performance studies, but without assuming that we shall arrive on another stable shore. Herein lies the transdisciplinarity.

The book is composed of three parts, divided into several chapters. Part one, "The Public Sphere and Its Discontents," introduces the problem of the public and its related categories and terms, as it has been studied in social science, political theory, and philosophy, bringing us to our main thesis: the public sphere is constituted performatively through the concepts of action and the performative act. We test our thesis in four parables, each of which

Preface Public Sphere by Performance discusses a form of hacking the public through one of the constitutive principles thereof, namely, the freedom of speech. We locate and analyze said principle in four figures that mark four significant contexts of this study: Athenian democracy in the fifth and fourth centuries BC, the transition from one régime to bourgeois society in the mid-eighteenth century, (liberal or soft) socialism in post-war Yugoslavia, and democracy and neoliberalism in contemporary control society.

Part two, "Ideology and Mass Performances," derives two complementary methods from performance studies and social science, which we further as a hybrid framework for an analysis of the public sphere today: social choreography and social drama. These two methods focus on mass performances of the state, of people, or of special groups, and on the political unconscious and the conscious performances of ideology, especially as regards individualism and collectivism.

In part three, "The Self and the Public," the focus shifts to the performance of the self within a range of concepts (habitus, social role, man as actor, technologies of the self, and performing identity). Two distinct problems associated with the self and individualism as the reigning ideology in contemporary society are tackled through their intensive expression in art: authorship in relation to the personal and its public performance, and solo dance performance as a technique of the self.

Another characteristic of this study stems, once again, from our political motivations. Our preoccupation with the public is contextual through and through. The first-person plural "we" refers to the joint authorship of this book, shared by Ana Vujanovic and Bojana Cvejić, members of the Belgrade editorial collective Tearija koja Hada (Walking Theary). Both of us were born in Belgrade, the capital city of former socialist Yugoslavia, and we both currently live in the European Union and are working on the international performance scene as theorists and practitioners. Our experience of several crucial historical moments that radically reissued the question of the role and position of the public could be broken down like so. In Yugoslavia, we witnessed how the socialist social order with its communist ideology exhausted itself in the late 80s and ended in radical rupture. The disruption of socialism led to a multiparty political system, but only through civil wars, the collapse of the country, and a new nationalistic ideology. We experienced the regime of Slobodan Milošević in Serbia in the 1990s, which mixed traces of an overbureaucratized socialism with nationalism, rendering Serbia a society isolated from the international community and at war with other former Yugoslav republics. The regime was continuously followed by mass dissatisfaction on the part of impoverished and humiliated citizens who sought democracy, an end to the wars, and, more simply, a ‘normal life’. We experienced the overturn of that regime on October 5, 2000, whereupon a demand for democracy was formulated. We also experienced how this democracy has been instilled only as a lateral side of neoliberal capitalism and how it has operated hand in hand with corruption, political assassinations; criminal privatization of state and social ownership, public factories and companies, and an overall 'feudalization' of the public sphere. Finally, we have seen many Serbian citizens from our generation, who having previously decided to stay and help build anew democratic society after the regime change in 2000, recently leave Serbia. The drain of highly qualified and politically disillusioned young people continues. Their sense of political dispossession is by no means dissipated by the current crises in Europe, where principles of solidarity are sacrificed for economic security.

We cannot but ask: What has the role of the public been in all these historical and current moments? Even if the public has not been passive and invisible in all of them, what has its position and its power been? Did it effectuate changes? Moreover, even if it has had political and social effects, we are inclined to repeat John Dewey's question: was this public aware of the consequences of its actions? Did the citizens who euphorically hailed Milošević in Gazimestan in 1989 want civil wars? Did the citizens of Belgrade and Serbia on October 5, 2000, know, when they thought they were choosing democracy, that they were also asking for capitalism? What did we ask for when we as a public arose in protest? And how does this correspond to what we got in return, supporting or opposing the one or the other political actor on the public scene?

Some of these questions are answered through the cases we study and visually document in this book. Our goal is not to resolve political dilemmas related to the murky circumstances of Yugoslav history, but to offer conceptual analyses as well as tools to those who feel similarly unqualified or politically disabled and stultified, tools they may implement to critically envisage civil action in their own respective contexts.

The book before you results from a two-year research project during our residency at Les Laboratoires d'Aubervilliers near Paris (2011-2012), which was conducted together with film- and video-maker Marta Popivoda, also a member of the TkH editorial collective. Her part of this research gave rise to the documentary film Yugoslavia: How Ideology Moved Our Collective Body, based on television and film archives from Serbia during Yugoslavia’s socialist period (1945-2000).

As a practical laboratory on performative technologies, Bojana Cvejić and Marta Popivoda conducted a workshop which tested two technologies in two simulated situations: team-building for business workers, and a gathering of performers for an ad-hoc collaboration. The workshop was held in collaboration with the performance artists Siegmar Zacharias and Christine De Smedt.

In addition, Ana Vujanovic and Sinisa Ilić researched visual representations and rhetoric in current protests against austerity measures throughout neoliberal capitalist societies, which resulted in the theoretical comic Dull Smart Mobs, also published in this book. Besides the theoretical study of diverse materials, our research also included three open days of presentations where we shared our questions, claims, and materials with a group of invited theorists, activists, and artists before an audience in hetveem theater, Amsterdam, July 1, 2011, in Les Laboratoires d'Aubervilliers in Paris, January 7, 2012, and in Tanzfabrik, Uferstudios, Berlin, January 24, 2012.

We would like to thank everyone who gave their support and collaboration to this research: Dragana Jovović, Jelena Kneževic, and others. Siniga Ilić, Bojan Dordev, and Katarina Popovic from TkH collective, Alice Chauchat, Virginie Bobin, Nataša Petrešin-Bachelez, and Claire Harsany from Les Laboratoires d'Aubervilliers, Heinz Emigholz, Michéle Soulignac, Abraham Cohen, Mileta Kecina, Nataša Damnjanović, Jelena Vesić, Julie Heintz, Vanessa Theodoropolou, Frank Leibovici, Bojana Mladenovic, Bojana Kunst. Igor Dobrić. Sigrid Merx, Joe Kelleher, Liesbeth Groot-Nibbelink, Chiel Kattenbelt, Ludger Orlok, Isabell Lorey. Siegmar Zacharias, Christine De Smedt, Antonia Baehr, Nicolas Siepen, and Ligna. A special thanks goes to William Wheeler for excellent copyediting and Katarina Popovic for her design of this book.

In the introduction, a note is made to thank William Wheeler for his excellent copyediting and Katarina Popovic for her design of this book. The rest of the text is separated into different chapters, each discussing various aspects of the public sphere and its discontents. The chapters are as follows:

1. The Eclipse of the Public
2. Can We Only Perform the Public Now?
3. Materiality of Ideology
4. Social Choreography
5. The Self and the Public

The chapters are further divided into subsections, discussing different aspects of each topic. The book delves into the idea of the public sphere and its discontents, discussing various aspects such as social choreography, the self and the public, and the public sphere's materiality in relation to ideology. The public sphere is a discursive space where citizens express their ideologies through speech and actions. The public sphere needs public space to function properly, but it is currently facing a crisis. This crisis stems from the privatization of public space in neoliberal capitalism and the broader crisis of representation in representative democracy. Walter Lippmann's works, "Public Opinion" (1922) and "The Phantom Public" (1925), raise questions about the existence and nature of the public. Lippmann argues that the public, as conceived by democratic theory, is an illusion, a myth, and an abstraction. He saw the citizen of his time as a private person who was neither educated nor interested in taking part in public affairs. Instead, public affairs were managed and governed by unnamed powers. Lippmann suggested differentiating between actors (insiders) and bystanders (outsiders) in the public sphere. He identified "spectators" or "publicum" as the subjects that constituted the public in 1920s American democratic society. According to Lippmann, citizens cannot but remain passive, delegating their civil activities to experts. Since they are incapable of grasping all details operative on the public scene, either because they have no time or because the details are not transparently available or shared, and since they are ill-equipped, lacking in the knowledge and skills required for acting in public, the random collections of bystanders who constitute the public could not, even if they had a mind to, intervene in all the problems of the day. Normally, they leave their proxies to a kind of professional public consisting of more or less eminent persons. Most issues are never carried beyond this ruling group, and the lay publics catch only echoes of the debate.

In Lippmann's view, citizens mobilize only occasionally, in moments of crisis. However, even in those moments, they do not act directly, but rather appear as a mere majority in support of, or opposition to, the actors who govern. Therefore, according to Lippmann, when men take a position in respect to the purposes of others, they are acting as a public. Faced with the predicament of how a public, who is badly informed about the substance of a problem, and thus unable to judge the actors on their intrinsic merits, should then decide to support or oppose the actors, Lippmann is even more pessimistic. The public is accustomed to making decisions according to rough external evidence and the leanings of political representatives. For that reason, throughout his book, he takes a perspective on democracy which will later be characterized as elitist, insisting on the need for a new mode of education of the public, one completely different from preexisting modes of training in fields of specialist knowledge.

Following up on Lippmann's debate on the crisis of the public, John Dewey tried to mitigate Lippmann's harsh diagnosis with a more optimistic view of how the public should recognize and articulate itself. In order to grasp what is distinctive and still topical about Dewey's analysis of the public's crisis in his book The Public and its Problems (1927), we must first look at his pragmatist conception of the public sphere. From this, his arguments of its renewal ensue. In Dewey's definition of the public sphere, the relation between the private and the public is contrary to the common view. Democracy, therefore, has never developed an education for the public. The result is a bewildered public and a mass of insufficiently trained officials.

We can conclude that the public arises from what Dewey calls "indirect consequences of action," which aren't regulated by an existing procedure or limited to and absorbed by the interests of private individuals who are the only ones concerned by the given action. On the one hand, this view is libertarian because it disentangles the public from the state, which Dewey identifies as the "public agency" in recession, and on the other hand, it accounts for the public as a democratic, socially organized community. According to Dewey, the public isn't a phantom; it is in eclipse, "lost," "bewildered," "uncertain," and "obscure," and remote from government. Its main characteristic is indifference. Indifference is the evidence of current apathy, and apathy is testimony to the fact that the public is so bewildered that it cannot find itself. What is the public? If there is a public, what are the obstacles in the way of its recognizing and articulating itself? Is the public a myth? Or does it come into being only in periods of marked social transition, when crucial alternative issues stand out, such as that between throwing one's lot in with the conservation of established institutions or with forwarding new tendencies? In a reaction against dynastic rule which has come to be felt as despotically oppressive? In a transfer of social power from agrarian classes to industrial classes? Is not the problem at the present time that of securing experts to manage administrative matters, other than the framing of policies?

The apathy he pinpoints here has several root causes, and consequently harbors several ways to counteract these causes and make the public rise up again. The first set of causes, similar to those in Lippmann, involves the administrative system found in the democracy of Dewey's time (and still existent today in an even more advanced and extreme form) where the specialization of competencies isolates ordinary people from public concerns. Citizens in democracy, or 'people,' as he prefers to call them, have no say in the choosing of experts to whom they entrust all social matters. These experts are legislators, executives, judges, doctors, educators, traders, and, most importantly, as he repeats throughout the text, managers and politicians, revealing economism as an early tendency in capitalist democracy: "Persons have their own business to attend to, and 'business' has its own precise and specialized meaning. Politics thus tends to become just another 'business,' the especial concern of bosses and the managers of the machine." He goes as far as claiming that experts form a special class whose task is to keep social matters private and prevent them from becoming public.

"A class of experts is inevitably so removed from common interests as to become a class with private interests and private knowledge, which in social matters is not knowledge at all."

The public fails to recognize itself and articulate and identify itself with definite issues because it is bereft of understanding, of insight into how the state and the total social field in their diverse domains of work, leisure, and politics function. Dewey's view poignantly echoes the bewildering sense of the public's ignorance and incompetence in the face of the recent economic crisis and the accompanying austerity measures. Men feel that they are caught in the sweep of forces too vast to understand or master. Thought is brought to a standstill and action paralyzed. Even the specialist finds it difficult to trace the chain of 'cause and effect,' and even he operates only after the event, looking backward, while meantime social activities have moved on to effect a new state of affairs.

However, unlike Lippmann, Dewey doesn't lose faith in democracy altogether, but tries to rescue it in the literal sense of the word through the empowerment of the people in the public, conceived as the 'Great Community.' Thus, he proposes to reconsider the model of local community that rests on the bonds of family, neighborhood, and locality, by which early American settlers organized work and social life. These local communities in America were based on the social idea of democracy, which Dewey distinguishes from the political system of democracy. The main ideological obstacle to communitarianism in democracy is ‘individualism,’ which he regards as the ideology of the system of administration he was living in. There are differences that manifest themselves in diverse attachments that an individual entertains, but Dewey advocates the belief that these differences can be integrated by means of common interests and goals, which are social and beyond individual or private interests. From the standpoint of the individual, the public consists in having a responsible share according to capacity in forming and directing the activities of the groups to which one belongs and in participating according to need in the values which the groups sustain. From the standpoint of the groups, it demands liberation of the potentialities of members of a group in harmony with the interests and goods which are common. Since every individual is a member of many groups, this specification cannot be fulfilled except when different groups interact flexibly and fully in connection with other groups. For a public to rise as a ‘Great Community, individuals and groups must gather by means of various and often disparate matters that concern them. Dewey offers four mechanisms by which this can be done: attachment to the matters of the community's concern, communication that entails in-depth inquiry into these matters, and dissemination of that knowledge, which makes the matters of concern public, engagement that implies rational consideration of the consequences of communal activity, and ‘face-to-face’ participation in the public dialogue. While attachment is different from affection and implies readiness to act upon principle, the other three mechanisms centralize social knowledge. ‘a kind of knowledge and insight which does not yet exist,’ which is not abstract, but rather based, pragmatically, on the importance of considering consequences in all proceedings in social matters, because there is no public without full publicity in respect to all consequences which concern it. Whatever obstructs and restricts publicity, limits and distorts public opinion and checks and distorts thinking on social affairs. Dewey proposes that systematic continuous inquiry ‘in the sense of being connected as well as persistent’ be substituted for the passive formation of public opinion as a ‘habit.’ Lastly, the main problem of the public, he concludes, is a lack of methods and conditions for debate, discussion, and persuasion, whose improvement would be a prerequisite for democratic participation. Systematic and continuous inquiry into all the conditions which affect association and their dissemination in print is a precondition of the creation of a true public. But it and its results are but tools after all. Their final actuality is accomplished in face-to-face relationships by means of direct give and take. Logic in its fulfillment recurs to the primitive sense of the word dialogue. Dewey's position has recently been renewed by the sociologist Bruno Latour, who, in confrontation with current trends of managerial administration, reinforces the view of the gathering of various actors—a kind of Dingpolitik instead of Realpolitik, based on the etymology of the Scandinavian and Germanic word Ding, or assembly, as opposed to the so-called real facts and interests dominating political rhetoric since the time of Bismarck. Latour advocates the invention of new prostheses for a politically handicapped public sphere, which in his view should include an assembly of scientists, politicians, artists, and all others who might be concerned with various attachments that also separate them. In Latour's insistence on disagreement in the matters of concern that assemble various actors hides an implicit critique of a prominent early conception of the public sphere by the German sociologist and philosopher from the second generation of the Frankfurt School of critical theory, Jurgen Habermas. In The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere (1962), Habermas examines the rise of the bourgeois public sphere in eighteenth-century Europe as a third instance that mediates between society and state. Since being excluded from decision-making in the absolutist and monarchist states of that time, private individuals started to develop the practice of ‘public use of one's reason’ in Britain's coffeehouses, France's salons, and Germanys Tischgesellschaften—first in the domain of literary matters and later on in regard to political affairs as well—from which the liberal public sphere gradually arose. This public sphere, which supposedly achieves consensus on the grounds of (better) argument, is a modern social institution whose function is to guarantee society as a sphere of private autonomy and uphold the restriction______ Its main mechanism, the principle of monitoring and supervision, demands from the state that political proceedings be made public, and publicity (Publizitat) is the degree of public effect generated by the public act. At the core of this mechanism lies public opinion, based on the reasoning, critical judgment, argument, and rational debate of the public body.

The Public Sphere and its Discontents

The expression of "public opinion" refers to the tasks of criticism and control which a public body of citizens informally—and, in periodic elections, formally as well—practices vis-à-vis the ruling structure organized in the form of a state. The crisis of the political public sphere, for Habermas, begins with the withering of the critical function of the press. The permanent legalization of a "politically functioning public sphere" in the second half of the nineteenth century meant that the intellectual press that flourished between 1789 and 1848 in struggle for political freedom and public opinion was relieved of the pressure of its political mission. However, since the establishment of the bourgeois constitutional state, the press has abandoned its polemical position in favor of a more commercial undertaking. Thereby, the principles of free circulation of news, commodities, and matters of common concern were reduced to the principle of a free market of interests, which resulted in the capitalist-driven, consumerist mass media of the twentieth century.

According to Habermas, the epoch of the liberal bourgeois public sphere went into decline in the nineteenth century because the public body expanded beyond the bourgeoisie and the public scene was penetrated by various social groups with competing interests and demands for protection from the state. Once the public sphere of civil society had developed, however, thoughtful contemporaries could not help but notice how this veil was rent. The public was expanded, informally at first by the proliferation of press and propaganda; along with its social exclusiveness, it also lost the coherence afforded by the institutions of sociability and a relatively high level of education. Conflicts hitherto pushed aside into the private sphere now emerged in public. Group needs that could not expect to be satisfied by a self-regulating market tended to favor regulation by the state. The public sphere, which now had to deal with these demands, became an arena of competing interests fought out in the coarser forms of violent conflict.

This line of thought, its reasoning, and concerns can be traced back to Hannah Arendt, the postwar German-American political theorist and public intellectual, in whose writing the public sphere figures prominently. She identifies it with political life in shared public space, which is predicated on public interests, seen as a stake in the "common world." For Arendt too, the public sphere is in eclipse. 

because the public interest in modern capitalist society is predominantly seen as a sum of individual interests wherein the idea of the common world disappears from the horizon. According to Arendt—whose thought reverberates throughout Habermas' elaborations—, starting with the French Revolution, politics took an increasing interest in 'social issues', thereby legitimating the penetration of private interests and distribution of goods into the public sphere. For Arendt, politics is, as vita activa, the discursive practice (words and deeds) of free citizens interested in the organization and running of the polis, performed on the public stage of society. 

The Eclipse of the Public Concerns

Concerns about the public sphere's demise are connected to the socialization of politics and its approximation to economics. In Arendt's view, this led to politics' demise. She mainly referred to the Athenian model of democracy, where politics was a form of human activity called practice (praxis). It is not geared to fulfilling the citizens' existential needs and reproducing life (as is everyday labor), and, unlike production and creation (poiesis), it does not produce material objects as investments into civilization (as do arts and crafts). Instead, it is realized and exhausted within itself, affecting current social relations. Political practice is therefore a public activity performed by free citizens, driven not by their existential needs or interest in material goods, but by the will and desire of human beings as political beings to organize relations between humans.

From that perspective, the entrance of social issues—private issues that have become publicly relevant, such as the distribution of goods—on the public stage leads to the instrumentalization and therefore also demise of politics in the classically democratic sense. The other path through which Arendt identifies an eclipse of the public sphere is connected to the artificial and performance-related dimensions of public political activity. This is where Habermas will completely depart from her framework, insisting on reasoning and rational debate in lieu of performance. For Arendt, 'others' are vital to public activity, even if not empirically present, and even rational reasoning involves an internalized presence of others, rendering it a public performance. In On Revolution (1963), Hannah Arendt focuses on the context of the French Revolution as the arena where changes in the public/private relation occurred in regard to the artificial/performative and the natural/authentic activity and actor. Discussing appearances, masks, and persona, and considering artificiality in positive terms, as ‘man-made,’ she infers that after role-playing acquired its negative connotation of hypocrisy in the ancien régime, we were furnished with a cult of the natural, authentic, or original man and the attendant replacement of solidarity with compassion, and consequently, of politics with intimacy.

Habermas, however, reduces public activity as performance to the ‘manipulative theatricality’ or ‘show’ in mass (media) society, where his rationalist opposition of argument and debate to performance and theater again evokes the argument of hypocrisy. On the other hand, those theses will later be elaborated in detail by sociologist Richard Sennett. who conceptualized the ‘fall of public man’ and largely corresponded to Arendt’s concerns without referencing them explicitly.

In his study of public life in Western Europe, The Fall of the Public Man (1976), Sennett offers a historical perspective on what he calls the end of public culture. He locates it in the shift from the ancien régime in the eighteenth century, where public experience was connected to the formation of social order, to the formation of a new capitalist urban culture in the nineteenth century, where public behavior and personality became confused. The decline of public life is measured against the constitution of the public sphere in the eighteenth century as a domain of impersonal action and of social roles under the artificiality of masks and ‘coded theatrical’ expression, a domain which sharply distinguishes between the public and the private.

The public life of the eighteenth century is often described through the cliché theatrum mundi, where Sennett contends that all men were artists because they could act. In the nineteenth century, the belief in the expressive powers of individuals who together build a common social order is lost. That is, expression is delegated to the professional artist who embodies a radical subjectivism that elevates their expression as a special ability above ordinary citizens. The impersonality and artificiality of public actions based on a transcendent code from the eighteenth century is replaced by emotional representation, where expression is contingent on immanent and authentic feeling. Western societies are moving from something like an other-directed condition to an inner-directed condition—except that in the midst of self-absorption, no one can say what is inside. As a result, confusion has arisen between public and intimate life, and people are working out in terms of personal feelings public matters which properly can be dealt with only through codes of impersonal meaning.

The private domain, which was characterized by the authenticity of the human being and was, in the eighteenth century, segregated from the public domain, now enters that domain. The objective character of action is deflated, while the importance of actors’ subjective states of feeling is inflated, culminating, as Sennett states, in an obsession with the idea of intimacy: Now what matters is not what you have done, but how you feel about it. This is reflected in the political realm, where the leader becomes the one whose personality is strongly declared, a political personage who offers their intentions and sentiments, rather than their acts, for the consumption of citizens—while the citizen remains a passive spectator. Two forms of the degradation of political life in the intimate society are singled out in Sennett. From the figure of Napoleon to the present day, the cult of personality associates political leadership with a charisma that depends on the ability of the leader to dramatize his own motivation, allowing the media to divert the attention of citizens from any evaluation of political acts by appealing to their empathy for his personal private persona. In addition to charismatic leadership, Sennett criticizes communitarianism, which fragments, specializes, and privatizes the public sphere according to the principles of identity and shared interest. The notion of community is based on a fantasy of a shared collective personality, contrary to Dewey, who takes local communities as a model for the rise of a new public. Communitariansm for Sennett implies "fraternicide," because it narrows fraternity down to the common that excludes outsiders.

Drawing a parallel to the darkening of the theater auditorium as sharply contrasted with the illuminated stage, Sennett describes the paradox of an alienating anonymity coupled with an intimacy that has compensated for alienation in public life since the nineteenth century. There grew up the notion that strangers had no right to speak to each other, that each man possessed as a public right an invisible shield, a right to be left alone. Public behavior was a matter of observation, of passive participation. of a certain kind of voyeurism. "The gastronomy of the eye" (Balzac), defense through withdrawal and silence.

Intimacy is an attempt to solve the public problem by denying that the public exists."

Sennett's last point sheds light on the widespread standpoint of equating the private with the public, a view which has been furthered lately by social media. When we bring the discussion onto the terrain of contemporary society, the crisis of the public, in our view, can be outlined in the following four points:

The changed configuration between the state and the private in neoliberal capitalism — The neoliberal state uses its public authority to promote private capital, i.e. the agenda of corporations, since it appropriated its instrumental economic mode of operation, whereby reality is equated with political economy. The new alliance between the state and the private, that is, corporate capital, has been confirmed by the recent transformation of the global financial crisis into the global fiscal crisis, caused by governments who used public money to bail out banks and are consequently now introducing austerity measures. Here, the question of ownership of public space arises, since public space is becoming less and less a public and common good and more and more privatized. That which constituted the public as common good in welfare states and former real socialist states—healthcare, education, arts, and independent cultural production provided by the state—is now the target of austerity measures, reducing, or even altogether dispensing with, the public sector and its services.
2. The "depoliticization" of civil society, whose citizens are politically dispossessed and handicapped - The political life of citizens is mostly reduced to voting, and so mechanisms for allying oneself to particular concerns and for assembling in public spaces are lacking. Political representations and discontents call our attention to a growing dilemma. In addition, transnational capitalism and nomadism as predominant forms of life that result from the migrations of living labor complicate, blur, and hinder many citizens' sense of belonging, responsibility, entitlement to political action, and participation in political life. The process of depoliticization was also already fueled in the 1990s by the establishment of non-governmental organizations who took over the public services of the state.

The paradox of freedom of speech - In the information age, the wide accessibility of information and the right to freedom of speech do not necessarily presuppose political concern and action. There exists a cynicism asserting that anything can be said because it won't have any consequences, so we can say that public speech is harmless in fiscalized societies. As a special concern with the role and place of art in society, can we defend art as a public good on a par with the political life of citizens? Or does art offer, as some sociologists argue, a playground where the current form of capitalism can test its mechanisms of privatization, precarization, and political disempowerment? Or should art no longer be taken as an exceptional activity from which a political revolution is to be expected and instead be regarded as just one more indicator of the crisis of the public sphere?

Mapping the Public Sphere in the Social Field

We would like to distinguish what constitutes the public sphere in regard to society by addressing the present situation in European neoliberal societies, and at the same time by drawing upon the decisive historical and theoretical paradigms that brought about new conceptions of the public sphere—Athenian democracy of the fifth and fourth centuries BC, the emergence of the bourgeois public sphere in the eighteenth century, and the real socialist countries in the second half of the twentieth century.

The point of departure for this mapping is the social field as an encompassing category. It addresses the institutionalized, administratively constituted community, the community of people who share something, but are also divided by and because of something. Our reason for beginning with society as an association of people is that it comprises what the notion ‘community’ with its references to commune, common, commonality, and communism neglects, namely the conflicts, disputes, and disagreements, as opposed to the sharing, solidarity, consensus, and so on. In our view, opting for society rather than community is preferable, because the only thing that the members of society have in common is the world, not the common world in Arendt’s sense, but the world in which they all have to live. In sum, society, unlike community, doesn't specify in advance any other qualities of the association upon which it is based.

Society bifurcates into two big categories: the private and the public domains. It seems there is a clear distinction and division between them. the private involves the personal, familiar, domestic matters and interests; while the public involves the concerns, issues, and goods that relate to society as a whole or to all the members of society. For some thinkers, like Arendt, what belongs to the private should stay there and only there, as any penetration of private interests into the public leads to the instrumentalization of politics, which consequently means the end of any politics. Today, in neoliberal capitalism, predicated as it is on the collusion between the protection of individual rights, globalization, and corporate capital, this far-reaching critique is manifested on an unprecedented scale. Still, we now need a more careful consideration of the relationship between the economic and the political, that is. the private and the public, which are today completely entangled, and it should be the starting point of the analysis of how their relation determines the public sphere.

According to Italian post-Operaist and bio-political theorists who attempt to explain the prevalence of post-industrial and post-Fordist production in today’s society, the borders are blurred from the outset, since production has already integrated elements of political practice. Paolo Virno, for instance, explains, "I believe that in today’s forms of life one has a direct perception of the fact that the coupling of the terms public-private, as well as the coupling of the terms collective-individual, can no longer stand up on their own, that they are gasping for air burring themselves out." This is just like what is happening in the world of contemporary production, provided that production—29 | For further discussion on the community and communitas, see Chapter 5 in this book.30 | Accordingly, public space is defined as space that is free, accessible, and open to all.23 | Chapter 1: The Eclipse of the Public loaded as!t is with ethos, culture, linguistic interaction—not give Itself over to econometric analysis, but rather be understood as a broad-based experience of the wortd?! On the other hand, from a broader perspective, it is important to understand that the private and public categories are not naturally given, but always socially constructed, as Nancy Fraser articulated in her reaction to Habermas' thinking of the public and the private.42 | For instance, sexual orientation could be both a private and a public issue, depending exactly on the historical and social contexts and their divisions between public and private realms. In the same manner, we can observe how the national question—that is, nationalism in the USSR and other real socialist countries, which belonged to the private, domestic realm for so long—thereafter became a public issue all of a sudden, even the dominant issue during perestroika and glasnost in the late 80s.24 | Therefore, we don't want to propose maintaining an impenetrability of boundaries between public and private; nor do we wish to advocate their unproblematic mixture. Our proposal is that we look for the mechanisms by which private issues are made public, the specific procedures and protocols. At this point, we need to consider the third crucial component for orienting the public within the social field: the state. This concept belongs to modern societies and theories of society (Locke and later Habermas). Lockean liberal orientation separated the people and the government as their agent, while Habermas emphasized the mediating role of the public sphere between society and the oppressive state. This separation didn't exist in democratic Athens, where the people were the state—due to direct democracy—and where the concept of government didn't exist, thus we speak about Athenian ‘democracy’ rather than ‘demarchy'.4 | This modern break of the public/private binary helps resolve the confusing notion that everything outside the private and domestic belongs to the public sphere. Such a break may equip us with a tool for making a preliminary differentiation between the public sphere and the public sector in neoliberal societies, a tool needed increasingly in the time of austerity measures, Occupy, and similar protest movements from the US to Spain, Greece, and elsewhere, where we can see the division at work in the collapse of the public sector and the uprising of the public sphere. The related question is, for example, should we fight for art as a public good by asking the state to protect it from the market, which would lead to a reaffirmation of state cultural policy and the state's role as both guarantor of public good and regulator of the cultural scene? Or is art as a public good located precisely between these two categories, in a projected public sphere? The question of the role of the state is, on the other hand, crucial for understanding the 31 | Paolo Virno. A Grammar of the Multitude (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e). 2004).26 | Nancy Fraser. ‘Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually Existing Democracy.’ Social Text no. 25-26 (1990). 56-80. Fraser. "Sex, Lies, and the Public Sphere: Some Reflections on the Confirmation of Clarence Thomas." Critical Inquiry 18. No 3 (1992). 595-612 33 | "At first, most nationalist mobilization centered around calls for freedom of movement, increased autonomy, and linguistic and cultural expression, following closely the liberalizing and reformist spirit underlying dissent. But as institutional constraints diminished, and as events took on a momentum of their own, demands began to be framed with increasing boldness, focusing in a number of republics on outright secession." Mark R. Beissinger, "How the Impossible Becomes Inevitable: The Public Sphere and the Collapse of Soviet Communism," in "20th Anniversary of the Fall of the Wall," special issue in "Public Sphere Formation," also a special issue of the online journal Transformations of the Public Sphere, the website of the Social Science Research Council, November 2, 2009. 

"Etymologically, democracy is about the power (kraras) of the people (demas) rather than the governing (arkhein) by the demos."  

The Public Sphere and its Discontents construction of the public sphere in real-socialist societies—where the state is the people, or, even better, the surrogate for the people. As a result, the state in fact dismissed the public sphere as a democratic space, converting it into the space for state monologues instead of dialogues among citizens, as we will consider later. #5 Neoliberal societies bring about a completely new set of problems in this regard, since the state and its public sector become the agent of the private (capital) and no longer play the role of oppressing the private, what is oppressed in neoliberalism, due to the alliance between the state and private capital. is the public itself. 36 Now we must distinguish the various categories that pertain to the notion of public. Continuing where we left off with our brief demonstration above of why the public sector is a category belonging to the notion of the state rather than to the public, we recognize in our definition of the public, two close yet divergent categories: the public space and the public sphere. Quite similar notions, they are usually used as variants or synonyms with different emphases. Most often, public space is understood as a physical, spatial category, while public sphere is a discursive one (including speech and action). However, in keeping with this functional distinction, we would propose not to mix these concepts, because their implications are not symmetrical, although the public sphere needs public space, which Arendt, for instance, deems a precondition for the former, public space is not necessarily the space of the public sphere (the social sphere of the political or of citizenship activities), but can also be a space of tourism, entertainment, leisure time, labor, and production, or state monologues (which belong to the state, to production, or to the private domain of the life of citizens where they take part as private individuals or persons). This differentiation could be a challenging insight into our current situation, where public space becomes the buzzword in the same breath that we experience an eclipse of the public sphere. 37 An important issue in and around the public is its degree of inclusivity, since its very publicness can be thereby measured. Athenian democracy was characterized by the participatory public sphere, which, programmatically, included all citizens—regardless of their economic status, nobility, eloquence, reputation, or prominence. Therefore, on the one hand, in Athens, all were equal, and everyone's voice had the same weight. For instance, Arlene Saxonhouse, who researched free speech in Athens, emphasizes the following: as Ober nicely describes the democratic scene: "Now the vote of 'nobody, son of nobody' had precisely the same weight in deciding the outcome of a debate as that of the noblest scion of the noblest house. Moreover, 'nobody, son of nobody' might actually choose to raise his voice in public—if not as a formal speaker in the citizen Assembly, then as a voting member, hooting and jeering at the distinguished men who dared to speak."

However, at the same time, the right to participate in politics was rather exclusive in democratic Athens, which was nonetheless referred to as a participative democracy. It was a prerogative extended only to free citizens, barring, in fact, the majority of Athenians from the public stage: the women, the children, the slaves, the foreigners, the freed slaves, and those who had lost their citizens' rights. Inclusivity is, according to Habermas, one of the three main institutional criteria of the eighteenth-century public sphere (the other two are disregard of social status and the creation of the domain of common concern). Criticizing Habermas' attribution of inclusivity to the bourgeois public sphere, Nancy Fraser claims that the latter discriminated against women and society's lower social strata.

This network of clubs and associations—philanthropic, civic, professional, and cultural—was anything but accessible to everyone. "On the contrary, it was the arena, the training ground and eventually the power base of a stratum of bourgeois men who were coming to see themselves as a 'universal class' and preparing to assert their fitness to govern." And, from another perspective, she remarks, "In fact, the historiography of Ryan and others demonstrates that the bourgeois public was never the public. On the contrary, virtually contemporaneous with the bourgeois public, there arose a host of competing counterpublics, including nationalist publics, popular peasant publics, elite women's publics, and working-class publics. Thus, there were competing publics from the start, not just from the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, as Habermas implies."

The last level of our mapping of the public sphere focuses on its epistemic background. In theory, there are basically two approaches: one maintains that the public sphere is based on reasoning and rational debate that supposedly leads to a consensus, and the other emphasizes the role of ideology, which includes affects, passions, and also beliefs, and could also result in the sharpening of conflicts, struggles, and antagonisms. Our concern is ideology rather than rational debate, first of all. We hold that rational debate often hides its irrational ground, thanks to hegemony. We also find ideology the most powerful fuel for constructing public spheres in modern and current societies as we know them. We identify two predominant ideological discourses: individualism and collectivism, which we will give more attention to later. Our hypothesis regarding the public's position in society returns to the relationship between the public and the private. The public, as a political sphere, has to be constructed along a clear divide between private interests and public concern. A delimited space for political debate should admit the intrusion of the private only on the terms of public concerns. These concerns are defined ideologically.

The public's function as a political sphere is based on protocols and conventions whose publicness depends on their transparency. As histories of public life, as well as theories of the public, demonstrate, these conventions and protocols are constantly negotiated and liable to transformation. Hence, they reveal the dimension of the performance of the public, which opens questions about mechanisms of acting in public and about the possibility of constructing new apparatuses that can effectuate change.

Our main thesis addresses the relationship between the public sphere and performance by way of the following questions. Is the public sphere the domain of performance? Or, can it only be performed? Why, and in which sense 'performance,' and why 'only'? Performance has figured in various historical tropes of the public sphere as determined by political activity, the two prominent paradigms being the theater in Athenian democracy and the eighteenth-century idea of theatrum mundi (‘All the world's a stage'). Yet it has also served as a model for interpretation and analysis of the social in both private and public spheres.

Several concepts rooted in performance surged as formal and functional analytical models in sociology, anthropology, and performance studies, such as social drama and dramaturgy, social choreography, man as actor, social roles, performance of the self, and so forth. The relationship between these two axes of articulating the social and the public, i.e., the methodological and descriptive usages of performance, has not been examined explicitly. Our objective is to test the conjunction of performance and the public sphere with the aim of accounting for activities of citizenship in neoliberal capitalist and representative-democratic society.

The recurrence of the metaphor that frames politics and the public as theater/performance—appearing from Ancient Greece to the present by way of the Christian Middle Ages, the Elizabethan era, the Baroque period, and eighteenth-century bourgeois society—echoes with different connotations of the condensed cliché theatrum mundi. It ranges from humans merely performing a play for the gods to bourgeois codes of behavior in public, to us performing our social roles in the never-ending reality-TV show of the contemporary society of the spectacle. Still, what is common to all these conceptions is an awareness that the human being is never alone and that she is always exposed to the gaze and presence of others. It is a commonly held view today that the moment we step into the public—if not even prior to that—our actions are observed and assessed by others. Since we are social beings from the start—we turn into performers, performing our selves for and before others. The legacy of both theater and democracy in Western civilization can be traced to ancient Greece, where theater and politics were some of the many forms of performance practiced by the citizens of the polis. A similar continuum could be observed in the public sphere of eighteenth-century bourgeois society between the coffeehouses, salons, and theaters of cosmopolitan London and Paris. Furthermore, there is a wealth of historical evidence documenting the impact of theater, especially comedy and satire, on the formation of public opinion and political positions in Athens, which would happen again in the eighteenth century when artist-performers gained special social standing as 'public figures'.

Notwithstanding the differences in their respective statuses, functions, and disciplinary specificities, theater and politics belonged to the same order of activities: the public performance of citizenship, predicated on conventions, procedures, and skills and exposed to the gaze, opinions, assessments, and critiques of others. The same applies to the early bourgeois public sphere, although there the primary association was between theater, on the one hand, and public conduct and debate, on the other. During these two historical periods, theater performance served as a public forum for debating political issues. Theater performances and theatricality in general constituted an important social practice, not only because theater sometimes thematized current political issues, but also because it fulfilled the structural role of providing models for social behavior conceived as acting in public and testing hypothetical subject positions, forms of subjectivity and social relations.

The boundaries between theater performances and public and political activities were porous, and they could therefore shape one another mutually. This points to a significant and distinct feature of public behavior in these two remote historical periods—Athens in the fifth and fourth century BC and France, Germany, and Britain in the eighteenth century—as compared to the tradition of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Public behavior and political practices were anything but spontaneous, direct, and natural, rather, they were performative—artificial, codified, and institutionalized within the discourses that framed and constituted citizenship.

Our point here is that the association between theater/performance and public sphere/political practice is not a matter of ahistorical conceptual synchrony, or a trope based on structural resemblance. As Arendt and Sennett show, the conjunction between theater and public qua political sphere is specifically historical, situated in these two periods. Bearing in mind the historicity of the relationship between performance and public, our challenge is to examine the conjunction in the current social context, characterized by neoliberal capitalism, representative democracy, and a total mediation and mediatization of social life.

Can We Only Perform the Public Now? PERFORMANCE AND ACTION

At the outset of this inquiry, two terms require distinction if they are to describe the range of activities of citizenship in the public: performance and action. The initial question is to locate the line that separates our acts and actions from our performances, regardless of whether we speak about art, the public sphere, or our private lives. If we rely on common sense for a moment, there arises a binary opposition between act/action as a real and authentic activity and performance as an artificial, theatrical, and fictional one. However, the relation between these two terms is far more complicated, since it is almost impossible, in current social systems of representation and mediatization, to break the chain of representation and actual condition to the extent that we would be certain of the degree to which something is real or represented.

Richard Schechner tried to map out the demarcation line between action and performance and gave an important contribution to the subject by distinguishing between the concepts of doing, which refers to all human actions, including ordinary life behavior, and showing doing, which refers to performance, both in art and beyond. According to him, showing doing does not mean that the performed act is fictional, insincere, or fake, but rather that the performing subject is aware that she is performing, so she points to it, emphasizes, and stresses it for those observing her.

Still, even if we are equipped with this theoretical tool, it will be difficult to draw the line in social reality, precisely because human beings are always already social and as such constituted among, with, and before other humans—even if those others, as some thinkers would say, may not always be empirically present. We will try to take this distinction further than Schechner's proposition.

Schechner's differentiation can help us understand that act/action and performance do not stand in binary opposition since they cannot be separated by a line marking a difference between the real or authentic and the unreal, fictional, or representational. In a word, we cannot say that an act is real while a performance is not. This is also due to the issue of an act's intervention into and effect on a social context, where the collapse of the demarcation line prevents us from hasty divisions between the action and performance as something other than such an act (because performance reiterates the protocols and conventions it rests upon, even when it breaks them).

Moreover, even if it is completely fictional and representational (like traditional dramatic theater), a performance is a social practice, and the reality of its represented fiction may have real social effects, outcomes, and consequences. It can affect our thinking, it can provide us with a model of behavior, it can bring us to the street, or it can even construct and 'rehearse' a real social situation of the community of spectators, which belongs to the reality of its fictional order.

Thus, what Schechner's differentiation implies instead is that performance is a type of act/action, or in other words, that an act/action and a performance operate in different degrees of publicity and different registers of the discursive order of society. So we can understand them as a literal act and an artificial act, or as a spontaneous, unpredicted/unpredictable and codified/ritualized act, or, even better, as an act/action that may be both physical and discursive and that is always symbolic or signifying in another way (like a speech act). The result of the change it effectuates "? Performance," from the perspective of performance studies, signifies showing and doing to others. In speech act theory, it refers to a speech, discursive, or signifying action, an action that, if understood and communicated correctly, produces a meaning which creates a certain social situation. From both viewpoints, performance is an act that deeply depends on a social context, as it depends on social and cultural conditions and rules known to all involved in the situation.

These conditions and rules have to be fulfilled in order for a performance to be happy or felicitous, creating a meaningful social situation within a dialogical process. Since politics and other kinds of citizens' public activity, as we know them throughout Western history, are codified social practices based on rules and conventions – this also applies to direct democracy – we could conclude that the public can indeed only be performed.

However, when we claim this, we refer to those activities that take place in the configuration of the public sphere as it is, or, as Arendt would say, we limit these performances to "the appearances on the public scene." Staying within that frame, a performance based on the principles of the performative is an act/action that, although it can be effective and create new social situations, cannot effectuate the change of the context itself, since it depends on the conditions, conventions, protocols, and procedures that are already established and operative in a certain social context.

If this is not fulfilled, that is, if a performance does not recognize and adhere to its conditions, then we can speak of failure or, in strict theoretical terms, the unhappy performative. However, it may be politically ambitious to claim that a public activity that breaks the rules and conventions in its spontaneity and unpredictability does not necessarily remain an unhappy performative, becoming instead a self-proclaimed performative. And in such a case, we can speak of activity as action in a narrower sense.

Thus, a political action may be regarded as an activity that forces the conditions needed to make it performative – through the scale of the mass and the collective, or the support of other bodies, through the physical occupation of public space, through its temporality and duration, and so on. It is about the other aspect of the public, to which Arendt referred as "the appearances of the public scene itself." Citizens in political action, therefore, do not act according to the rules and conventions of political practice as established in a public scene, but breach old conventions in favor of new conventions that they don't have a right to, aren't entitled to, though they nevertheless express the power to install them.

This may be a politically crucial distinction between performance and action, and we would propose understanding action as an un-prescribed and non-predeterminate social to action but rather as an action done by and with language or "speech." which he later broadens to signify practice: The [performative] is derived, of course, from 'perform,' the usual verb with the noun 'action' it indicates that the issuing of the utterance is the performing of an action – it is not normally thought of as just saying something" (ibid, 6-7).

See Chapter & in this book, as well as Giorgio Agamben, "Poiesis and Praxis" in The Man Without Content (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999). 44 | The word 'to perform" was established in Middle English in the fourteenth century (performen. Perfournen) It originates from the Anglo-Norman French porfourmer, a conjunction of gar (through, during) and fournir ("to furnish, provide"). As an alteration of the Old French parfornus, porfurnir, which signified 'to do, carry out, finish, accomplish," the same notion in French develops in parallel to English through the verb parfoire, whose first meaning in the twelfth century is 'to complete, round off,' and whose second meaning in the fifteenth century is 'to perfect.'

The theatrical and musical denotation of performance in English as “live show or concert” dates from the early seventeenth century.

Can We Only Perform the Public Now?

activity that constitutes itself and imposes its performative power in the public. From this, we should not deduce a need to reinstate the initial dichotomy and again conceive of performance and action in binary opposition, since in fact many public activities start as actions and end as performatives or start as performatives and become actions in the course of a social process. The crucial point to be observed in this dynamics is that oscillations between action, unsuccessful performance, and successful performance outline the borders of a public sphere with its political practices and revolutions that go beyond politics and bring about a new configuration of the public sphere.

HACKERS OF THE PUBLIC: FOUR PARABLES

The four theoretical fictions that follow examine four historical models of public sphere as well as the limitations they impose on citizens’ activity. The story of Socrates, the first known ‘civil disobedient’ in the context of democratic Athens, the story of John Wilkes, 'the scandalous father of civil liberty in the time of the emerging bourgeois public sphere in eighteenth-century Europe, the story of Vladimir Dapéevi¢, a Yugoslav political dissident who from the position of radical Marxist-Leninist communism criticized socialism in Yugoslavia as ‘soft,’ and an analysis of how WikiLeaks hacks the borders of freedom of speech/press in today's neoliberal democratic society.

PARRHESIAST SOCRATES, THE FIRST KNOWN CIVIL DISOBEDIENT

Athenian democracy of the fifth and fourth centuries BC (ca 508-322) is the first known democratic social system in Western history and provides our story's social context. Succeeding a period of tyranny and later adopted by the other Greek city-states, this political system is based on participatory and direct democracy—but the social order in Athens amounts to a slave society. The public sphere plays a crucial role here; the private sphere also exists, but is clearly separated from the public sphere and has only marginal significance for the life of the society. Government as a concept does not exist and is replaced with self-ruled democracy, where demositselfisin power. Accordingly, the state is not considered an enemy of the public or of the people, because the people are the state, due to direct democracy. This participatory public sphere includes all citizens who don't elect representatives to vote on their behalf, but instead cast their own votes in assembly, council, and court. Be that as it may, the right to participate in politics is quite exclusive in Athens, extended only to free citizens and excluding women, children, slaves, foreigners, freed slaves, and people no longer in possession of citizens’ rights.

Parrhesia (parrhésia) is the foundation and most highly valued category of the Athenian public sphere. As free speech that allows everyone, that is, every citizen to speak truth in public, parrhesia is based on two main principles. The shamelessness and historical amnesia of Socrates marked his legacy as a civil disobedient. He challenged the Athenian democratic system and promoted the idea that philosophers and other competent citizens should lead society. Socrates' practice of free speech and criticism of the Athenian democratic system, especially its self-ruling principle, was a test of the limits or supposed unlimitedness of parrhesia.

However, the limits were not as far away as they seemed. In 399 BC, Socrates was accused of corrupting the youth and showing contempt for the city's gods. He was accused of making the worse appear the better cause and teaching the aforesaid doctrines to others. Socrates was a doer of evil who corrupted the youth and did not believe in the state's gods but had other divinities of his own.

At his notorious trial, Socrates attempted to bring the jury face-to-face with the incorrectness of their ways of thinking. His quarrel was not with Athenian law but with the jurors. The five-hundred-and-one-man jury sentenced him to death, but he accepted the decision and died by drinking hemlock poison. This gesture demonstrated to Athenians that their democratic system must be improved lest it kill a citizen precisely for practicing democracy.

Socrates' ambivalent gesture showed his respect for democratic laws and followed his principle of ethical parrhesia until the end. The relations between civil disobedience and the law, especially compatibility and obedience or acceptance of the punishment for lawbreaking, are worth exploring further. 

The trial of Socrates and his death raise several questions. First of all, the story shows that the democratic public sphere, based on free speech, can intrinsically bear its own abuse. Indeed, it can punish excessively democratic actions and speech, namely, any free speech and shamelessness that irritates and angers the majority, by purely democratic tools—here, the public voting by jurors chosen by the drawing of lots by citizens—where the voice of the majority has decisive power. At the same time, by this process, the democratic public sphere contests its own basic principle: free speech. This leads us to a paradox of parrhesia in a democratic public sphere. Parrhesia means speaking the truth freely, directly, and openly, saying what one thinks to others. And Socrates, the greatest Athenian parrhesiast, is punished exactly for practicing parrhesia, this fetishized foundation of Greek democracy itself, synonymous with the equality and freedom of its citizens.

The parrhesiastes spoke the truth precisely because he was a good citizen, was well-born, had a respectful relation to the city, to the law, and to truth. However, parrhesia is the most dangerous speech activity, and its danger is inherent. Foucault explains that the commitment involved in parrhesia is linked to a certain social situation, to a difference of status between the speaker and his audience, to the fact that the parrhesiastes says something which is dangerous to himself and thus involves a risk. On the other hand, since 'in parrhesia the danger always comes from the fact that the said truth is capable of hurting or angering the interlocutor, both the speaker and the interlocutor take a risk.

The case of Socrates demonstrates that parrhesia might be practiced at the risk of one's life, and at the same time, it raises the question of whether parrhesia in its pure form is at all possible or socially acceptable. In democratic Athens, it was obviously possible, but not acceptable, and Athens thereby delimited the realm of its democratic public sphere and dismissed its ideal. But if we continue with this issue, projecting the future of the democratic public, we could ask, can the non-democratic respect for those of higher social standing be replaced by a democratic shame and respect, a respect for that which has been democratically decided (which gods to praise, for instance) or for the perspectives, lives, and feelings of other citizens?

As elaborated in Alrene Saxonhouse, shameless speech may also in fact be asocial, just because it is free, whereas shame indicates a sensitivity to the social community since its cause lies in an awareness and attentiveness to others' perception of us and our doing, and how we and our doing affect them. "And I argue," she writes, "that Socrates' failure to blush—to care what others think of him, to be ashamed were he to stand open with his vulnerabilities revealed—lies behind the decision of the Athenians to execute him."

This problematic opens the question of the right to freedom of speech and the prohibition of hate speech that addresses contemporary society. While in Athens, free speech was its citizens' expression of freedom, their freedom from tyranny and from the old, hierarchical regime, in liberal democracy, free speech is a right guaranteed to an individual—she possesses it and this possession is guaranteed by constitutions and laws. ‘Parrhesia in the Tragedies of Euripides’ and ‘The Meaning and Evolution of the Word Parrhesia’ in Discourse and Truth.

The first and most famous example is the First Amendment to the United States Constitution (1791), which reads: “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press.”

Saxonhouse concludes that the Athenian citizen is not equal or similar, but rather radically different from the modern liberal individual. To understand the difference better, we would like to propose thinking this issue in three categories: free speech, the right to freedom of speech, and the prohibition of hate speech.

Firstly, we would say that the right to freedom of speech and the prohibition of hate speech seem mutually exclusive. A common interpretation of the freedom of speech calls it the freedom to speak freely, that is, without censorship. However, many modern constitutions and laws that guarantee freedom of speech limit it simultaneously, considering hate speech incompatible with free speech while prohibiting and punishing it. It seems contradictory but it isn't. In fact, both categories belong to liberal and neoliberal democracy, which protects individuals with laws, assigning them freedom of speech or prohibiting any speech that might insult, offend, threaten, or harm other individuals. Therefore, it is not a paradox of liberalism but its intrinsic and probably inevitable self-limitation, since it is a social order, even if centered on the notion of the individual.

The second point that we would like to clarify here is that free speech is something quite different than both the right to freedom of speech and the prohibition of hate speech. In the Athenian model of democracy, it was a practice engaged in by free citizens whereby they publicly exercised their freedom and their social position as free people who governed themselves. Saxonhouse explains that ‘freedom of speech in Athens is the opportunity for those who are considered equals to say openly whatever they may think in a world of equal citizens.’ The individual or the private person was not considered a category, nor was he one who ‘possessed the freedom of speech.’ The aim of public discussions among citizens was to achieve the truth so the best possible decisions for the city could be made. Therefore, in Athens, free speech—which, as noted before, was not a celebration of diversity—included insults and hate speech, and any restriction or prohibition was judged as a corruption and violation of the democratic principle. That is why it collapsed de facto with the trial of Socrates. The story of Socrates is far from black and white, yet it still points precisely to an ambivalence of a self-ruled public which will subsequently become a concern for both the theory and the practice of democracy.

On the one hand, self-rule is important for any understanding of democracy’s core ideals, since the principle allows citizens to decide about their society autonomously, i.e., without pressure from individual or private interests and without domination by the few (as in oligarchy). On the other hand, the concept of free speech as it was practiced in ancient Athens is not without its problems and contradictions, as we have seen through the trial of Socrates. These issues continue to be relevant in our modern understanding of democracy and freedom of speech. 

It gives power to each and every citizen, even the worst ones. And, as Foucault remarked, "Because parrhesia is given even to the worst citizens, the overwhelming influence of bad, immoral, or ignorant speakers may lead the citizenry into tyranny, or may otherwise endanger the city. Hence, parrhesia may be dangerous for democracy itself." This fatal consequence has occurred more than once in Western history. For instance, in the Weimar Republic, democratic elections passed rulership to the Nazi Party, who proceeded to abolish democracy promptly by legal measures of 'coordination', or in the period of newly introduced democracy in Yugoslavia at the beginning of the 1990s, which immediately sparked nationalism as the political discourse, leading the country into civil wars.

The multinational socialist state's dissolution. Even if we neglect this last instance, the principle of self-ruling 'normally' leads to a 'tyranny of majority, as the thought of Alexis De Tocqueville and John Stuart-Mills explains. We could conclude from the story of Socrates, with its bothersome Foucauldian conclusion, that real and critical parrhesa cannot exist where real, self-ruled democracy exists. Herein lies the crucial ambivalence of the democratic public sphere. an ambivalence that we inherited from the history of democracy and that remains for the most part unresolved within the democratic system.

JOHN WILKES, OR THE VICISSITUDES OF THE PUBLIC AND PERSONAL LIMITS TO FREEDOM OF SPEECH

The story of John Wilkes, 'the scandalous father of liberty,' begins around 1760, during the period of the English parliamentary monarchy. Wilkes' story is connected with the birth of liberalism, the ideology which will motivate the American and French Revolutions to put an end to the arbitrary rule of the sovereign monarch in the name of inalienable 'human rights.' What interests us here are the mechanisms Wilkes used to promote the future postulates of liberal democracy: freedom of the press, wider political representation, the right to privacy, and religious tolerance. In a transition from the public qua social order of ancien régime to the rise of the bourgeois public sphere, Wilkes' performance changes the modus operandi of the eighteenth century 'man as actor.' As we will see, it explicitly uses insult and libel against public persons in office, as well as the manipulation of public opinion, to transgress limitations on the freedom of public speech that are instituted monarchically. This gesture turns him into a public figure whose acts have political impact, and whose personality beyond these acts begins to blaze an exemplary trail toward political liberty. A liberal and a libertine, Wilkes was one of the first to cross the dividing line between public politics and private character (Wilke's own character being that of a rake). The new configuration between the public act and private personality will change the principle of performing in the public sphere towards the end of the eighteenth century. In Wilkes' time, the political public sphere developed through the wars of rhetoric between newspapers that practiced public insult. The mechanism of public insult could be described as follows: a person was attacked personally on the grounds of his public association with a policy or political faction, or his capacity in conducting policy, but the author of the verbal detict was anonymous. In parodic contrast to the voice of British government, the newspaper Briton, Wilkes founded The North Briton. The use of 'north' in the title disclosed the geographical focus of the paper. Wilkes was virtuosic in his insulting witticisms, and the down-and-dirty tone of his scandalous rumours and insults against King George III's administration garnered his paper a rate of circulation four times that of the official Briton.

When The North Briton sold 2000 copies a week, the reach these rumours had into society seemed dangerous, capable of turning public opinion against the authority of the king. To illustrate the tone of The North Briton, we will quote a few insults. Lord Egremont was 'a weak, passionate, and insolent secretary of state,' and Secretary of the Treasury Samuel Martin was 'the most treacherous, base, selfish, mean, abject, low-lived and dirty fellow, that ever wriggled himself into a secretaryship.'

Wilkes himself explained the nature of such speech by means of a difference between 'liberty' and 'license'. Liberty is 'when some perfectly respectable person gets up and says something everybody agrees to,' while 'license is when some infernal scoundrel, who ought to be hanged anyway, gets up and says something that is true.' The word 'license' adequately describes Wilkes' act: he licensed, or gave himself permission to insult others in the name of truth, which wasn't noble. This gave way to a simple equation between the symbolic assassination of public character and the defense of liberty.

In the famous issue 45 of The North Briton, Wilkes indirectly yet unmistakably insulted the King, crossing a line. Breaking the strict rule that placed the king above reproach while only his ministers could be criticized, insulting the sovereign was considered treason to the Crown. Wilkes implicitly accused King George III of lying in his speech in celebration of the end of the Seven Year's War, an act which was then declared 'seditious libel.' The King's ministers drew a general warrant for the arrest of the publishers and seizure of the newspapers, but mentioned no names of the persons charged with the crime. As the article in issue 45 was anonymous, forty-nine persons were arrested, and the prosecution made procedural blunders that Wilkes took advantage of for his defense. He used his trials in the Court of Common Pleas before a large audience to state his principles in fiery speech, saying that his case would 'teach ministers of arbitrary principles, that the liberty of an English subject is not to be sported away with impunity, in this cruel and despotic manner.' This action led to the nullification of ‘general warrant,’ the unpopular instrument of the ancien régime, which was unpopular because it represented arbitrary power and was considered dubious because it authorized the king's officers to arrest anyone they suspected without evidence. General warrants were particularly disliked by American colonists, who saw in Wilkes’ case an example for rebellion in favor of liberty against monarchy. For Wilkes, a series of arrests followed, as did reelections to British Parliament as the representative of Middlesex, and ousting attempts in the House of Commons, which, had they been successful, would have annulled his immunization against lawsuits. All this was mainly linked with Wilkes’ efforts to enact radical political reforms.

Can We Only Perform the Public Now? That every free agent In this kingdom should be represented in Parliament. That the metropolis, which contains an eighth part of the people, and the counties of Middlesex, York, and others, which so greatly abound with inhabitants, should receive an increase in their representation.

This marshalled him great support among the middle and working classes in England, but also among the rebellious colonists in America who were seeking independence from the British crown and struggling for the right to be represented by someone they would elect, as opposed to someone appointed to represent them. Wilkes also advocated a bill against the ministry's excise tax, not because he was against government taxes, but because collecting it would legitimate forced entry and search of private property while providing politicians with information for use against their adversaries. In addition to promoting the right of privacy, he argued for religious tolerance.

In his Essay on Woman (1755), co-written with his friend Thomas Potter, Wilkes presents his libertarian lifestyle of debauchery and recommends it with many other licentious expressions, such as ‘life can little more supply than just a few good fucks, and then we die.’ This work disclosed the identity of the man who had been behind many other insulting articles in the past, articles he had anonymously authored, and it also earned him a temporary exile in France.

Why was Wilkes recognized as a hero of the underdogs while he himself won the privileges of nobility as a libertine? As he fashioned himself as someone who stood for less privileged members of society, the lower classes sought to redeem his immoral character, the middle classes denied his immoral conduct, and the working classes converted it into a sign of rebellion against the established order on the grounds of making public the hypocrisy of the upper classes. Wilkes' case is paradigmatic for the shift that his public performance caused. 'Every action of the person Wilkes had of necessity a symbolic or public character. The very life of John Wilkes, the person, turned into a symbol of what liberty itself meant. The man and the principle became one,' as Sennett writes. The moment Wilkes appeared on the historical political scene, in Sennett's view, his supporters lacked a clear idea of liberty and felt misrepresented and confused by the style of an upper-class language of government based on a fixed set of ideas, on an established, known, but passing order. 

The Public Sphere and its Discontents

The same supporters felt betrayed when twenty years later Wilkes turned more conservative, using his office to suppress the anti-catholic Gordon Riots (1780) and disapproving of the French Revolution. His earlier, radical actions made him a hero of populist democracy. As populism doesn't guarantee the articulation of an ideological program, but is instead the result of general discontent as a social affect, it needs and seeks a personality who will embody this affect, which can be assessed in the recent cases of Pim Fortuyn® or Silvio Berlusconi.

Four points in the controversy surrounding the conjoining of liberty and representation, on the one hand, with political power and the personal, on the other, could be inferred here. In the first place, hacking the idea of freedom of speech by hurling it beyond the borders between the domains of private and public implies shamelessness and the suspension of any public order. The idea of liberty introduced into ordinary social life implied that the demand and desire for liberty become joined to a belief in individual character as a social principle. So, in the second place, libertarian and liberal uprisings against a sovereign power gave rise to the understanding of freedom as a matter of the individual.

The motto written at the entrance of the gentlemen's club to which Wilkes belonged (the quite notorious Hellfire Club, which engaged in a secret society, called the Knights of St Francis of Wycombe, that parodied Roman Catholic rituals in drunken orgies often involving prostitutes dressed as nuns)—Fais ce que tu voudras (Do what thou wilt)—is the libertine equivalent of laissez-faire, the libertarian restriction of the power of the state, the ultimate instance of which is anarchy. Thus Wilkes' formula of libertarianism-cum-libertinage reveals a paradox wherein the right of political representation of every man and the idea of liberty as individual freedom become incompatible, because they mutually diminish one another.

In the third place, the idea of liberty in the image of the person as the symbol of liberty brings the performing identity of the private person into politics, and hence blurs the political meaning of the act through the ethical understanding of the affect that accompanies its performance. And fourthly, the reinforcement of the individual as the social principle in political leadership instigates a process of taming and moralizing the personality, establishing performative standards for judging the political figure as a morally 'credible' and respectable person. After Wilkes' time, the mechanism of personal insult as a tool for the symbolic assassination of a public figure will continue to be implemented, which many a case of moral scandals hounding politicians and other politically powerful figures testifies to. The story of Vladimir "Vlado" Dapčević (1917-2001) takes place in the turbulent geopolitical context of Yugoslavia, spanning various historical moments. The first is the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, a capitalist parliamentary monarchy in the 1930s, followed by the 'second,' socialist Yugoslavia, including the period of the 1940s-50s, then 1975-1988, and finally, the 1990s. Over this time span, the state indicatively changed its name a few times. First, in the period from before until the beginning of World War II, it was called the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, which was subsequently renamed Democratic Federal Yugoslavia in 1943. It then became the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia in 1946, and finally, the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRJ/SFRY) in 1963, remaining so until 1992.

In this final phase, Yugoslavia is a real socialist society, but develops 'Yugoslavia's third way'—a CPY-led, socialist one-party political system that accommodates some elements of capitalism, like the free market. The economy is predicated on associated labor and workers' self-management. Politically, the SFRY positions itself between East and West, refusing to be a member of the Eastern Bloc and thereby become inflicted with the Cold War. Hence, it initiates the Non-Aligned Movement. In the late 1980s and early 90s, the Yugoslav third way ended in democratization and the establishment of a multiparty political system, as well as civil wars, the dissolution of the state, and a transition toward neoliberal democracy and capitalism.

Dapčević's story takes place not only in Yugoslavia but also in the USSR during the 60s—(1958-66), the era of Kruschev, the Cold War, and world domination by opposing superpowers (the US and the USSR)—as well as in Belgium, France, Switzerland, and the Netherlands (1966-75), all capitalist democratic welfare societies. This complex historical positioning of the story is an integral part thereof, but we will focus here only on the segments occurring in socialist Yugoslavia in the 1940s-50s and from 1975 to 1988. From the perspective of the public sphere in this context, it is a commonly held belief that the public sphere in real socialist countries doesn't exist. However, even if this is true, there is an intriguing conceptual trajectory that led to this state of affairs. We can say that the public sphere is intrinsically tied to the socialist system in Yugoslavia and the complex historical positioning of the story. 

In socialist countries, governments accepted Aristotle's definitions of democracy as rule by the poor versus oligarchy as rule by the rich. In the socialist version, this principle was called, following Marx, the dictatorship of the proletariat, which was supposed to lead to a classless society. Within this configuration of society and its public sphere, every voice that problematized, questioned, or contested the dictatorship of the proletariat was dubbed a counterrevolutionary class enemy. As an effect of such a system, real-socialist countries practically cancelled the public sphere as the realm of society where citizens talk, negotiate, argue, and confront each other about the public good and interest of the society they live in.

The SFRY with Tito's regime of 'soft-totalitarianism' has its specificities, as this instance of socialism goes hand in hand with a certain decentralization and gradual liberalization from the 1960s onward. Yet the public sphere as we know it from the history of democracy appeared more or less only three times in and after 1948, around 1968, and in the late 80s. This is the 'stage' Vlado Dapčević acts on.

Vlado Dapčević is a fighter for freedom, equality, democracy, and republic, workers' solidarity, national brotherhood, and internationalism, and against the creeping of fascism, Nazism, royalism, capitalism, imperialism, nationalism, and 'bourgeoisation into socialism. He was a freedom fighter and overidentified with the ideology of communism. He was also overdetermined, as he was a member of the Alliance of Communist Youth of Yugoslavia and later the CPY.

Informbureau or Cominform refers to the Information Bureau of the Communist and Workers Parties, which was an international organization of Communist parties, established in 1947, with the aim of coordinating the activities of the communist parties of the Soviet-dominated Eastern Bloc countries. See Vojin Majstorovic, "The Rise and Fall of the Yugoslav-Soviet Alliance 1945-1948," Past fmperfect, no. 16 (2010). Leonid Gibianskii, "The Soviet-Yugoslav Split and the Cominform," in The Establishment of Communist Regimes in Eastern Europe, 1944-1949, eds. Norman Naimark and Leonid Gibianskii (Boulder, CO: Westwood Press, 1997) 41.

Chapter 2: Can We Only Perform the Public Now? The party rejects the resolution, saying a historical and categorical 'no' to Stalin, whereas Dapcevic openly accepts it. He does so because, in a broader sense, he is critical of the CPY, which is in favor of the liberalization of socialism, independence from Soviet Stalinism, and collaboration with Western capitalist countries. And what is the outcome of his overidentification with Marxism-Leninism, which the Yugoslav state—at least officially—embraces? He spends 22 years in various jails and in the communist camp Goli otok, he is expelled from the country and lives in exile, he escapes from an assassination organized by the UDBA, and he is even sentenced to death. The paradox, which is the crux of our story, is that all this is caused by Dapcevic's open critique of Yugoslav socialism for being too soft' and liberal, while the too-liberal SFRY, which renounces the critique of the Informbureau and thus rejects the path of Stalinist totalitarianism, wishing to develop its 'socialism with a human face,' handles Dapcevic by exercising the most classical Stalinist method of force— 'purge.' This is why his critical free speech as political practice could be considered an unhappy performative that misunderstands the conventions and protocols of public speech in socialism and fails to achieve the establishment of new ones. As we said, a political practice may effectuate change either when it is a successful performative that recognizes, follows, and fulfils preexisting procedures and conventions, or when it establishes new ones.______ 

or a historical need that itself forces the circumstances to change. Dapcevic, however, proposed a new political practice—the free public critique of state communism from the perspective of communism—which remained unsuccessful, prohibited, and punished. Dapcevic's misunderstanding and overidentification are by no means evidence of naivety; they form a political practice that, though unsuccessful in its performative, provokes the object of criticism to reveal its own cynicism.

He criticized the CPY for not accepting Stalinist critique, and it punished him with the Stalinist method of purge. He accused Yugoslav socialism for being too liberal and showed its totalitarian face. Later on, in the 1980s, overidentification will be articulated as a critical cultural-artistic tactic in socialist Yugoslavia, as practiced by the Slovenian music group Laibach (within the movement Neue Slowenische Kunst, or NSK). According to Slavoj Zizek, "overidentification may be a powerful tool which uncovers otherwise invisible social problems—or, in this particular case, the invisible or hidden underside of Yugoslavian soft-totalitarian socialism—though its potential to bring about change remains questionable."

In contrast to the critical art of 74, during his time in the USSR, Dapcevic will be critical of the CPSU, which will be in favor of the coexistence of capitalism and socialism, which could prevail in one part of the world. Dapcevic will adopt the Chinese line of permanent struggle between them to achieve global communism. During his stay in Western Europe, he will enact a communist criticism of Western imperialism, organizing and volunteering for the Viet Cong and for Cuba during the Cuban Missile Crisis, and he will participate in workers' movements.

During the last period, the civil war in Yugoslavia, Dapcevic will work on empowering democracy and preservation of 'brotherhood and unity, acting for the most part against the nationalist regime of Slobodan Milosevic, and he will establish the Party Of Labour.

The punishment is later changed to twenty years of hard labor. See Slavoj Zizek "Why are the NSK and Laibach Not Fascists?" MARS, no 3-4 (1993).

In the 1980s, Dapcevic's overidentification is not cynical in itself, but provokes—far more radically—uncovers the cynicism of the state and its liberal socialist discourse. And it may be only a distant historical-political interpretation that Dapcevic's practice practically did what Zizek finds most powerful in overidentification as a tactic, namely, that Dapcevic did not produce an affirmation of something or someone with which, or whom, one can overidentify—which in this case would be Stalinist developments in Marxism-Leninism—but that he instead produced a radical critique of it.

Ironically, this is the outcome of the whole story when the state abandons its soft-totalitarian public discourse and reacts in a thoroughly Stalinist way, punishing its critic by demonstrating, at the same time, how totalitarian socialism actually operates. This problematic raises the following question: is free speech possible in socialist-communist countries, even the most liberal ones? The story of Dapcevic tells us that it probably isn't, due to the complex role of the socialist-communist state and its relation to the public.

The classical division of society results in two realms, the public and the private, while in modern society the third category, the state, is introduced either as the agent of the people, where the public sphere is involved in chains of delegation within government and decision making (as civil society), or an oppressive apparatus that necessitates the public sphere as an instance of moderation between the state and the people. The question of the role of the state is specific______ On the one hand, and public arenas of citizen discourse and association, on the other, all too often it was assumed that to subject the economy to the control of the socialist state was to subject it to the control of the socialist citizenry. Of course, that was not the case. But the conflation of the state with the public sphere provided ballast to processes whereby the socialist vision became institutionalized in an authoritarian statist form instead of in a participatory democratic form. The result has been to jeopardize the very idea of socialist democracy.

In addition, the story of Vlado Dapčević reveals differences between the public space and the public sphere, as well as the importance of their differentiation. The Fifth Congress of the CPY in 1948 and the ensuing discussion of Cominform's resolution were transparent and, we could also confidently say, quite public—2,400 delegates were present (Dapcevic too), there was full radio streaming, detailed newspaper reports, and so forth. However, in fact, this was not indicative of a public sphere, but of an occupation of public space by a monologue—that of the party—which was accessible publicly, though in no way open to criticism and polemics. Herein lies the blind spot of Dapcevic’s gesture, which in the long run, as we said, reveals the cynicism of party and state discourse. This brings us to the last question we wish to open, a question that in a long historical ellipse transports us right into the present—the question of the degree of inclusivity/exclusivity of the public sphere. In this particular case, the fence is obviously solid and high.

In the critical moments of liberal socialist Yugoslavia, when the crucial decisions 78 | Nancy Fraser. ‘Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually Existing Democracy.” Socialist Text 25-26 (1990): 56 43 Chapter 2 Can We Only Perform the Public Now? about society had to be made, only CPY communists, and among them only ‘proper communists, took part in public discussion. They were the sole deciders of what public interest and public good could be. They were truly the only actors on the scene, all the other voices were excluded or purged—and we call this totalitarianism. But have we ever had a public sphere that is not exclusive, or is such a thing merely a theoretical fiction that we project onto the lost good old days of history, like the days of Athenian democracy or of the early liberal public sphere?

As we mentioned, in the public sphere of Athenian democracy, only citizens took part in this ideal of participatory and direct democracy; in the eighteenth century's liberal public sphere, only bourgeois men; while in twentieth-century democracy, only political representatives of the citizenry decide. And the central recurrent question is, on whose behalf do they vote? Moreover, do they really represent us citizens?

WIKILEAKS: OVERLAYING THE POLITICAL ONTO THE PUBLIC

The last parable concerns a most recent and familiar case, that of WikiLeaks, which interests us as an attempt to give rise to a political counterpublic of individuals against the state. We will therefore filter it through the central problem we analyzed in the three previous parables: the relationship between the public sphere and freedom of speech and freedom of press, which, since the Bill of Rights, are considered pillars of liberal democracy.

WikiLeaks, which has existed officially since the end of 2006, started as more than a whistleblowing site with a history in ethical computer hacktivism, based on the political convictions of its founders: internet activists Julian Assange, who has emerged as its central figure due to media exposure and legal prosecution, invokes the First Amendment in the Bill of Rights as the principle that justifies the enormous leaking of confidential information. He explains that the rights of the press should be exempt from law because they are superior to it, because ‘free speech is what regulates government and regulates law ® In that way, he takes the First Amendment ‘too literally,’ as a principle upon which humanity should be built and not a political and legal framework of operation. He equates the public sphere with unlimited access to information and freedom of press, which permits him to crack the public (state) and private (corporate) codes that limit access to information and distribute so-called classified, confidential—or as he calls it ‘suppressed’ (censored)—information that is leaked from governmental and other institutions. He also reiterates the principle of monitoring and supervision, which Habermas understood as a characteristic of the liberal public sphere. Assanges understanding of information, if we are to take it as representative of Wiki-Leaks, reveals its status vis-a-vis publicness in today’s control society.

Information falls into three categories: knowledge that is economically supported, ‘historical record,’ which dissipates over time, and ‘suppressed information.’ According to Assange, what is ‘faintly glowing’ about signals of censorship is the amount of economic work needed to suppress it. And why is so much economic work being done to suppress that information? Probably—not definitely, but probably—because the organization predicts that its going to reduce the power of the institution that contains it. It’s going to produce a change in the world, and the organization doesn’t like that vision. Therefore, the containing institution engages in constant economic work to prevent that change. So, if you search for that signal of suppression, then you can find all this information that you should mark as information that should be released.

Releasing information to which access was previously denied is equivalent to its liberation, and Assange's optimism concerning the detection of censorship lies, as he sees it, in the possibility of political change that the institution containing the information fears and needs to prevent. But he also admits that there are societies in which censorship doesn’t exist in an obvious way, because publishing any information wouldn’t affect ownership or control. Such societies have mastered control through the fiscalization of power relationships to the extent that their public sphere is thoroughly depoliticized.

With regard to the public sphere, WikiLeaks is an attempt to mobilize a counterpublic of individuals against the state through the monitoring of governments and other power structures. Counterpublic here deviates from Fraser's definition of the marginalized and historically excluded public and emphasizes a hacktivist sense of ‘counter’ that discloses the domain of hidden activity underneath the hegemonic public sphere, turning something that would otherwise remain conspiracy into ‘transparency.’

What politically motivates this operation is a belief in ethical individualism, in individuals who recognize the power of the instrument of hacking by de-crypting and re-encrypting information in order to monitor or denounce the abuse of power. “We saw that we could change the nature of the relationship between the individual and the state using cryptography,” he says. “We wouldn’t say that we came from a libertarian political tradition as much as from a libertarian temperament, with particular individuals who were capable of thinking in abstractions, but wanting to make them real. We had many who were comfortable with higher mathematics, cryptography, engineering or physics who were interested in politics and felt that the relationship between the individual and the state should be changed and that the abuse of power by states needed to be checked.” 

What WikiLeaks didn't count on was that the state would find other legal means to arrest its activity, targeting the individual, Assange, rather than the whole organization with its other members and numerous volunteers on moral grounds through staging a sexual crime for a court case. This is reminiscent of the control mechanisms—a kind of moral police—installed after Wilkes, which are based on the individual as the social principle: the public sphere seeks a face that will be held accountable and that will bear public opinion regarding the judgment of his private life. The public male figure morally misperformed in his private life.

The question remains as to how responsible Assange himself is for the failure of WikiLeaks to present itself as a force of a multitude. But before WikiLeaks was suppressed, what did the repossession of Knowledge, the stealing of information as governmental or corporate property, achieve in the public sphere? We will answer this by observing the operation of WikiLeaks in its successive steps.

The operation begins by obtaining suppressed information through leaks, where an advisory board chooses the interest and target where they will search for suppressed information and then finds whistleblowers. The obtained documents are then verified for their authenticity. In the third step, media are sought out to edit and publish information. The last step of publication proves to be the most difficult, firstly due to errors in re-encryption of the released documents, which are damaging to individuals responsible for leaking information. Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, the masses of information remain unprocessed. For instance, 400,000 documents were released about Iraq, the redaction of which was unachievable by the workforce of the mainstream or commercial media.

Assange explains that he was looking for volunteer labor, for non-professional writers, i.e., bloggers, who would recognize the political potential of this enterprise for change and assess documents, analyze them, contextualize them, and insert them back into local communities. WikiLeaks hasn't spurred the investigative journalism that Assange hoped for, which recalls Dewey's in-depth inquiry into and evaluation of consequences. In Assange’s conclusion, bloggers are prepared neither for intellectual debate, nor to proactively search for what is "newsworthy." Instead, they react cynically to the stories of the mainstream media in their own search for popular readership. In a word, a counterpublic hasn't been mobilized on the grand scale that WikiLeaks expected.

What political, ideological, and conceptual effects has WikiLeaks had on our understanding of the relations between the state, the public, and private capital? According to some commentators like Saroj Giri or Zizek. It is important to note that the text provided is a collection of thoughts and ideas, rather than a coherent essay. Nevertheless, I have separated the text into paragraphs and cleaned it up to improve readability:

WikiLeaks has a more radical political charge than many mass mobilizations and social movements, just because they challenge representative democracy by attacking the procedures and protocols that supposedly guarantee the transparency of governance. According to Žižek, WikiLeaks acts against 81 | Saroj Giri writes. “And here we must hand it to WikiLeaks that their subversiveness came precisely from the fact that even though they tend to espouse liberal ideas of free flow of information or, in semi-anarchist mode, think of power as merely conspiratorial, their attack really came from outside the normal channels, professing free flow of information and citizens' right to know. They challenged power by challenging the normal channels of challenging power and revealing the truth. Even though they are perhaps getting suckered now into the hands of corporate houses and other suspicious players.” Saroj Giri, “WikiLeaks Beyond WikiLeaks,” Metomute.org, the website of Mute magazine. 

The shame is not on those in power, but on citizens who tolerate such power. Nevertheless, critical voices who would rather applaud WikiLeaks from the left side question the operation's political legitimacy. For instance, a typical opinion claims that politics is a more complicated game that citizens are ignorant of. Therefore, understanding the freedom of speech and press literally leads to inaccuracies and tactical errors, and unlimited transparency is dangerous. Citizens therefore still prefer representation, however problematic it has become, because they are happier to delegate the filtering of information to the experts, which echoes Lipmann's and Dewey's views on the problem of the public.

But what are the problems and questions that operations of WikiLeaks raise? In conclusion, WikiLeaks attempts to repoliticize the public sphere by overlaying the political onto the public sphere. They do so by breaking the protocol of the performance of the public in media and devising a new performative in journalism (the release of suppressed information). Will this performative evolve to establish a new procedure for journalism? Until now, it has failed by virtue of a paradox. The ultimate openness of public space meets the indifference of the public. There is no unilateral determination of cause and effect between the exposure of censored information and political mobilization.

WikiLeaks points to the limits of the public sphere, not in the boundaries political power sets to keep information private, as Dewey would have it, but in the lack of response. We can discern two misfires in WikiLeaks' operation: on the one side, the liberalist promise of freedom by unlimited access, transparency, and openness, and, on the other, ethical individualism as a default setting of democracy, i.e., the assumption that private individuals identify with freedom of speech as a natural right they are driven to exercise. The operation didn't prove sufficient in creating the rise of a new conception of the public sphere, yet it not only pointed to, but also exploded the limits of representative democracy. Hence, we might ask, for WikiLeaks to fulfill a new happy performative, is it crucial that they train real journalist-terrorists to hijack the public sphere—the mainstream media itself? 

The conclusions of part one conveyed a broad, comprehensive view which holds that the public sphere as a political sphere can only be performed on the basis of (political) ideology. In chapter one, we identified that one of the determinants of the crisis of the public sphere today is the ideological antagonism between collectivism and individualism. The two ideologies will be invoked, respectively, throughout part two, which focuses on massive and state public performances, and in part three, which critically examines performances, actions, and technologies of the self qua individual in everyday life and the performing arts. This chapter will elucidate our conception of ideology, which will be integrated into two models: social choreography and social drama.

Ideology in a conventional sense designates a set or system of ideas about how to configure society. Despite its broad and neutral thrust as a comprehensive worldview, or Weltanschauung, ideology is a rather unpopular term. It owes its renunciation in everyday speech to its pejorative connotation of totalitarianism, as associated with the twentieth century's extreme state ideologies of fascism and communism.

The political and, as we 83 | The negative connotation of ideology dates back to the Napoleonic era (specifically to 1796) when the word was coined by the French philosophers Destut de Tracy, Cabanis, and Constant to designate the study of ideas, their origins, and their laws. In accordance with the sensualist empiricism of Locke and Condillac, these philosophers datemed that all ideas derived from physical senses.

In part II, Ideology and Mass Performances, we will argue that the commonsensical negative understanding of ideology is multifold. They can be critically traced back to the definitions of ideology in Marx and Engels, as well as in Lenin. Marx's various writings on ideology are predicated on his materialist view of capitalist society as divided into a base and a superstructure, and characterized by class antagonism and the division of labor. In Marx and Engels' classical work, The German Ideology, ideology belongs to the social superstructure. It is a production of ideas, of conceptions, of consciousness firmly tied to and conditioned by the modes of material production in a certain society, or by the base.

Since the superstructure holds a subordinate position as an expression or reflection of the distribution of forces among the classes and of real existing relations of production ruled by the bourgeoisie, ideology too cannot but be ruled by the bourgeoisie, thus presenting the thinking of the ruling class as the ruling thinking of an epoch. A famous paragraph from ‘Ruling Class and Ruling Ideas’ explains it:

The ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal expression of the dominant material relationships. The dominant material relationships gasped as ideas; hence, of the relationships which make the one class the ruling one. Therefore, the ideas of its dominance. The individuals composing the ruling class possess, among other things, consciousness, and therefore think. Insofar, therefore, as they rule as a class and determine the extent and compass of an epoch, it is self-evident that they do this in its whole range. Hence, among other things, rulers also think and regulate the production and distribution of the ideas of the age. Their ideas are the ruling ideas of the epoch. Therefore, ideology in capitalist society functions as what Engels called the "false consciousness" of dominant social relations, which the ruling class imposes upon all social classes, thereby misleading them.

Apart from Marx and Engels' own consideration of ideology as a negative term, the predominant pejorative connotation that ideology bears today could be connected with Lenin's usage of the notion as well. Although he himself conceives it as a positive notion, as a revolutionary, Lenin referred to ideology in terms of political practice and proletarian struggle, trying to resolve the Marxist problem that the existence of revolutionary ideas presupposes the existence of a revolutionary class.

In What is to Be Done?, he promotes and encourages the possibility of the socialist ideology as opposite to that of the bourgeoisie, a possibility which can transform the proletarian class consciousness into the political class consciousness by means of a comprehensive political exposure. For Lenin, ideological work is of prime importance for social revolution, since the working masses can constitute a revolutionary class neither spontaneously nor only by political agitation on the level of the economic base. Ideology therefore acquires a positive connotation in his writing.

In a word, ideology is for Lenin a tool for the revolutionization of the proletarian class, and it now has a negative connotation for this very reason. When Tracy and his companion déologues refused to become servile members of the Napoleonic nobility, Napoleon began to use the word as a term of abuse. See Jack Hayward, After the French Revolution: Six Critics of Demacroc yond Notronolism (Hemel Hempstead, UK: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1991), and Laurent Clauzade, L éologte ou le révolution de l'analyse (Paris: Gallimard, 1998).

Materiality of Ideology

The Marxist elaborations of ideology that were subsequently articulated by Marx and Engels and Lenin, and by many others, derive from their generally critical perspective on preexisting capitalist society. This perspective advocates a battleground of social classes where an end to antagonisms can be achieved only through the dictatorship of the proletariat, leading to a classless society where the ownership of the means of production is held in common.

This thought has always annoyed capitalist society, whose ideology of (neo)liberalism and concomitant immanence of the principles of individualism and personal property rights is not seen as an ideology at all. In this way, capitalism manages to naturalize production and social relations as inherent to humans.

What supposedly determines our times as 'postideological' and 'posthistorical' is, on the one hand, the global predominance of capitalist neoliberal democracy since the early 1990s, and, on the other, the pluralism on social microscales, never seen in terms of a fundamental social antagonism that encompasses both production and ideology as the ground of politics, legislation, education, culture, etc.

A tendency to evade the concept of ideology in critical theory in a wide sense can be identified in recent decades. Already in his conception of biopolitics, Foucault avoids the term in favor of micropower and a direct capture of bodies by disciplinary apparatuses and mechanisms of the society of control. Foucault's orientation toward micropolitics and biopolitics is furthered by the theorists of post-Operaia, who place the organization and management of the social body, and of life itself above a political practice in an ideologically framed public sphere set by the ruling class. But the commonsense opinion about the end of ideology has grown most prominently out of the neoliberal celebration of the end of the Cold War and the ‘victory of capitalism,’ where ideology is to be unmasked as false consciousness.

The vision of the end of ideology in posthistorical’ time is rooted in Francis Fukuyama's influential article "The End of History" from 1989. Turning away from Marx's and toward Hegel's conception of history as progress, whose end no longer lies in communism's replacing capitalism, but in the establishment of a universal and homogeneous state based in democracy, he proclaims:

"What we may be witnessing is not just the end of the Cold War, or the passing of a particular period of postwar history, but the end of history as such, that is, the end point of mankind's ideological evolution and the universalization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government."

Political pluralism, defended by political theorists such as John Rawls and Isaiah Berlin, is defined as a permanent feature of liberal, non-repressive societies. For instance, in Political Liberalism, Rawls argues that pluralism is reasonable and that philosophy can play a role in characterizing its public justification as well as the legitimate, democratic use of collective coercive power while accepting the same pluralism.

"That is, while earlier forms of government were characterized by grave defects and irrationalities that led to their eventual collapse, liberal democracy was arguably free from such fundamental internal contradictions."

In The End of History and the Last Man (1992), Fukuyama develops the thesis further, emboldened to take a prophetic tone by the collapse of socialist regimes:

"What is emerging victorious, in other words, is not so much liberal practice, as the liberal idea. That is to say, for a very large part of the world, there is now no ideology with pretensions to universality that is in a position to challenge liberal democracy, and no universal principle of legitimacy other than the sovereignty of the people."

We can observe how ideology as a contextually constructed system of ideas accompanied by a historical-materialist perspective regarding their practice is dismissed and replaced by a universal idea based on a transcendent rationality. The universalist view on liberal democracy will prevail as reason based on common and good sense, equally driving both the transition processes undergone by former real-socialist societies and the expansion of the free-market economy on a global scale.

From this viewpoint, all the difficulties and resistance that the implementation of neoliberal policies meets are regarded as signs of irrationality—that is, remnants of ideology—while being identified as totalitarian or just repressive in general. All means to eradicate these 'ideological obstacles are therefore appropriate and just. They are considered emancipatory tools for the rationalization of those who are themselves irrational enough to reject neoliberal capitalism.

Today, it seems that it takes the occurrence of a financial crisis with 'austerity measures for the awareness of neoliberalism as ideology to arise. This recalls the stance of late Marxist ideological critique—made by Jameson, Zizek, Balibar, Laclau, Mouffe, and others who in recent decades didn't abandon the notion of ideology—according to which there is no privileged place for ideological critique. No place is exempt from ideology in order to critique ideology. Only ideology can fight ideology. When we say that only ideology can fight ideology, we don't claim that it is impossible to step out of ideology and proceed with an Althusserian debate on this question, rather, we want to emphasize that the public sphere is predicated on the ideology of the ruling class. Not only when it clearly appears in the form of totalitarian decrees from the state (as was the case in real-socialist societies), but also when it is vague, volatile, hegemonic, or universalized (as it is in neoliberal capitalist societies).

That is exactly why we are focusing away from the liberal idea, that is, from freedom as a universal and abstract idea which is opposed to totalitarianism, which is always identified as a socialist type of particularism, and toward the more material ideological categories of individualism and collectivism. In our view, individualism and collectivism, respectively, shaped the public spheres of capitalist and socialist societies into those societies' epistemic and aesthetic foundations, which were in turn conditioned by the specific production relations (already) found in each society. The antagonism between these two ideologies is emerging once again in currently widespread protests.

The claim that only ideology can fight ideology allows us to reexamine the dubious conclusion about the end of ideology, beyond the rather obvious fact that it is an outcome of the recent global expansion and hegemony of one—neoliberal—ideology. Moving on to the domain of performance, we could say that what appears to be an end to ideology might be a mere shift in its performative, ritualistic mechanism. The naturalization and internalization of requests, expectations, models, and patterns of thinking, speaking, behaving, and acting have always been important mechanisms in the functioning of ideology. Hence we might want to exchange the Althusserian notion of ‘interpellation’ (whereby individuals are turned into subjects by being hailed into ideology) for embodiment (where ideology functions via the control and action of bodies). The shift could also be viewed as a renegotiation between the linguistic-semiotic and the corporeal-affective-experiential, which has begun to stand for the real tdeology’s change in ritualistic mechanism. The shift of focus might imply only a change of degree that manifests itself in the material form of the functioning of ideology within the same matrix of cynically enlightened consciousness that the late Marxists established.

The function of the act of hailing the individual into ideology, making her a subject, the act which was supported with words, belief, or cynical knowledge, is now overtaken by procedures and compositional arrangements of an ambivalent nature. These mechanisms can both capture their subjects and enable them to act. Thus, the total ideological discursive grip of early Marxism is now relaxed, therefore permitting physical and bodily failures, affective ruptures, gaps to be navigated, where diverse ideological interests can be negotiated. Our point is that the disruptions of ideology don't occur mainly inside the private sphere of the individual in critical theories of the 1990s that focus on identity politics. The rupture, if ideological at all, is issued by and for the individual whose subjectivation is a form of self-realization in the open field of particularized, yet-to-be-represented differences. The problem with the principle ‘the personalis political’ is that in practice it is easily reverted to the abstract transcendental idea of individual freedom. In self-determination, the self is more determinant than the vision of the society that the sum of the selves could make. For instance, the nongovernmental organization (NGO)—a mechanism by which identity politics and other particular interest groups advocating special missions have been most efficiently instituted in the public sphere, and whose funding is often private and non- 90! On the other hand, the liberal idea already contested its own universality in the course of the transition processes undergone by real-socialist societies, wherein it functioned—sparked by the general and ideologically vague social appeals for liberalization made in the late 80s—as the herald of neoliberal capitalism, and therefore as a particular but hegemonic concept. 

Our interest lies in probing how the public sphere is constituted by collectivist visions of social order without falling back into totalitarian ideology. Two approaches to the analysis of movement, speech, and the composition of bodies in time and space in the public sphere are explored here: social choreography and social drama. These two models are, as we will see, complementary and form one method. The main viewpoint on social structure and processes outlined by this method is predicated on the assumption that conflicts and antagonisms characterize contemporary neoliberal capitalist societies, the ideology of which is hegemonic while not exercising a total grip. In such societies, social choreography happens continuously, in art, in everyday life, in the economic relations of production as well as in social reproduction, thus conflating the two levels (the economic base and ideological superstructure) into the same aesthetic mode of operation. Social choreography shows how social order is aesthetically produced, instilled, and rehearsed. As a material practice of aesthetic ideology, social choreography isn't obvious at the time of its operation, but becomes visible within historical perspectives, like when its collapse gives way to social drama. Social drama happens exceptionally. The notion designates those intensive moments in the social process when one or more latent conflicts escalate to such an extent that they cannot be managed any longer, leading to a collapse in the social order.

In public mass events, liminality appears as a short passage, a limited area of anti- and proto-structure where society critically reflects on what it is and was, though it is still not sure about what it might become. The performances of the subject and the self in both private-social and public-social senses are discussed in part three. The shift from ideology’s hailing through the speech act to embodiment, where the materiality of actions is always already socially endorsed, prompted Andrew Hewitt to redefine ideology's mode of operation as aesthetic and to privilege ‘social choreography’ as its prominent form. Recent projects that proclaim themselves as practices of social choreography today involve the mobilization of activists. Their point of departure is the ‘body-movement paradigm’ of dance, referring to William Forsythes movement language, which they seek to transform into the ‘social body'.

Andrew Hewitt's approach sides against both the phenomenological, romanticizing conceptions of the body's experience of metaphysical transcendence and the culturalist, identitarian determinations of the body in performance and dance studies (through race, gender, sexuality). Hewitt's study is thoroughly historical, centered on the late bourgeois era (ca. 1850-1933) and the development of industrial capitalism and modernity in the sociopolitical and aesthetic sense. Our first task will be to find out if and how social choreography might be appropriate as a theoretical framework for an analysis of political ideology in the public sphere today, in the era of neoliberalism. We will then examine the place it should take in relation to ‘social drama’ within the method we propose for theorizing the public sphere.

The origins of the idea of “social choreography” can be traced back to a famous passage from a letter Friedrich Schiller wrote in 1793 to Christian Korner. In the letter, Schiller describes a dance as a fitting image for the ideal of social conduct. He compares the chaotic movements of dancers in a gallery to the social conduct of people in the public sphere. 

yet never colliding. Everything is so ordered that the one has already yielded his place when the other arises, it's all so skillfully, and yet so artlessly, integrated into a form, that each seems only to be following his own inclination, yet without ever getting in the way of anybody else. It is the most perfectly appropriate symbol of the assertion of one’s won freedom and regard for the freedom of others.

The Image invokes not only a tradition of thinking about social order that derives its ideal from the aesthetic realm—the area in which Hewitt situates his study—but also the recurrent concerns in contemporary dance with performing a harmonious relationship between the individual and the collective. The aesthetic qua social ideal of the English ballroom for Schiller is a harmonious play of movements between dancers, which we are to see as a model of citizens’ social intercourse. Hewitt reads Schiller’s account as one of Mark Franko.

Franko writes, ‘A critical theory of choreography unable to grasp dance in its historical density is equally unable to reveal choreography's ideological perfomativity in the social sphere. no matter how many theoretical positions it seeks to debunk along the way'.

Social Choreography

the missions of the project of modernity, which he defines as ‘social choreography’ that seeks to aesthetically instill a social order directly at the level of the body. Siegfried Kracauer's essay The Mass Ornament (1927) is a more direct precursor of this thesis of social choreography. Kracauer, a cultural critic with close ties to the Frankfurt School, invents the aesthetic figure of ‘mass ornament’ to describe the appearance of mass dancing in stadiums and the mechanized movement of revue routines, like Tiller Girls, as distractions from revolutionary political activity. Kracauer’s interest in mass culture is in its tendency to demonstrate, more overtly than high art, its material conditioning by capitalism.

What links the two distinct types of dancing, mass dancing in the stadium and the chorus line, is the rationalization of capitalist production, as Kracauer writes:

Only as parts of a mass, not as individuals who believe themselves to be formed from within, do people become fractions of a figure. The ornament ends in itself.

Furthermore, he sees mass ornament as a form of irrational, fetishistic mythologization. It is the rational and empty form of the cult, devoid of any explicit meaning, that appears in the mass ornament. As such, it proves to be a relapse into mythology of an order so great that one can hardly imagine its being exceeded, a relapse which, in turn, again betrays the degree to which capitalist Ratio is closed off from reason.

Mass ornament implies both the alienation of the individual and of the community. Physical training expropriates people's energy, while the production and mindless consumption of the ornamental patterns divert them from the imperative to change the reigning order. Reason can gain entrance only with difficulty when the masses it ought to pervade yield to sensations afforded by the godless mythological cult. The latter's social meaning is equivalent to that of the Roman circus games, which were sponsored by those in power.

For a transmutation of social choreography into an aesthetic ideology, Hewitt takes his cue from Kracauer, who was the first to read the capitalist production process in the empty form of mass ornament, the famous hands in the factory that correspond to the legs in the chorus line. Hewitt's theory goes beyond Kracauer's observations by claiming that ideology, in the form of social choreography, operates aesthetically and performatively at the base of the relations of production. Hewitt seeks to invert the classical Marxist model of base-superstructure, aligning his notion of social choreography with Fredric Jameson's 'political unconscious.'

In conclusion, Hewitt's theoretical project can be summarized as follows: "Ideology has a history that is not merely the history of its successive forms, but of its functions and functioning," he writes.

According to Slavoj Zizek, ideology today might be difficult to pin down as an imposed and organized doctrine of the state or ruling class due to its diversity, vagueness, and the illusion of rational parliamentary debate. It is equally elusive as a spontaneous belief of the people. Zizek argues that ideology's sheer material existence in ritual or practice is what is left, and that we have moved from the 'false consciousness' to the 'cynical, enlightened consciousness.'

Hewitt's conception of ideology as performance in dance and everyday movement, or 'social choreography,' deserves a third pragmatic twist in the formula: "because they are doing it, they believe it."

The main claim of Hewitt's social choreography rests on the assumption that there exists an aesthetic continuum in bodily articulation that spans from everyday movement to dance. This continuous aesthetic spectrum is framed on the one end by the conscious or unconscious sensory experience of daily movements, gestures, postures, and relations between bodies in time and space, and on the other by 'the aesthetic in the more limited sense as a socially endorsed framing of the sensual.'

The aesthetic continuum is best articulated in the following: "If the body | dance with and the body | work and walk with are one and the same, we must, when dancing, necessarily enter the suspicion that all of the body's movements are, to a greater or lesser extent, choreographed."

This aesthetic continuum is not a simple chain of cause and effect – rather, it runs both ways. Dance also serves to demonstrate how the textual acquires significance as social choreography only when embodied. This complicates the operation of any critique of ideology. 

It cyni- cally disguises itself as truth. The same is true when a Western intervention in a Third World country is motivated and legitimated by human rights infringement. The intervention might improve the human rights record in that country, yet its real motivations are elsewhere, in economic interests. For example, Therefore, the truth conceals the relation of domination which is established ‘ceologically’.

A step further in this logic of instrumentality results in the automatism of procedures whose instrumentality is no longer questioned. Zizek takes Blaise Pascal to explain the mechanism of self-referential causality through which the procedure, supposed to be an effect of belief, becomes the cause of belief. Thus, he suggests that Pascal's “Kneel down and you will believe!” should be read as “Kneel down and you will believe that you knelt down because you believed!”

The body neither performs a prescripted social text, nor is it capable of pre-linguistic, pre-ideological expression. Hewitt argues for a double perspective that conflates the textual and performative aspects of bodily expression. He describes his method as follows:

To examine choreography is necessarily to follow two trajectories: one tracing the ways in which everyday experience might be aestheticized (dance aestheticizes the most fundamental and defining motor attributes of the human animal), and another tracing the ways in which ‘the aesthetic’ is, in fact, sectioned off and delineated as a distinct realm of experience. This is what I mean by the aesthetic continuum of social choreography.

Although a reference to Jacques Rancière’s philosophical theory of the ‘politics of aesthetics’ is notably missing here, Hewitt's understanding of the aesthetic is close to it. According to Rancière, the aesthetic sphere has no definite boundaries, as its regime is dual: the autonomy of art is its heteronomy as well. Reading Hewitt's assumption of the aesthetic continuum along with Ranciére’s ‘distribution of the sensible,’ which designates the configuration of actions, movements, gestures, bodies, roles, and patterns of perception by an order that Rancière calls ‘police,’ we could say that dance is social choreography in the aesthetic regime of art inasmuch as its movements belong to a separate sphere delineated as ‘art.’ And it is also social choreography inasmuch as its movements bear no specific difference to the movements of the other spheres.

Walking as a gesture is Hewitt’s case in point here. Throughout the analysis of Honoré de Balzac’ ‘Théorie du démarche,’ Henri Bergson’s ‘On Laughter,’ and Delsarte’s system of gestures and expressions, together with Giorgio Agamben’s ‘Notes on Gesture and earlier eighteenth-century German literature on walking, Hewitt examines the changing status of social gestures in the history of the bourgeoisie. Walking as an activity was discussed and rehearsed in Germany from 1780 onward as an attempt by a new bourgeois class to develop its own lifestyle. All the topoi of romanticism run through this gesture walking to escape from corrupt society, to return to nature, to commune with the people. As a social gesture, walking demonstrates bourgeois self-consciousness, as can be read in the statement of an enthusiastic German walker of the early nineteenth century. ‘I consider walking to be the most noble and independent thing about a man and believe that things would work better if people walked more. "Hewitt shows how the collapse of a system of social gestures in the late bourgeois era (from 1850 onward, symptomatically in Tourettism) led to a systematic interest in the legibility of gesture (as in Delsartism), which indicates social choreography as a hegemonic and therefore ideological, rather than coercive, form. If we examine the same gesture—walking—a century later on the other end of the aesthetic continuum, te in pedestrian movement in American Post-Modern Dance, then illuminating its historicity as the political unconscious becomes interesting. Steve Paxton’s Satisfying Lover (1967), a choreography for a large number of all kinds of 106 | Asan advocate of the politics of affect who is otherwise sympathetic to Hewitt's experiential grounding of ideology. Derek P McCormack criticizes Hewrtt’s “suspicion of any attempt to ground identity and/or community in a pre-discursive or pre-ideological context.’ as ‘it becomes impossible for Hewitt to affirm any political sense or sensibility that might operate prior to ideology however immanent. Derek P McCormack. ‘Politics and Moving Bodies." in Political Theory 35. no. § (2007): 819 107 | Hewitt. 19 108 | Rancaeére Jacques. The Politics of Aesthetics. trans. Gabriel Rockhill (London: Verso. 2004) 109 | Hewitt. 81 60 Part ll Ideology and Mass Performances bodies crossing the stage in simple walking steps and halts, was supposed to warn against aesthetic excess and mark a zero-degree of dance walking as all that it is. a simple step The quotidian or pedestrian movement in daily gestures like walking was hailed in the 1960s'"° as an emancipation of ‘democracy's body while coinciding with the marches of the civil rights movements. SOCIAL CHOREOGRAPHY AND THE POLITICAL UNCONSCIOUS Although he never properly explains the relation between his notion of social choreography and Jamesons political unconscious,’ Hewitt draws on it as an important forerunner of his own theory.""' Jameson’s theory of the political unconscious is a revision of Althusser's model of base-superstructure in Marxism. It lays the ground for Hewitt’s claim about ideology operating at the (economic) base. We will now unpack the relations between Althusser's, Jamesons, and Hewitt's models. It is well known that Althusser transposed Marx's edifice model of social system, comprised of the base and the superstructure(s), into the model of a structure where the economic base—in Althusser, the mode of production,’ which includes forces of production, labor process, technical development, and relations of production—would become a less determining instance. Consequently, the superstructures, comprising culture, ideology, philosophy, religion, the legal system, and the state, gain relative autonomy, ie become semi-independent of the base. The model is illustrated by the following diagram in Jameson’s"’:

Jameson shows that Althusser's structuralist reading of the law of base-superstructure introduces the concept of the mode of production in order to expand the base beyond the more narrowly economic and toward the synchronic system of social relations as a whole, ie structure. What makes the mode of production a structure is its function of 110 | Sally Banes Democracy's Body in Post-Modern Dance (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1995). Whereas the mimetic ideology approximates a traditional mode of ideology as false consciousness, the performative would be something more like a political unconscious (Hewitt, 21).

In his poststructuralist reconfiguration of Althusser's model, Jameson takes history to be the absent cause, not a part of the whole or one of the levels, but rather the entire system of relationships among those levels. In his famous motto, "Always historicize!" Jameson claims that the hierarchical two-level model that Althusser retains from Marx (albeit by weakening its economic determinism) should be spread out into a horizontal structure of mutual relationships:

CULTURE IDEOLOGY
MOP OF PRODUCTION, OR STRUCTURE
THE JURIDICAL
THE POLITICAL
THE ECONOMIC
RELATIONS OF PRODUCTION
FORCES OF PRODUCTION

Jameson's web of mutual relationships, where no one thread is privileged as an ultimate cause, is Hewitt's point of departure. Hewitt claims that what makes an ideology aesthetic is that the aesthetic operates at the level of the base. Ideology doesn't serve only to reproduce social relations of production, or to reflect or represent the social order, it directly participates in its production. Thus, Hewitt elaborates on Jameson's method by claiming that the mode of production itself is aesthetic. Choreography is a medium for rehearsing social order. This means that the social order is both reflected in and shaped by aesthetic concerns.

The two cases we will present next expound the model above by illuminating how ideas of labor and play were negotiated, displaced, masked, or repressed in various kinds of discourses and practices that invoked the aesthetic ideal of dance. The first concerns a cluster of texts from early anthropology and sociology of labor wherein dance came to signify a new automatic, antivoluntaristic, non-alienating, and yet pleasurable model of human labor power. 

A model based on a parallel drawn between physiology and mechanism, dance served to explicate the notion of natural labor that might harness and regenerate labor power through energy and enthusiasm that went into the playful performance of dance rather than simply use it up. Dance in the ‘primitives’ demonstrated in a vitalistic fashion the existence of a human instinct toward activity, not a form of work, but an activity to which man in the state of nature dedicates himself with great gusto and diligence (...) dance [was regarded] as a spontaneous activity that produced a greater social energy than it consumed, it was potentially self-regenerative."

To deploy Jameson's method of historicizing the political unconscious would mean to detect how anthropological and sociological discourses in the nineteenth century echoed vitalism or Lebensphilosophie, which placed physical immanence as central, celebrated energy in motion, and subsumed the subject not by her ideal humanity but by the vital, muscular energies and vibrations’ that pass through her body."

In the same period of early modernity, modern dance was born in denying work, suppressing its material conditions in play—as in the dances of Isadora Duncan, or Laban's experiments at Monte Verita. However, in the writings of the English sociologist Herbert Spencer, the proponent of social Darwinism, dance could provide the image of undifferentiated labor where, according to Arendt’s definition, ‘labor is the activity which corresponds to the biological process of the human body’."

Labor is ‘unalienated’ because the performance of labor does not yet demand a self-conscious human subject: but, by the same token, it is animalistic because the absence of an object 117 | Hewitt. 12 118 | ibid. 40, 43, The texts include Herbert Spencer. “Professional Institutions II. Dancer and Musician.’ Contemporary Review 68 (1895) 114-26: M G Ferrero ‘Les formes primitives du travail." Revue scientifique sémes 4.5. no. 11 (1896) 331-4, Karl Bucher, ‘Arbeit und Rhythmus’ (Leipzig: Raubner, 1902), Charles Fere ‘Trovoil et Plaisir’ (Paris: Felix Alcan, 1904), Anson Rabinbach, ‘The Human Motor Energy, Fotic, and the Origins of Modernity’ (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1992); and, most notably, Rudolf Laban and F C Lawrence, ‘Effort Economy in Body Movement’ (London: Macdonald and Evands, 1947) 119 | We refer here to the work of Hans A. E. Dnesch, German biologist, a proponent of a neo-vitalist Lebensphilosophie in the end of the nineteenth century, Dreisch, ‘The Science © Philosophy of the Organism’, 2 vols. (Aberdeen: University of Aberdeen, 1908) 120 | Hannah Arendt, ‘The Human Condition’ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958) 7 63 Chapter 4 Social Choreography denies man the possibility of becoming a subject in contrast to that object. By putting the entire body in motion, dance figures a movement beyond the manufactural and opens up the possibility of a totalizing—if not, indeed, totalitarian—model of social order.

So, the political unconscious of both modern dance and its instrumentalization in the theories of labor (Laban's fascination with Taylorism is well-documented in his book, co-authored with Lawrence, 'Effort: Economy in Body Movement', 1947) lies in the affect of enthusiasm. The enthusiasm of a dancing body isn't just a universal form______ Today, numerous body systems and practices, often close to techniques of contemporary dance, attest to the self-perpetuating social choreography as a technology of the self. They are still grounded on the truism of modern dance in Martha Graham's dictum that ‘the body doesn't lie.’ Vitalism is the ideology that still produces and reproduces capitalist production processes today. It doesn't take a wild act of the imagination to visualize millions of bodies working out right now in gyms or thousands of bodies de-stressing, or bodies stretching in yoga positions. All those apparatuses of vitalist desubjectivation feed into the industry of New Age products and services today.

The second demonstration of aesthetic ideology in Hewitt's study—where material production and ideological reproduction meet in a choreography—is the Girlkultur. It is a specimen of what Adorno and Horkheimer dubbed ‘cultural industry,’ of the ‘revue type of entertainment in the Weimar period. Rapid, belated modernization in Germany absorbed the new American phenomenon of physical culture and then transformed it into the eugenic physical regeneration and drilling of the German race in the 1930s.

The ‘girls’ from the 1920s performed the ‘Taylorized’ body of the American production line, which Kracauer identified in the famous chorus line of the Tiller Girls. Hewitt's contribution to this analysis lies in his underlining the transmutation of sexual play into work, which is covered up by purposes of entertainment. The mechanical movement of the same body part in a line, mostly a row of legs, is a dance to the rhythm of Fordist production.

The overt sexual exposure of female body parts has a desexualizing effect here, marking a shift away from the figure of the woman, who reveals the hidden truth to the girl, who displays the sheer functioning of a mechanized ballet. In Hewitt's words, the girls ‘are not creatures, they are creators, emblems of the very principle of capitalist mass production.’ He elaborates their function in the following:

He points out that many commentaries on artistic freelance labor or the system of intermittent’ labor fail to recognize its different and critical status from other forms of employment or independent self-employment, because they attempt to correct it as an ‘exception’ or ‘anomaly’ according to the so-called “normal" or “ordinary” forms of employment and unemployment in the free market of labor.

Ideology and Mass Performances

Just what do they create? As synchronized performers—whose rigor seemed to stand in opposition to an increasing and disturbing cultural syncopation—they are not individual objects of feminine display in the traditional sense. And yet there is no actual object or work to which we can point as the result of their cultural Levstung [achievement]. They are a puzzle they produce, yet they produce no thing. They are not "femininely" self-centered and self-centering because their entire performance relies on a synchronization with others. Fulfillment (sexual and aesthetic) is deferred along the endless line of identical legs. In the chorus line that signifies the performance of production, Hewitt reads a shift in the function of ideology wherein the place of truth changes from truth with a referent, as something to be revealed, to truth as something dynamic, something to be performatively produced. The very fact of production, its automatic unstoppable nature, becomes the truth.

When ideology loses its promise that it will unveil something unknown, something we have hitherto been unconscious of, we enter the realm of cynicism. Contrary to Sloterdijk and Zizek, Hewitt argues that this already happens in the early period of industrial capitalism and mass culture, in the marked shift from the principle of revelation to sheer functioning. In this new configuration, ideology is no longer a system of belief that holds at its core a (sexual) truth that can be laid bare. It has become a function, a system of deferral that keeps disbelief in motion. The shift from woman to girl is a shift from ideology as a system of belief to ideology as a self-sustaining and self-legitimating social function, a shift from the promise of revelation to the reality of mere motion or function.

The conclusion of this analysis has purchase on Hewitt’s claim that social choreography is a performative rather than a mimetic mode of ideology. We will now examine it critically.

PERFORMATIVE VS. MIMETIC MODE OF AESTHETIC IDEOLOGY

While every social order in history has yielded its aesthetic representation, the most notable example being the invention of ballet de cour by, with, and for Louis XIV, most of these representations were constructed on the basis of the inclusion and exclusion of power. What distinguishes social choreography in the late bourgeois era, and what Schiller already anticipates in his letter from 1793, is a fantasy of totality: a possibility of an integrative or participatory ideological performance. Therefore Hewitt insists on coining social choreography as the performative or integrative aesthetic ideology, ‘one in which art does not simply misrepresent, in a palliative manner, an existing social order. Instead, the aesthetic now becomes the realm in which new social orders are produced (rather than represented) and in which the integration of all social members is possible.

The juxtaposition between the performative and the mimetic is necessary for Hewitt to renew the notion of ideology beyond the classical, pejorative sense of ‘false consciousness’ and introduce the aesthetic component at the very base of material production. But how plausible is this?

What Hewitt understands by the mimetic mode of ideology is a utopian projection of a social order that blinds its spectators by distorting the social realities they live. This is necessarily an ideology in a negative sense, for it distracts us from the political praxis necessary to bring that utopian condition about in reality. There are two problems with this thesis. First, mimesis can't be reduced to emulation, an improved copy that misrepresents life, since the meanings and modalities of mimesis are broader. Second, the mimetic mode, as Hewitt fashions it, doesn't have to exclude performativity in the sense he deploys here—as production or rehearsal in which onlookers participate. Hewitt’s main wager in substituting performative for representational ideology is that it allows for introducing, producing a new social order rather than reproducing or reflecting an existing one. His choice of choreography as opposed to, for instance, painting, stems from the fact that the former evolves with the onlookers, incorporating them, while the latter is always a mimetic representation. The narrative, as in Jameson's case, resonates with the performative attribute for Hewitt. Choreography doesn't simply inscribe itself in time and space but rather transforms both time and space, bringing into existence a ‘world,’ materializing it in a non-transcendent sense. If choreography can act as a blueprint of a new society, a vehicle for instilling and rehearsing a new social order, then the rich modernist tradition of mass dancing in Europe from the 1910s to the 1930s should be included therein. It is significantly missing from Hewitt's account of this period, presumably because it belongs to mimetic ideology.

Before we elaborate a counter-example, let's now consider what the method of social choreography, according to Hewitt, enables. A brief answer would be, in most cases, no. This can be explained by using the Jamesonian method to historically ‘narrativize’ the function that social choreography was born within the late bourgeois era. In Hewitt's study, social choreography figures as a form of cultural hegemony particular to a rising bourgeoisie who foregrounded the aesthetic realm by way of the autonomy of art as a form of political liberty from the authority of the monarchy in the eighteenth century. Thus, art offered a place around 1800 in which one could reason freely, because the consensus was that art had no social consequence, as Hewitt infers here. The emerging class utilized this freedom to rehearse ideas that would only subsequently be set free into a truly political bourgeois public realm.

The (aesthetic) form of expression allowed to the politically emergent bourgeois class cannot have been without effect on the content of the ideas that were developed under its protection. Thus, aesthetic concerns entered from the very beginning into bourgeois political calculations. What Hewitt's theory doesn't account for is the moment when the function of projecting, proposing, and exercising a new social order turns into a prescription of norms. These norms, codes, or conventions needn't be imposed from above mimetically, as Hewitt would have it. They may also be inherently, immanently performed, internalized in a control regime in which the political unconscious resides.

As a social choreography, Delsartism was normative because it prescribed a taxonomy of behavioral gestures and signs that would regulate social self-presentation. Its political unconscious lay in the imperative of legibility of gestural signs, indicating a fear of the loss of the authentic style of a class. Social choreography is, on the one hand, an artifact with a distinctive form and a material practice, as we saw in Girlkultur or Delsartism, and on the other, an interpretive model whereby dance appears as the trope of the ideas of harmonious play or social labor, as in Schiller or early anthropology and sociology's interest in labor, dance, and primitives. But as a model of interpreting ideology through the lens of movement, bodily expressions, and relations, can social choreography serve as a critique of ideology? Hewitt offers an explicit answer to this question. The predominance of performative, ritual, and choreographic modes of social cohesion in a given society does not necessarily lead to the emergence of a critical vocabulary for articulating or critiquing that society's choreography. Quite the contrary, it is only when a certain choreography breaks down. In periods of transition, it becomes evident that the operation of choreographic norms and conventions can be critiqued, as observed by Hewitt. This critique can be made retroactively when a rupture occurs, such as a stumbling in social choreography, which would make us aware of it as a normative, ideological regime. Hewitt associates politics with exception, aligning him with other thinkers like Jacques Rancière, Gilles Deleuze, or Bruno Latour, who perceive politics as a matter of exception or event.

We will test the hypothesis about the exceptional breakdown of choreography with the case of mass dancing, which is excluded from Hewitt's inquiry. Our second test case will focus on its opposite, normative function in a contemporary form of social choreography, which we will refer to as 'proceduralism'.

Delsartism was popular in the US, where a manual like Anna Morgan's An Hour with Delsarte studied the attitudes of the head and other parts of the body, especially the various expressions of the eye, nose, and mouth, advising that they be carefully practiced before a mirror.

Hewitt's study focuses on the cases of mass dancing, which are often subsumed under the same aesthetic figures of totality. In our view, the conflation of Nazi spectacles and communist parades into the same political ideology of totalitarianism is inaccurate and ahistorical. To correct this perspective, we will draw a parallel genealogy of mass dancing in the two cases.

The history of Laban's movement choirs (Bewegungschore) is well-known. Its formative period is during WWI, when Laban, together with many other artists, took refuge in the artistic commune near Ascona on Lago Maggiore in Monte Verita. There, he developed a form of community dance, experimenting with movement and dancers, often dancing nude in nature. The movement choirs, the famous example being the open-air choral play Sun Festival (Sonnenfest, 1917), epitomize the aestheticization of life after a call for a restoration of the lost Festkultur of Ancient Greece. However, when Laban’s disciples adopted the form of the movement choir to promote proletarian culture in the 1920s throughout Germany, Belgium, and the Netherlands, Laban reacted against its politicization, calling on the ideals of the transcendental, universal nature of movement, a kind of mystical premodern union with nature that withdraws from the city. 

These very arguments by which Laban refused the political instrumentalization of Bewegungschare will allow him, paradoxically, to direct mass choreographies in Nazi spectacles but also to be ousted from his collaboration with the Nazis abruptly in 1936. His last major choric work, involving a thousand lay dancers from thirty German cities, was commissioned by Joseph Goebbels for the opening of the Olympic Games. At the beginning of the performance, a quote from Nietzsche's Also Sprach Zarathustra was recited.

If we can learn to have more pleasure, then we will unlearn how to do others harm and to imagine how to strive. It is not where you come from that gives you honour, but where you are going with your will and your feet, which want to rise above you. And we want man and woman one fit for war and the other fit for birth, but both fit for dance in their head and legs! Lost is every day on which we haven't danced. And every truth is false which does not include laughter!

Although it features the image of a man-warrior and a woman-mother who, Zarathustra recommends, are both better off dancing, the text was received as ambiguous. Goebbels wrote in his diary about why he banned it: "Dance rehearsal freely based on Nietzsche, a bad, contrived and affected piece | forbid much of it. It is all so intellectual | do not like that. It goes around dressed in our clothes and has nothing whatever to do with us." Instead of politically invested symbols and a clear object of worship (the Fuhrer), the work promoted a mystical humanity through the dancer's attitude of being turned inward, after which Goebbels banned the usage of the words 'cult' and 'mystical'.

In a word, Laban's consecration play, with its best intentions to celebrate the occasion, was too 'open' to qualify for the political ideology of Nazism in that phase. After 1937, all mass parades using mass dancing were banned, and marching as well as propaganda through radio and TV took their place. Why exactly was Laban's last choric play censored as unsuitable and withdrawn from the program when until then it had served the purposes______ They performed an immanent desubjectivation of the individual toward a transcendent, suprapersonal level. The moment National Socialism became the official state ideology (after 1933), a political consciousness was required where the individuals submit to the transcendent sovereign power of the Führer and march in a Nazi Gemeinschaftstanz. In that moment, Laban's social choreography wasn't politically conscious enough to enact this political order, and thus it collapsed ideologically. Laban's indignation at Goebbels' censorship attests to his unawareness of the political unconscious that his choreographies had hitherto possessed. The genealogy of mass dancing in communist parades has a reverse point of departure than Laban's, a kind of political consciousness. In the period immediately after the October Revolution, the Proletkult movement in Russia organized mass spectacles where lessons of the revolution were rehearsed. In these spectacles, the events from not only the October Revolution but also the French Revolution and the Paris Commune were reenacted at authentic historic sites, mingling amateurs and professional performers respectively, in the roles of the good and the bad actors of the historical stage while tens of thousands of spectators gathered and often interfered to prevent the negative historical characters from acting against the revolution. Alongside this tradition, we can find counterparts to mass dancing in German Freikorperkultur and Festkultur, as well as in the USSR (fizkultura), and in Czechoslovakia (Sokoli, the falcons), whereby the New Soviet Man was celebrated or pan-slavic nationalism was built. Although these dances rivaled the Nazi Gemeinschaftstanz in terms of massiveness, they didn't manifest a martial character or war motives (e.g., the mourning of the dead soldier) as did their German counterparts. On the contrary, they celebrated the unity of youth as the best representative of the nation in an aestheticized life geared to the future. In the second era of communist Yugoslavia, formed under Tito's leadership after WWII, the same mass celebrations were practiced on several occasions (May Day, the Five-Year Plan, etc.), and a peculiar place is occupied by Slet, the youth parade in honor of Tito's birthday, held every twenty-fifth of May. Slet consisted of carrying the relay baton of youth (Stafeta mladosti) from the extreme north-western point to the south-eastern point of the country, where youths from six republics and two provinces exchanged it. On May 25, thousands of youths, pioneers (elementary school pupils), and students of the military army performed mass choreographies in the largest stadium in the capital, Belgrade, (Stadion JNA, or the Stadium of the Yugoslav National Army). The spectacle displayed the roles of workers, youth, children, sportsmen, and soldiers in mass ornaments such as the flag, the five-pointed star, crops as the emblem of peasants. The factory as the emblem of workers, and so on. As a special act in the dramaturgy of the event, the climactic moment was when an elected youth, typically an excellent student, handed over the relay baton to Tito, wishing him a happy birthday. The mission of Slet is best summarized in Tito's oft-quoted speech: "What we want of our younger generation is to be physically and mentally able and strong and versatile—developed—all round. You do know why this is important—we are building socialism. And socialism is not static, but something that needs to be constantly developed. It's up to you, the youth, to carry out that development forward into the future. And we, the older generation, are going to be happy to watch you walk the paths that we started and which we walked."

The social choreography of Slet staged a triangular bond between the people performing and watching the performance, the revolution as the object of the mass movement, and the leader whose honor was a moral and political pledge of revolutionary zeal. The political consciousness of Slet consisted in voluntary subjectivation, where representing the ideals of revolution was a method of building and preserving state ideology. The ideology of the state didn't only involve socialism, but also 'brotherhood and unity' (bratstvo 1 jedinstvo) among the ethnically varying peoples and minorities that constituted Yugoslavia.

In 1987, seven years after his death, Slet was still performed in homage to Tito, whose place was thereafter taken by the political delegates of six republics. The then-president of the Young Communist League of Yugoslavia (in Serbo-Croatian, SKOJ, Savez komunisticke omlodine Jugoslavye), HaSim Redžepi, received the baton instead of Tito.

The second celebration began to hint at a breakdown. The recording of the broadcast event on Radio-Television Belgrade shows signs and warnings of the upcoming collapse of Yugoslavia, but these signs are displayed choreographically with an eclectic mix of folk dances and generic dances to Yugoslav pop and rock music, confusion among dancers about the ornament they are supposed to make, sloppy dance routines, and close-ups on an overall sense of inertia, arbitrariness, and lazy indifference felt among thousands of bodies.

The real symptom of the ideological deregulation is evidenced by a scene which deviates the farthest from the mission of Slet, a kind of 'theater in theater' where, as the commentator explains, two hundred and fifty particular characters from European history (members of all classes, 'from beggars to aristocrats') are represented in their representative fictive dances. Medieval knights and their ladies, noble gentlemen, and butlers, etc., form a fragmented multitude which has nothing to do with the history of the SFRY, its state symbols, or socialism.

The words of the song, sung by the Yugoslav pop star Dorde Balasevic—"This old orchestra that always plays the same tune / never changes / is always the first on the song list"—allude to those discontent with the one-party political system. The scene shows how Slet tries to preserve its choreographic form despite its aesthetic lapses while it is emptied of the ideology that had animated it in the first place. The discrepancy between the choreographic and the ideological is confirmed in the textual messages projected on a screen on the stadium and remarked on by the TV commentators, who wonder, for example, why one dance splits into eight different folk dances. "It seems like we are not as united as we should be. This is a warning about the current political situation, albeit in a playful, dancy message." All this is to remind us that we live in the same backyard, which will become terribly small if we parcel it out with gates or wires. The message on the display says, "Every nationalism is equally dangerous, even ours." The Slet from 1987 not only evinces signs of the collapse of the state ideology of brotherhood and unity that inspired the mass dancing of youth in socialist Yugoslavia, but it also shows how its logic of political consciousness allows it to narrate, in the form of aphoristic allusions, a message of warning about the political disunity in a seemingly ideological unison.

Three conclusions for our method can be drawn from these two cases of social choreography in collapse:

1. Social choreography can't be determined as exclusively performative, as devoid of any register of representation or even mimesis.
2. It rarely operates without a textual support, which often yields a more complex relationship between the political unconscious, or that which manifests itself as an ideological or political contradiction, and the political consciousness, which links ideology with a political program.
3. Besides its function in the rise of the cultural hegemony of the bourgeoisie in Western culture, choreography has been used as an instrument of state ideology in socialism, where it does precisely what Hewitt ascribes to it: it rehearses a social order, but in a representational and politically conscious manner. The contradiction within such a configuration of the aesthetical, ideological, and political arises in the disjunction of the three. To which the above two cases testify.

Returning to the question of social choreography as a critical method, perhaps we can now give a more well-rounded and conclusive answer: Social choreography can account, at best, for how a social order is introduced, rehearsed, perpetuated, or shaken in the aesthetic realm, where movements of and relations between bodies enrich our sense of ideology's operation. In order to examine how one social order collapses and gives way to another and how the transition between them can develop, we need to complement our analysis of the method of social choreography with the model 'social drama.' which is the subject of the next chapter.

PROCEDURALISM: FROM PERFORMANCE TO CHOREOGRAPHY

All cases considered above are historical, which makes them suitable for elaborating social choreography as a method in its own right. The next challenge is to investigate contemporary practices of social choreography, which could possibly help us learn about ideology today. Here is a somewhat bold claim that we will test in this section: is 'proceduralism' the form of social choreography that instills liberal democracy as the ruling ideology today?

Let's begin by reading a peculiar document: Choreography Webster's Timeline History 1710-2007, a book of less than a hundred pages, thin for the century-long time scope it is supposed to cover. The edition is software-generated, and according to the full signature on the book cover, its editorial authorship is attributed to Professor Philip M Parker, PhD, Chaired Professor of Management Science at INSEAD (Singapore and Fontainebleau, France). The book traces all published uses of the word 'choreography' in print or news media. Our interest in browsing through this curious index was to extract those recent uses of the word (since 2000) that would be the remotest from dance and performance. Three fields where 'choreography' serves as a technical term are registered: molecular biology, information technology, and political science.

"This is a massively complex security operation involving, of course, a huge array of countries, all of which are coming with their own security details, but, also, specific countries and NATO have been engaged to provide security. So, yes, there is some diplomacy. There's a lot of security, but, again, it's the Greeks doing the choreography. Greece is in charge. This is absolutely a Greek lead and a Greek security operation."

The currency that 'performance' as a technical term had in the 1990s seems now to be replaced by 'choreography'. Comparing their usages, we can infer that performance denotes competence, ability to execute, and achievement, while choreography designates dynamic patterns of the complicated yet seamless organization of many heterogeneous elements in motion. Choreography stresses the design of procedures that regulate a process—chemical, physical, algorithmic, political, and diplomatic, in the examples above.

This observation resonates with choreographers' and performance-makers' current theoretical, self-reflective obsession with methods, procedures, formats, and scores. Two statements amidst a plethora of interviews, manifestos, and other types of writings in contemporary dance are eloquent here.

The choreographer Eleanor Bauer writes: "What do you do when you get into the studio? There's nothing to do there! The empty room gives us nothing, nothing but space and time. A sterile luxury. Advantages of having methods we are aware of using are that we have things to do when we get into the studio and that the work is stronger than the constant shifting of our interest, confidence, and motivation."

The choreographer Andros Zins-Browne remarks that most good pieces are the writing of a methodology in their production. Given how choreography is defined by the heterogeneous discourses above, should it be rethought from the perspective of an dramaturgy of procedures, as a kind of operative reason? This implies investigating procedurality in various terms that it circulates within democratic proceduralism' as a concept of political legitimacy, 'procedural rhetorics' as the widely acclaimed and controversial videogame theory, and 'procedural knowledge' as that which artists are taught in art education.

The relation between choreography and proceduralism arises from two premises. The first state holds that the expanded practice of choreography entails a shift from the bias of the body and embodiment to procedures, or how processes are structured and operated in time. The second state holds that procedures aren't just instruments of governance, but they define actions and attitudes in general, allowing us to treat them as a logical thinking model or an ideological apparatus. Unpacking the aforementioned registers of procedurality may help us understand what choreography means when it is used outside the strictly artistic and aesthetic realm of dance/performance.

The first register tackles 'democratic proceduralism. According to the extreme position in liberal democracy—the normative definition of democratic legitimacy—democracy is said to be a procedure. Fabienne Peter, who specializes in political and moral philosophy, defines it as follows: "Democratic decisions are legitimate as long as they are the result of an appropriately constrained process of democratic decision-making." The legitimacy of the outcomes of a (political) process depends only on the fairness of the decision-making process, not on the quality of the outcomes it produces. This view is justified by the claim that there is no shared standard for assessing the quality of the outcomes, and deep disagreement about reasons for and against proposals will always remain.

The neoliberal version of the same arguments is, as usual, more compellingly instrumentalist than the liberalist tradition. To paraphrase Stephen Chilton, "intercourse needs to be regulated even through imperfect norms, because the journey must serve a practical need." An infinite journey, which is a collective process of creation or any kind of decision-making, however enjoyable, still does not "get us to our destination." There's much to approve in all this, argues Chilton, because proceduralism ensures decisions. It prevents participants from employing the strategy of infinite delay, and it avoids having "energies consumed by infinitely long discussions of an infinite variety of issues." Outcomes are by their nature open to dispute, but processes need not be.

The second register featuring procedurality, 'procedural rhetoric,' is a videogame theory conceived by Ian Bogost. It is based on the following thesis: Procedurality refers to a way of creating, explaining, or understanding processes. And processes define the way things work, from mechanical systems like engines to organizational systems like high schools to conceptual systems like religious faith. Rhetoric refers to effective and persuasive expression. Procedural rhetoric, then, is a practice of using processes persuasively. Procedural rhetoric has purchase beyond the ontology of games, where a critical debate has been raised.

Deliberative decision-making processes, if appropriately shaped, are uniquely able to reach rationally justified decisions that everyone has reasons to endorse. But we should understand what deliberation means: it is not a matter of settling disputes over the cognitive validity of competing proposals, but rather a matter of developing legal frameworks within which citizens can continue to cooperate despite disagreements about what is right or good.

While Whiteheadian process philosophy invests in a metaphysical notion of process, Bogost’s emphasis on procedures is illuminating when used as a tool of ideological analysis. It asserts procedurality as the logic by which something works, therefore, Bogost's procedural rhetoric is a framework suitable for neoliberalism, in which it belongs. Social choreography, then, implies a knowledge of procedures (and tools to apply them) which comprehends a complex design of elements to be organized, as Webster's index shows. Proceduratism forces us, like neoliberalism, to ask if there is any material production that can't be subsumed under procedures. What happens when procedures are lacking? Can we think social choreography without emphasis on the procedures? Do we need to crack open social choreography in order to do a proper critique of procedurality?

In Living in the End Times, Zizek targets procedurality as an ideology which prevents any revolt against capitalism. He writes that our political consciousness is shackled by questions like the following, questions which form the legal framework of an empty concept of freedom. Does a country have free elections? Are its judges independent? Is its press free from hidden pressures? Does it respect human rights? The Marxist answer would be that the key to actual freedom resides in the ‘apolitical’ network of social relations, from the market to the family. which can be transformed not by any political procedure, but rather by class struggle: We do not vote on who owns what, or about relations in the factory, and so on—such matters remain outside the sphere of the political, and it is illusory to expect that one will effectively change things by ‘extending democracy into the economic sphere. Radical changes in this domain need to be made outside the sphere of legal ‘rights.’ He thereby concludes that the acceptance of democratic mechanisms as providing the only framework for all possible change is the democratic illusion’ which prevents any radical transformation of capitalist relations. Although he comes from quite a different theoretical orientation than Marxism, the sociologist Bruno Latour conducts a similar critique of proceduralism in an interview.

Following Lippmann and Dewey, he posits that the public sphere arises in the exploration of the unintended consequences of actions that would remain private. The private is everything that is formatted. already established, everything that has known consequences of action. It's arbitrated and there's a protocol for every action, there is a habit of thought. An issue becomes public when there is no knowledge of what to do, so the issue is dealt without knowledge, like groping in the dark, fumbling blind.

That's why the phantom public something that appears and might disappear, so long as we don't develop instruments to treat it; but the departure is no instruments, no procedures, new protocols have to be found. This is the ephemeral, exceptional moment of politics. Because political science teaches politicians procedures, how to do everything to avoid politics. Let's forget about politics and get good management, fight against corruption, and for rankings, standardizations, procedures, the masses of European good practices.

It might be difficult, even impossible, to disentangle choreography from procedurality entirely. But it is possible, as we would like to propose here, to distinguish three operations in social choreography by which it can be transformed from a normative practice as a phenomenon into a critical model. The first is the recognition of regulatory procedures by which social choreography is normative. The second is deregulation, where the procedural knowledge of a social choreography is instrumentalized for another goal or process (Slet from 1987 would be a case in point here). The third is intervention, the rupture of procedures, and prescription that involves a direct and urgent application of a principle rather than a procedure.

The last operation implies a thorough rethinking of politics, proposed by Peter Hallward on the basis of Alain Badiou's theory of event. Hallward’s call for a ‘prescriptive practice of politics’ from 2005 sounds prophetic in relation to the rising protests and riots against social injustice held by students, Indignados, the Occupy movement, or the London mob from summer 2011. Against alignment with the way of the world, against withdrawal from engagement with the world, it is time to reformulate a prescriptive practice of politics. Prescription is first and foremost an anticipation of its subsequent power, a commitment to its consequences. In the current protests where the public sphere is rising up, or in the riots of the lawless mob, the ‘rabble, the crowd, we can discern a messy, uncontrolled choreography that breaks the law protecting private property. It doesn't proffer a political ideology in its conscious manifestation, but it does disrupt normative procedures. In "Art and the Public Gaod." special issue, TKH. no. 20 (2012):72-160, Peter Hallward discusses "The Politics of Prescription." In "The South Atlantic Quarterly 104. no. 4 (2005): 770-76," the authors discuss the idea of social choreography and social drama as complementary concepts for analyzing social order and its transformations.

Social drama, a concept from social anthropology, was coined by Victor Turner in the late 1950s. It refers to social phenomena and methods for analyzing social processes through cultural performances, mass gatherings, rituals, carnivals, large-scale cultural events, and other collective symbolic actions in public space.

Social anthropology, together with other approaches, was connected to experimental theater practices and discourses on dramaturgy, acting, and the social and anthropological dimensions of theater. This resulted in performance studies, a field concerned with broadening the traditional discipline of theater and constituting the field of performing arts.

However, the "everything is performance" approach sparked criticism that deemed it an academic discipline lacking a methodology and even in want of an object of study. In the course of this process, social drama analysis (and related concepts) from the 1960s were gradually put aside for being inappropriate for the new climate of the 1980s-90s, a time colored by cultural studies, when everything was subsumed under culture, conflating art, politics, culture, work, and private life.

In this framework, performance studies joined investigations on cultural identities, offering explanations for how they are performed. Turner himself tried to prove that social drama analysis belongs to 'the postmodern turn' by emphasizing its focuses on performance in the linguistic competence/performance dichotomy, on process in the structuralist structure/process dichotomy, and on action in the anthropologist norm/behavior and ideology/practice dichotomies. *Nevertheless, social drama analysis, epistemically speaking, doesn't belong to the horizon of cultural studies, where the basic distinction between social and cultural/artistic performance on which it is grounded ceases to exist. Or, it does only if one begins to observe social dramas as cultural phenomena or phenomena in culture, thereby dissolving its socio-political dimension, which is the very way the social drama has commonly been used in performance studies recently. Added to the social drama's confrontation with the trend of cultural studies, a new challenge was made in the late 1990s and 2000s by theater studies: the concept of postdramatic theater, supposedly a new paradigm of international theater practice. At bottom, the postdramatic, as proposed by Hans-Thies Lehmann and developed by many other theater scholars, decentralizes and hence dissolves drama as a dialectic, symbolic structure based on conflict and accordingly fragments performance, which ceases to revolve around the dramatic text, but whose various elements become texts (in a post-structuralist sense) in their own right. A seemingly consequential question arises here: does it still make sense to analyze public social life through the lens of social drama when, already in theater, the dramatic has been replaced with the postdramatic? The question obviously already implies a negative answer. However, there is something intriguing to us in this epistemic history, especially since the currently prevalent conceptual platform in performance studies seems inadequate, as it abounds in metaphorical speech and is incapable of producing a discourse on performance.

Social Drama that could link with current social and political debates on the public sphere, democracy, and citizenship, which are our concern. So in our search for methodological tools, we decided to look again at the social drama, not with a desire to follow Turner and merely apply his theory, but with the aim of examining it in our own analyses while rethinking and developing it.

From the perspective of social drama analysis, society, especially modern Western industrial and class society, is predicated on agons—divisions, conflicts, antagonisms— and individuals play social roles within its structure, roles fixed to their social status. As conflicts tend to be resolved in favor of the one or the other side, societal dynamism complements society's synchronic structure, its static entity, and can be seen in a dialectic between the procedures, on the one hand, of social normativization and mending conflicts and, on the other hand, social dramas that emerge when agons escalate.

The main source of such a vision of society lies in Victor Turner's notion of social drama, including the concepts of liminality and communitas.163 Conceptual roots of the social drama lie in Arnold van Gennep’s writing on rites of passage, where he started off with fieldwork and case studies and ended with a formal analysis of ritual.164 In parallel and in close relation to Turner's work, Clifford Geertz developed the concept of ‘deep play,’ where his case study, based on formal analysis of the Balinese cockfight, took one step further toward the development of a methodological tool for understanding the role of cultural performances in the symbolization of the social165. Later on, liminality is contested by Jon Mckenzie, who brought it closer to liminoidity and thus to a normative function of cultural performance in neoliberal capitalist society.166 On the other side, arguments similar to those that Turner made in his elaboration of communitas can be traced in Jean-Luc Nancy's ‘inoperative community’167 and Maurice Blanchot’s ‘unavowable community.168' As well as in Giorgio Agamben’s ‘coming community169, while Roberto Esposito used the same term, communitas.

Liminality and Communitas

They both relate to the social structure, but they do so in an ambivalent way—as a rupture that comes from its interstices, edges, margins. Turner's point of departure is the classical Marxist base/superstructure division of social structure. Thus he generally locates social drama with its public rituals’ in the superstructure. However, for him the superstructure is not a standardized unit act (like ceremony), but the performance of a complex sequence of symbolic acts, or even more specifically, a 'transformative performance revealing major classifications, categories, and contradictions of cultural processes.'

Liminality and communitas do not simply belong to the regular social superstructure, but instead appear at the (seemingly) irrelevant and inferior edges of social structure as a proto-, meta-, or even an anti-structure rather than as a superstructure, which is where their transformative potential lies.

The term liminality is derived from the Latin limen, which means 'threshold.' Van Gennep was the first to use the term in the sense we use it today, analyzing rites of passage, like rituals of initiation, and their role in constructing social subjectivity. Turner elaborated the term more and in a broader social perspective, making it a methodological concept. For him, the liminal is 'the moment in and out of time, a state in which a society is restructured, reclassified, and where social positions, roles, and statuses are redistributed.' In terms of a wider social dramaturgy, the liminal is the moment of discontinuity of historical time in which social drama takes place, causing standstill and the collapse of the existing social order.

Rituals and other performances belonging to the liminal moment are those practices where social structure is breached, reflected, and restructured by means of collective actions in public that presuppose both bodily movement and affective-experiential aspects and their symbolization.

In modern societies after the Industrial Revolution, liminal practices are more often liminoid, being the results of professional cultural-artistic work and the professionalization of human play'’’—which gains its momentum today, alongside the capitalization of both play and leisure time, in neoliberal capitalist society's favoring of immaterial labor and the post-Fordist organization of production. Already in his time, Turner, coming from his Marxist-Catholic perspective, called it ‘Protestant ethics,’ where one’s whole life is subsumed under work and thus lacking the time and space for reflection and, accordingly, change. The liminoid practices resemble the liminal ones but may be both liminal and, more often, pseudo-liminal. They promise a transformation but in fact only homeopathically treat the endangered social equilibrium.

The question, which was the basic dilemma of Jon Mckenzie’s book Perform or Else, is how to define the cultural-artistic performance today, even when it comes to, for instance, a radically critical theatrical performance or, more broadly still, big rave concerts and parties from the 1990s—as a normative and hence servile or as a potentially transformative practice.

The reason for the weak transformative potential and usual pseudo-liminality of liminoid cultural performances would amount precisely to their pertaining in and to the system of production, where they, firstly, become ‘socially relevant’ and, secondly, where a certain (dominant) ideology operates but is never shown and observed in its operations.

Communitas (the Latin term for community) is a more comprehensive notion and deserves a more extensive elaboration. As a concept advanced by Turner, it is not the social community as such, but an unstructured rudimentary community that emerges in the liminal period, a potential community, a community that is becoming.

Although his approaches and frame of reference are different, Roberto Esposito established a similar point of departure when he discusses the origins of community, re-employing the term communitas. However, while in Turner's social anthropology communitas has a positive connotation of togetherness—the common, and equality among people when social order, property, and social roles are suspended—in Esposito, who conducted a philosophical and etymological analysis of the term starting with the term munus (gift and duty) and who brought the discussion to the terrain of ontology, what lies at the core of community is more the lack, void, duty, and obligation rather than the common (shared property or thing’) that is shared.

According to Turner, the basic types of communitas or sometimes also considered as the phases of a communitas are:

1. The spontaneous or existential communitas, which breaches the norm-governed social structure and directly confronts it. It is immediate and usually short-lasting. Its main quality and social power is the experience of participation.
2. The ideological communitas, which comprises theory and history, conceptualizing previous communities. It may offer a utopian model of society (commonly based on the experience of communitas).
3. The normative communitas, which is organized into a perduring social system and can thus be very slow and long-lasting. It may be imposed or ordered.

Among these, the spontaneous communitas clearly resides in the domain of anti-structure, while the ideological and normative communitates already belong to a certain extent to the social structure, but nevertheless also rely on the attributes of the structurally inferior. We will return to this issue later when discussing the ideological practice of communitas.

As a rudimentary proto-community, communitas is always seen as a danger brought into the society through the ‘powers of the weak,’ of the precarious, of the inferior who don't fit well in the social structure. The foremost reason lies in both Turner's and Esposito's views in the fact that communitas fundamentally remains in opposition to the (supposed) immuritas of the structured social community.

Within the current uprisings under the names Indignados or Occupy, we can recognize the figure of Turner's ‘powers of the weak, nowadays associated more with the expression of an affect—indignation or outrage—than with an ideological view and a corresponding political program. In the post-9/11 era of the Bush regime and wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the trend was to analyze the politics of ‘fear’ in order to explain the mechanism of pre-emptive action which claimed the imminent threat of terrorist attack and thus reversed the virtual effect into an actual cause of security operations.

The issue of immunization thereby places communitas in medias res of the ongoing dramas of neoliberal society as they arise from growing precarity associated with terrorism, insecurity, the economic crisis, and austerity measures. The notion of immunity, apprehended as a protection from disease, from common law, or from risks that threaten the community, has a long tradition and has reappeared in recent theoretical, political, and biopolitical understandings of the social community. At bottom, immunity is predicated on the thesis that the human being is, from birth, dependent on the social, where social bonds have two different yet reconcilable faces. Fear associated with a ‘nonimmunity, that is, the vulnerability of the human being exposed to others who all share the capacity to cause her death, and vice versa; and the processes and instruments of immunization that protect human beings from one another.

What is characteristic for our times in this regard is probably explained best by Isabel Lorey, who further develops Judith Butler's theses from Precarious Life and Frames of War. where Butler contests the current ontology of individualism on the grounds that it overlooks the ontological precariousness of human life and the human body, namely, that they are unable to function autonomously and independently. Lorey recognizes that in the course of history these instruments of immunization were never used equally, that they were instead used predominantly to protect certain individuals from the risks to which the rest of society is exposed. This consequently leads to competitiveness and the projection of precariousness into unprotected social margins.

Lorey therefore distinguishes three registers of precarity:

1. The first is, as in Butler, the ontological precariousness of human life.
2. The second involves precarization in the form of political or legal processes of immunizing and protecting some lives. In neoliberal capitalism today, precarization becomes an instrument of governance, instigating an overall sense of insecurity within which it can normalize differences and pacify frictions.
3. The third register are the precarious, who appear as an effect of precarization and could become a social agency if they concentrated on what they have in common and how to change the current modes of governing. According to Lorey, the attempts of the precarious to establish the commons and change governance could be found exactly in current communitates: the Democracia Real YA! movement in Spain or the movement of the Outraged in Athens.

Why in communitas? Let us return to the basic references. If communitas as an anti- and proto-community that springs from the breach of norm-governed social community between or among individuals is 'what all of us believe we share, for Turner it is a positive category, a sharing of the common as an experience of solidarity and equality where the very exigency of immunity is abolished. Communitas stops the process of immunization in the moment when it also puts a stop to a role-play that characterizes regular social life in its ties to social status. She develops her theses on immunity and precarity in numerous tectures and writings. 

This addresses only communitas, while modern society tends to integrate immunitas, so much so that Esposito, relying mostly on Bataille, sees the community based on Hobbezian premises (including fear) as an immunitas where everyone is protected from everyone else. By stressing the antinomy of communitas/immunitas, he in fact criticizes the community predicated on the idea of immunity instead of on the idea of obligation and care for one another. See especially Roberto Esposito, "Fear" in Communitas, 20-41.

Chapter § Social Drama is, according to Turner, closely connected to property. Communitas appears as a liminal passage of the collective, of the 'in-common,' of a rupture of collectivism in its unstructured and uncompleted state. Collectivism functions as the cohesion of the precarious, of the weak and equal. The undecidability of these 'betwixt and in-between' collective moments appears threatening to the existing social order—a point that can be observed in Occupy protests as well as in the recent conflicts and uprisings in Arab countries.

Reverberating with Turner's vocabulary, in her interpretation of the Occupy movement, Judith Butler explains: "Demonstrations are one of the few ways that police power is overcome, especially when they become too large and too mobile to be contained by police power, and when they have the resources to regenerate themselves. Perhaps these are anarchist moments or anarchist passages, when the legitimacy of a regime is called into question, but when no new regime has yet come to take its place. This time of the interval is the time of the popular will, not a single will, not a unitary will, but one that is characterized by an alliance with the performative power to lay claim to the public in a way that is not yet codified into law, and that can never be fully codified into law."

The collectivity that emerges in Occupy is incomplete, never fully codified, as it dwells in mass dissatisfaction and disagreement without projecting a new social order. But being incomplete and outraged is what makes it an elusive, spectral enemy in the eyes of the existing social order, an enemy not easily represented and identified and hence struggled against; it is what therefore opens an enormous space for misrepresentations and hysterical reactions on the part of an endangered society.

The relations between the collective and the individual should be examined further within the internal organization of communitas, wherein we will try to find an answer to the question of who the subject of communitas is, the subject that it brings into the public sphere. Communitas is a social composition where individual distinctions are not completely erased in totalitarian collectivist unison but are subsumed under a collective action or experience of 'being together.'

Extreme individualism only understands a part of man; extreme collectivism only understands man as a part. Communitas is the implicit law of wholeness arising out of relations between totalities. But communitas is intrinsically dynamic, never quite being realized. It is not being realized precisely because individuals and collectivities try to impose their cognitive schemata on one another.

Only as a moment between the realization of one or the other opposite. This is the point where we would like to augment Turner's model by claiming that while binarism is the very thing through which individualism and collectivism are defined as ideological categories of capitalist and socialist social communities, the subject that emerges from many communitates that have appeared in recent decades—in ‘a situation that joins in a unique epochal knot the failure of all communisms with the misery of new individualism’—abandons both sides rather than simply being located between them. Here communitas brings into view a subject that can be conceptualized by what Nancy calls ‘the singular plural’ or what Gerald Raunig terms the ‘condividual.’

Raunig's neologism is pretty close to Nancy's singular plural, according to which a singularity is always a singular of a plural, belonging to it via an ‘and,’ and specific in its singularity. The notion of condividual is based on Raunig's analysis of the Italian word condivisione, which at the same time indicates association and sharing (con-) as well as the differentiation and separation of singularities (divistone). This means that my proposed neologism, condivision, becomes a term for a concatenation of singularities, which not only names their exchange, their mutual reference, their association with one another, but also impels it. In condivision, the dividual component, the division, does not indicate a tribute, a reduction, a sacrifice, but rather the possibility of an addition. an AND.

Singularities and their concatenations become incondivision. It is not necessary for a community to emerge first in order to achieve the recomposition of previously separated individuals, but instead the concatenation and the singularities are co-emergent as the condividuality of condividuals. Although neither Nancy nor Raunig locate their conceptions of subject in concrete social circumstances or formations, but rather indicate that they are co-emergent, we would say that if the singular plural or the condividual exists somewhere in social reality, it is the communitas.

Going further in his analysis, Turner precisely distinguishes the being-together which characterizes communitas from teamwork, which associates individuals in the execution of a task more efficiently than individually: “Here it is not teamwork in flow that is quintessential, but ‘being’ together, with ‘being’ the operative word, not ‘doing'.’ This thesis is close to Nancy and his ideas about the (inoperative) community. For Nancy, the community (communitas in the sense we are elaborating here) is an always already lost root and essence of the society that fails to understand the singularity of a human being and its ‘being-in-common’ and thus oscillates between individuality and particularity. There is no entity or hypostasis of community because this sharing, this passage cannot be completed. Incompletion is its ‘principle. "Incompletion" in an active sense, as designating not insufficiency or lack, but the activity of sharing, the dynamic. (190)

As we already mentioned, within the frame of social drama, liminality and communitas do not fit smoothly into the societal superstructure. They are anti-, meta-, or proto-structures that are relatively free from and thus potentially threatening to the social structure. Yet when Turner speaks about liminal collective actions in the public and their performative dimension, he does so without invoking pure or transcendental freedom with its romantic attributes of emotionality, irrationality, regression to infancy, and so on. Instead, he talks about breaching, subverting, and restructuring the social order, which includes, but cannot be reduced to, a cognitive and linguistic register and hence also ludism, playfulness, the experience of participation, and a discursively unstructured corporeality as constitutive elements of new models of human interaction and relation.

Regardless of whether they resulted in new social orders or in reintegration into already existing ones, when we bring to mind various liminal collective actions and movements in recent history—from ‘68 and protests and demonstrations in late socialism to the protests in Seattle and Genoa, and now the Occupy and Indignados movements—we perceive the following in the moment of an ideological breach brought on by social drama, the thing at stake is, on the one hand, a conjunction of bodily action in a specific spatiotemporal constellation, ie in a liminal moment in public space which processualizes that space, and on the other, that conjunction’s symbolization. As Turner would say, it's about the point of contact between the Weltanschauung and praxis. However, the symbolization that brings new ideology is not necessarily articulated discursively in the moment of action. Generating new symbols and new language can also appear after a spontaneous communitas enters the public stage as a so-called ideological communitas, while in many cases, as Turner insists, it appears only as that which a certain communitas embodies by the very experience of being performed, by its duration and dynamics, by its organization of actions, by new voices and images, by the mise-en-scène of its use or production of public space, and so on. In Turner's view, ‘It is in the social drama that Weltanschauungen become visible, if only fragmentarily, as factors giving meaning to deeds that may seem at first sight meaningless. "6 Judith Butler stresses exactly that aspect of the Occupy gathering—it doesn't necessarily possess and promote clear ideologies or politics for the future which would define ways of being together and commonly producing and sharing public space; it claims these ways by means of participative bodies. The persistence of the body calls that legitimacy into question, and does so precisely through a performativity of the body that crosses language without ever quite reducing to language. In other words, it is not that bodily action and gesture have to be translated into language, but that both action and gesture signify and speak, as action and claim, and that the one is not finally extricable from the other. To sum it up, liminal performances of communitas that take place within social dramas always embody an ideology that is sometimes elaborated discursively in the type or phase of communitas identified as ideological communitates, which are focused on reflection.


Ideology and Mass Performances

To clarify, we must add that the performance of communitas must also be a performance of Weltanschauung. The concept of ideological corporeality can help us resolve the political and theoretical dilemma of the existence of the spontaneous communitas, a dilemma which has recurrently accompanied mass movements of resistance in recent history. Here, we need to clarify or rework Turner's differentiation of three types or phases of communitas and also say that there can be no clear differentiation between spontaneous and ideological communitas, where the former is to be understood as non-ideological.

By claiming the above and stating that the performance of communitas is a performance of Weltanschauung, we're not claiming that every performance is political and ideological, but we want to remind the reader that a communitas, which is a corporeal aspect of social drama, appears precisely in the escalation of a social agon that presupposes at least two sides, two elements, two entities in conflict with one another about how social order should function. Since it is not a psychological category pertaining to an individual human qua her internal dynamics, but clearly a social (hence relational) category, the social drama brings forth a communitas that antagonizes, resists, and breaches the established social order and publicly performs a different set of ideas about living, being, and doing together.

Yet we needn't hastily abandon Turner's differentiation, since it may help us in an appreciation of both corporeal (and, possibly, discursively unarticulated) and linguistic (discursively or even programmatically articulated) aspects of ideology. This would conserve the possibility of a communitas that emerges without an ideological program up its sleeve and whose primary fuel is indignation at, resistance to, and breach of the already existing program. Thus, we can name it spontaneous.

Moreover, most of the communitates in history emerged in this very way. These superimpositions and intertwinings of ideological corporeality, these generations of new language, this point of intersection between Weltanschauung and praxis—all this characterizes the communitas and sets social drama apart from social choreography in terms of its ideological operation.

SOCIAL DRAMA IN NEOLIBERAL SOCIETY: THE DRAMATIC VS. THE POSTDRAMATIC

The last issue we want to address regarding social drama analysis starts with the following question: is social drama still useful in analyzing processes in our current society as well as the constitution of community through mass public performances? Or, in other words, what is implied if we abandon the concept of social drama and in return shift to a framework of ‘social postdrama’? Anthropology of Performance. 19

Indeed, in his differentiation, Turner himself describes the ideological communitas in terms of "explicitly formulated views on how men may best live together in comradely harmony." Turner, "Ideological and Spontaneous Communitas." 

After all we have said about social drama, we would like to begin reflecting on that issue with a brief juxtaposition: the dramatic is predicated on such categories as agon, antagonism, protagonists, and antagonists, while the postdramatic indicates fragmentation and dispersion of the conflict as well as pluralism of positions, anticipating complementarity and, in the last instance, anon-conflictual or consensual societal organization. Politically speaking, the postdramatic, as it is formulated in theater studies, is to a degree close to the recent agonist political theories. More specifically, we could associate it with the "agonistic democracy" proposed by Chantal Mouffe, who conceives of the political as the "space of power, conflict, and antagonism" but advocates a sublimation of the political whereby the antagonism has to be transformed into an agonism, focusing on the positive aspects of the conflicts and their affective motives while promoting liberalism and pluralism. For Mouffe—who takes the notion of (value) pluralism from Max Weber (as well as from Foucault) and the notion of antagonism from Carl Schmitt (and not Marx)—the pluralism both underlies antagonism and is a way to manage conflicts without aiming to eliminate the others (antagonists as [class] enemies), but rather to understand them as our adversaries. Although Mouffe's theory is far more complex, we shall take a step back here and ponder a basic question it provokes: how can we understand the agonism in our deeply antagonistic capitalist society?

It may be that agonistic pluralism as well as pluralism in recent socio-political discourse addresses and can explain only one moment of a conflictual society, the moment of equal coexistence and public co-presence of the entities in conflict, when the tension between those entities is manageable and can be discussed or even celebrated as proof of a liberal and pluralistic democratic public sphere. However, in terms of the public performance of citizenship, this viewpoint presupposes an absolute parrhesia in a "radically democratic" society. On the one hand, the current neoliberal democratic society can be hardly described in these terms, and on the other, we doubted this very vision in the first part of the book by introducing Foucault's skeptical claim that real parrhesia in fact cannot exist where real democracy exists.

Furthermore, in terms of the macroideological and macropolitical performance, the moment to which agonistic pluralism refers is actually the moment before one or another social force wins and instills the social order that it advocated in the conflict. All this turns agonistic pluralism as a theoretical-political proposal, as well as pluralism as neoliberal socio-political discourse, into a rather ahistorical perspective on conflictual society. Otherwise, if we are to challenge it historically, we would dare say that it is a politically conservative perspective that advocates and maintains the social status quo. Agonistic pluralism functions in this way since it neglects the point that pluralism is itself limited through that which can be done within existing political institutions, which are constitutive of the existing order. and due to which antagonistic protests, violence, and revolutions occur in a conflictual society. Therefore, agonistic pluralism, as an ideological formation, prevents the real existing social conflicts from escalating into social drama by dissolving them into a postdramatic pluralism of an endless present. 

Starting with this critical assumption and transporting it into the terrain of current social conditions, we would argue that the contestation or rejection of the social drama as an explanatory model suggests that contemporary neoliberal capitalist society has already achieved consensus regarding its foundational structure, or in other words, has already been plural. Its conflicts are multifold and dispersed, and its current social divisions and partitions are never fundamental and therefore manageable. As it is indeed the main discourse of neoliberal capitalism, the postdramatic is apparently more appropriate today than the dramatic simply because it uses the same vocabulary and the same performative mode, thus going hand in hand with the hegemonic social discourse.

Our critical stance asserts that we need social drama analysis today precisely on account of this adequacy of the postdramatic. Whereas social drama analysis insists on the conflictual yet opaque basis of society, on a need for rendering the conflicts visible, manifest, transparent, for showing the crucial principles of the social structure in their operation, while also insisting on the possibility of change, the discourse of postdramatic theater and further social postdramatic models provides us instead with tools for leveling and blurring the conflicts in the plurality of the complementary.

Extending the aforementioned ahistoricity, or conservativism, of agonistic pluralism, our claim is predicated on the following thesis: Although neoliberal capitalist society performs, more or less consistently, pluralism in public, it does so only when its basic structural premises of (neoliberalism, democracy, and capitalism go unquestioned. And vice versa, as soon as its premises are contested or rejected, it is incapable of maintaining such a performance in the public sphere. This indicates that neoliberal pluralism in its totality is possible only by virtue of the acceptance—or, in other words, prior instillment—of the basis of social order and its values, ideas, images, and discourses. This social conditioning makes pluralism truly postdramatic, but in an unexpected way it came after a social drama.

On the other hand, it simultaneously makes pluralism an ideological category, which is inherent to a particular social order that sees itself as the horizon of the possible rather than as a category that can (plurally) discuss the social order itself. In a word, pluralism as an ideological and political conception and practice encourages every discussion, except for the discussion of pluralism. The same is true for the postdramatic, whose power to interpret current society is weak because its reproduction of the dominant social discourse offers a symptomatology—a 'diagnosis of time' (Zeitdiagnose)—instead of an explanatory model of the society.

Continuing in this direction, we would claim that social drama analysis could also help us shift from Cultural Studies' keen interest in identitarian micropolitics, wherein conflicts are dispersed and managed without posing a threat, as defined by a wider socio-political perspective, to the social order. This is the perspective from which we can reopen crucial macropolitical issues of the very social order, asking if there is any public concern or good, any common world______ This is also the point where the discipline of performance studies can repoliticize its methodology and open anew chapter in the analysis of the performativity of social life by placing a stronger focus on how social order relates to its ideological formations performed in public, a direction which it has rather neglected in the turbulence of the last twenty years. 202 | Neither Hans-Thies Lehmann in theater studies nor Chantal Mouffe in political theory make at least intentionally. this claim. Mouffe's standpoint rests on new-left social democracy while Lehmann’s is indifferent to explicit political positioning. The discursive platforms nevertheless share a similar ideological hegemony that is informed by, or, if nothing else, akin to neoliberal capitalist social order.

We would now like to turn our attention to a highly controversial case in the context of Yugoslavia—a mass gathering and a social and cultural performance that happened on June 28, 1989, at Gazimestan in Kosovo. The event was the focal point for a year-long celebration of the six hundredth anniversary of the historical Battle of Kosovo and consisted of a mass gathering of approximately 15 million people as well as a cultural-artistic program including the performance of the musical drama The Passion of the Saint Prince Lazar and the delivery of a speech by Slobodan Milošević. 2? It is important to say that the event at Gazimestan took place amidst the biggest social drama in Yugoslavia after World War I, on a wider scale, the moment of revolution in European real-socialist states, the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the collapse of the ideology of communism, and in the local context, the era of late socialism marked by the economic crisis, demands for democratization, and the change in communist leadership, as well as worsened relations between Yugoslav republics, exacerbated by mounting nationalism.

In the huge Battle of Kosovo between the Serbian and Ottoman armies and the ensuing massacre, the majority of fighters on both sides were wiped out. Both the Serbian Prince Lazar and Sultan Murad | were killed, after which one of three Serbian commanders (Vuk Brankovic) left the field in order to save his people, and the armies finally retreated. According to some historians, the battle ended without a clear victor, according to others, victory is attributed to the Ottoman Empire, while according to some minoritarian histories and the report of Vlatko Vukovic Kosaéa, also a Serbian commander, it was a Serbian victory. Regardless of the outcome of the battle, the loss on the Serbian side was irrecuperable, since in the following years most Serbian principalities became Turkish vassals, which marked Serbia's final defeat as well as the beginning of Turkish expansion into Europe.

Since the battle was poorly documented at the time, its history has remained a mixture of ambiguous stories, legends, myths, and poems. As a social macronarrative, it was first revived in the nineteenth century, when Serbia was still under Ottoman rule, as part of its national awakening and independence movement, and again in 1989 in the midst of the conflicts between Albanians and Serbs in Kosovo, the same year that Slobodan Milošević became president of the Socialist Republic of Serbia and the Serbian parliament approved the constitutional amendments (29, 31, 33, 43, 47) reducing the autonomy of Kosovo (then an autonomous province of Serbia). The most controversial part of the event is Milošević's speech. On the one hand, it was severely criticized by the international news media, by Yugoslav politicians from other republics, and Serbian communists and anti-nationalists for being univocally nationalistic, for inciting the war, and heralding the dissolution of the SFRY (Actually, only nationalists have considered it non-nationalistic). On the other hand, a close reading and discursive analysis that we carried out indicates that the speech is not that unambiguous, as it mostly employed socialist rhetoric with much smaller parts that can be indentified as nationalistic. The following segments stand out as nationalistic:

Through the play of history and life, it seems as if Serbia has, precisely in this year, in 1969, regained its state and its dignity and thus has celebrated an event of the distant past which has a great historical and symbolic significance for its future. [.] Disunity among Serb officials made Serbia lag behind and their inferiority humiliated Serbia. Therefore, no place in Serbia is better suited for saying this than the field of Kosovo and no place in Serbia is better suited than the field of Kosovo for saying that unity in Serbia will bring prosperity to the Serbian people in Serbia and each one of its citizens, irrespective of his national or religious affiliation.

I am convinced that this awareness of harmony and unity will make it possible for Serbia not only to function as a state but to function as a successful state. Therefore! think that it makes sense to say this here in Kosovo, where that disunity once upon a time tragically pushed back Serbia for centuries and endangered it. and where renewed unity may advance it and may return dignity to it. [..]

Six centuries later, now, we are being again engaged in battles and are facing battles. They are not armed battles, although such things cannot be excluded yet. However, regardless of what kind of battles they are, they cannot be won without resolve, bravery, and sacrifice, without the noble qualities that were present here in the field of Kosovo in the days past.

Besides the paragraphs quoted above, in the rest of the sixteen-minute-long speech, Milošević uses rather typical socialist phrases, late socialist bureaucratic rhetoric, the language of multiculturalism, pro-European vocabulary, and metaphoric, poetic speech. Indicatively, however, the only national or ethnic denominator used in the speech is Serbs, while Albanians (as well as Croats, Slovenes, Montenegrins, and Macedonians, all of whom were recognized in the time of Yugoslavia as constitutional nations) are always referred to as ‘the others.’

As far as its discursive structure is concerned, we identify three parts in the speech. The central one,2°> typically socialist and containing no deviations or ambiguous references, speaks about the crisis in Yugoslavia, the advantages of socialism, and the need to preserve Yugoslavia as a socialist and multicultural society. The paradigmatic paragraph from this part reads as follows:

204 | English translation of “Slobodan Milošević's 1989 St Vitus Day Speech” compiled by the National Technical Informatton Service of the Department of Commerce of the U.S. When he speaks about regaining the state and dignity of Serbia, Milošević refers to the constitutional amendments approved in March 1986. When he refers to the disunity of Serbian leaders, he means the disunity (and Vuk Brankovic's betrayal) that supposedly occurred in 1389, at the same time alluding to then-current disunities, since he was in conflict with some other Serbian communist leaders. The last quotation is a part of the paragraph that continues with: “Our chief battle now concerns implementing the economic, political, cultural, and general social prosperity, finding a quicker and more successful approach to a civilization in which people will live in the twenty-first century. For this battle, we certainly need heroism, of course, of a somewhat different kind. But that courage, without which nothing serious and great can be achieved, remains unchanged and remains urgently necessary.”

In particular, being a progressive and just democratic society, should not allow people to be divided in the national and religious respect. The only differences one can and should allow in socialism are between hardworking people and idlers and between honest people and dishonest people. Therefore, all people in Serbia who live from their own work, honestly, respecting other people and other nations, are in their own republic.

Apart from employing socialist discourse in the speech’s central part, Milošević opens the speech by greeting the mass with the typically communist call “Comrades!” and ends with, "Let the memory of Kosovo heroism live forever! Long live Serbia! Long live Yugoslavia! Long live peace and brotherhood among peoples!" The last line is a paraphrase of the motto of the SFRY, “brotherhood and unity.” In difference to the central part, the first part of the speech contains a lot of national references and amounts mostly to a fictionalized history of the Serbian people marked by disunity among their leaders, which started already at the Battle of Kosovo and had just come to an end, finally giving Serbs cause for optimism about their future.

The third part is the most ambiguous, it comprises both the call to nationalism and a pro-European vocabulary. Here Milošević identifies three conditions for a prosperous future for Serbia: patriotism (national pride, dignity, unity, not excluding even ‘armed battles’); the acceptance of ‘European values’ (“Six centuries ago, Serbia heroically defended itself in the field of Kosovo, but it also defended Europe. Serbia was at that time the bastion that defended the European culture, religion, and European society in general.”), and a universal, progressivist implementation of the economic, political, cultural, and general social prosperity. All this makes the speech hybrid and controversial rather than univocally nationalistic. However, in the social reality of Yugoslavia, it acquired the illocutionary power to call Serbian citizens to nationalism. But for a more profound understanding of how and why this happened, we need to move from the discursive analysis of the speech to a performance analysis of the entire event. Gazimestan can be observed as a paradigmatic liminal performance occurring within social drama and bringing, in a controversial way, a new communitas into the Yugoslav public sphere. Approximately 15 million people, who gathered to celebrate the anniversary and the famous Milošević's speech, marked the public inception of a long-term normative communitas in Serbia, one based on national (Serbian) and religious (Orthodox) values. In the following years, it instituted itself more and more, gradually occupying the public sphere and entirely changing both the social context of socialist Yugoslavia, where nationalism was a taboo, and, to a certain extent, religion.

Focusing on material aspects of the event, we need to explain that Kosovo at that time was a multiethnic province of Serbia, where Albanians were in the majority, while Serbs were a minority reduced to less than 200,000 citizens. The organizers of the Gazimestan event, without advertising or referring to it as an ideological or political gesture, brought 15 million people, almost exclusively Serbs from Serbia, other republics, and from the Serbian diaspora worldwide, to physically participate on Kosovan territory in the event.

The number and physical presence of the Serbian bodies in Kosovo truly ‘speaks for itself' in terms which identify an ideological and political corporeality as akin to that which Judith Butler identifies as the production of bodies in public space.

In the course of the event, the new public space in Yugoslavia was thus formed primarily between or among the bodies co-present in alliance at Gazimestan in Kosovo. The event took place in a symbolically heavily laden spot: Gazimestan is a hill near Pristina with a commemorative monument dedicated to the Battle of Kosovo. ‘Gazimestan' means the place of the (war) hero and is composed of the Turkish word gazi (hero) and Serbian mesto (place). At the monument, the infamous Kosovo Curse uttered by Prince Lazar is inscribed, which curses all Serbs who failed to come to Kosovo to fight for Serbia.

Apart from this direct symbolism, it is worth mentioning that since the battle is not seen as a battle only between Serbs and Turks but also between Christians and Muslims, the story could have been smoothly extrapolated and reused in the then ongoing conflicts between Serbs (Christians) and Albanians (Muslims) in Kosovo.

Keeping this contextual framework in mind, it is now easier to understand how Milošević's speech, which itself is not extremely nationalistic, functioned as a nationalist hailing. The crucial matter is an indeed liminal moment in which the event took place: the speech was delivered in the time when socialist ideology was exhausted, being too familiar, heard too many times, too bureaucratic, and finally reduced to empty signifiers.

In such a moment, the major part of the speech employing socialist ideas, vocabulary, and rhetorics was heard much less than the then-new patriotic and nationalist discourse. In fact, it served as a neutral and common background for the emergence of new ideas rather than as their counterpoint. Therefore it comes as no surprise that the gathered mass in that liminal moment reacted to the speech exactly as they did, responding only to the nationalistic parts and to patriotic references, thus giving an additional illocutionary power to Milošević's speech and making the whole event a ritual of collective national initiation. The reactions were, in fact, an ideological continuation and consolidation of the performance of the crowd itself, which, though confusingly mixing both SFRY and Serbian symbols, banners, and posters, was most of the time singing Serbian patriotic and nationalistic songs, like "Who Says, Who Lies [that] Serbia is Small?" - which could not be forbidden or relegated to the level of 'private matter' any more because they were now being sung publicly by 15 million voices.

The same mechanism can be observed in the stage design where the official program took place, which bore three flags and a symbol between them. All three flags belonged to socialist iconography: the flag of the SFRY, the flag of the Socialist Republic of Serbia, and the flag of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia. Between these flags was the golden logo of the event, '600° with '1389-1989' filling the last zero, which, as a whole, somewhat resembles the Orthodox cross with the symbol of a fourfold °S in the Cyrillic letter (‘C’), designating the slogan 'Only unity (concord) saves the Serbs." This logo was the most remarkable element of the display, again since the flags were perceived as the conventional iconography of an official public event.

And this is how the materiality of the context and of the event enacted a "performative turn" of its linguistic, locutory register, which should not be neglected when observing and analyzing its social functioning. And only at this point can we fully understand what Milošević's speech did with words. It interpellated the citizens of Serbia as Serbs. The ideological transformation of workers as citizens of a socialist republic into a nationally identified people is crucial here and turns the event into a genuine socio-political ritual.

Moreover, this ideological performative had its real political consequences, since in the near future it will hail ethnic Serb citizens of other Yugoslav republics (especially Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina) and unite them under the idea of a Serbian people, without which the civil wars in former Yugoslavia wouldn't have been possible.

In the recent history of Yugoslavia and Serbia, Gazimestan almost illustratively functioned as a ritualistic return to the lost (and mythic, probably never existing) roots of a Serbian community. It occurred in the moment when the conflicts among Albanians and Serbs in Kosovo escalated into the social symptom. Thinking further about the roots of the community, Turner's enthusiasm about the power of the weak and equal as a reminder of social wholeness cannot help us. For it seems that only Esposito's somewhat ‘dark’ perspective could explain why in that situation the Battle of Kosovo played the central role. The battle—paradoxically, at first glance—is not a Serbian victory to be celebrated and used as fuel for national pride, but a traumatic point in Serbian history, not only because its Prince was killed, together with a huge number of Serbian men, but also because in the aftermath of the battle the independent Serbian state fell and failed to defend Christian Europe. Therefore, embedding the battle in the symbolic core of the new Serbian community based on the scapegoat national identity means, to be sure, building the community around the hole, debt, trauma, and sacrifice. Esposito’s words could explain it precisely.

All of the stories that tell of the founding crime, the collective crime, the ritual assassination, the sacrificial victim featured in the history of civilization don't do anything else except evoke metaphorically the delinquere that keeps us together. in the technical sense of ‘to lack' and ‘to be wanting’, the breach, the trauma, the lacuna out of which we originate. Not the Origin but its absence, withdrawal.

Continuing in this direction, we can infer that the new Serbian community grounded on the myth of Kosovo is per definition a negative category, a community which paradoxically arises by affirming its own negation. The Battle of Kosovo is not a thing, but rather a no-thing. And that is exactly where its enormous ideological power lies, since it is a hole that seeks to be but is never filled with a thing, a hole into which many things can be projected. This reasoning can explain how the tragic nihilism of the Serbian community celebrating its own loss, which has followed it throughout the last twenty years, makes ontological sense. And, however irrational it is or looks, history has already shown that it

208 | The scapegoat national identity is constructed in a reactionary relation to the past, generating resistance to what its subjects understood as the position of the oppressed and deprived of inherited rights. In this particular case, the sense of defeat and loss motivates an active force of retribution and revenge for the sake of a nationalist political project. See Manuel Castells. The Power of Identity (Oxford Blackwell Publishers, 1997).

209 | Esposito, Communitas, § 96, Part II Ideology and Mass Performances cannot be fought easily by the rationalist discourse of neoliberal capitalism; in turn, it can however, be easily manipulated and abused by any political party or social organization who would reaffirm and reproduce it to advance its rise to power and even its simplest material interests. Furthermore, the community entrapped by its own linkage to the delinquere cannot stand to hear the public debate about ‘Kosovo,’ even when it comes to current geopolitical questions concerning the territory of Kosovo, for every public speech about the matter is viewed through fundamental categories of ‘with us’ or ‘against us’. In that atmosphere, every link seems too profane to be substituted for the delinquere that keeps the community together. However, in closing, we want to add that the community built on the myth of Kosovo is not the only one existing in Serbia, though it is the most powerful one. After it resolved the social drama of the end of socialism and dismissed socialist and communist discourses and political options, it brought a new, intense, and long-lasting antagonism onto the public scene—the antagonism between one side that promotes neoliberal democratic capitalism and the other side that advertises nationalism and conservativism and, yet. 

Sennett describes it as the humanitarian spirit of an intimate society inherited from the nineteenth century, when political categories were transmuted into psychological categories and politics took an ethical turn, centralizing questions of identity, human rights, and the administration of good life.

Speaking in broader terms, while intimacy was certainly supported by the institutionalization of psychoanalysis in the twentieth century, creativity seems more characteristic for how the self is performed in the current form of capitalism. The narcissistic self needs an audience for its spectacle of self-affection, where producing, consuming, and trading experiences is its significant mode. The social field is populated by diverse apparatuses today that offer individuals techniques for indulging their private selves in the public sphere with what Agamben calls apparatuses of desubjectification that capture, that is, control subjects by means of the very freedom they provide those subjects with. For Agamben, the promise of freedom lies in the discourse of technology, which in turn doesn't produce new subjects, but rather captures the correct use of apparatuses of the subject so as to subject her to an economic control.

Representative democracy enforces individualism as the ideology rooted in the liberal heritage of individual freedom, which has, through the realization of the self, proven to be the best driving force for the free-trade economy. This constitutes a paradox: the internalist orientation of the common understanding of the self is the very evidence of its external constitution in the social field. The crux of this claim is that the self is constituted externally, that is, in front of others, by or in performance.

Several models inform the existing theoretical framework for considering the performance of the self. We will here examine a selection of a few key concepts developed in social theory throughout the twentieth century, concepts we find relevant for an analysis of the status of the self along the private-public axis. Hence, the following sections will discuss habitus and the techniques of the body in the theories of Marcel Mauss and Pierre Bourdieu, the social roles and the performance of self as Erving Goffman has postulated it, man as actor and the fall of the public man in Richard Sennett's history of public life, the technologies of the self in Michel Foucault's late work, and the performing of identity in Judith Butler's theory of identity politics.

HABITUS

One of the earliest models that accounts for the performance of the self is the concept of habitus. The meaning of habitus is quite comprehensive and will introduce several problems we shall discuss later. Its terms in contemporary usage were first elaborated by the sociologists Marcel Mauss and Norbert Elias, and further developed by Pierre Bourdieu. Habitus could be described as the way an individual human is positioned in a social context, where the cognitive schemata and behavioral patterns operating in the context play a significant role in the formation of the individual or groups of individuals as social subjects. Therefore, we can speak about, for instance, the class, national, or professional habitus that the members of a class, nationality, or profession inherit and share.

On the other side, some cognitive patterns and forms of conduct, such as table manners or bodily postures, can lose their origin in individuals and groups and shift to a wider and longer-lasting social register, thereby assuming the characteristics of habitus. As Andrew Pickel remarks, "Thus from a macrosociological point of view, it does not make sense to conceptualize habitus as the property of an individual. Instead, habitus should be seen as the property of a social system."

The habitus of a social system is reflected in different ways in the personalities and 'behaviors' of the individuals comprising the system (i.e., in their unique personalized habiti'). But a habitus is generated by the system, it emerges from the joint activities and interactions of the individuals making up a system, not from the characteristics of its individual components.

It is important to clarify that the habitus is close but not equal to ideology, for it is considered to be a set of cognitive and somatic dispositions, skills, and practices operating beneath any elaborated ideology. Since according to this, its crucial aspect is embodiment, the habitus can be seen as an early biopolitical concept. Among the central notions explaining it, we would single out 'body techniques' and 'doxa.'

Marcel Mauss defines the techniques of the body as the ways humans use their bodies in different societies, starting his analysis with the explanation of how the technique of swimming changed in the last few generations and how he, although he finds the old technique he learned in his childhood stupid, cannot get rid of it since it became his habit. However, Mauss' usage of the Latin habitus does not correspond entirely with the habit which he saw as individual and soul-related, a metaphysical category. He associates it instead with Aristotle's hexis (active condition or disposition, usually acquired) from the Nicomachean Ethics—which Mauss understands as 'acquired ability or 'faculty.' The reason is that they are socially determined. These 'habits' [habitus] do not just vary with individuals and their imitations, they vary especially between societies, educations, proprieties, and fashions, prestiges. In them, we should see the techniques and work of collective and individual practical reason rather than, in the ordinary way, merely the soul and its repetitive faculties.21 In the distinction above between 'habitus' and the ordinary notion of 'habit,' Mauss emphasizes the social dimension of habitus, involving education and the following imitative actions, containing both psychological and biological elements. This allowed him to move from ceremonies and ritual formulas for hunting and running in non-European societies to an inference, namely, that there isn't a 'natural way to walk, eat, lecture, or position the hands at rest. All those are body techniques, actions both effective and traditional, which are assembled by and for social authority.

The Self and the Public In Pierre Bourdieu's definition, habitus is a system of durable, transposable dispositions that pertain to a social structure and that also structure practices ranging from the bodily hexis, through linguistic practices, to collective social actions. Habitus generates practice without conscious intention. It is what regulates it and makes it regular. On the other hand, it is what would not exist without being practiced. In that way, the patterns of body postures, for instance, pass from practice to practice through learning, or more precisely, imitating and embodying the social process, which occurs without a conscious discursive elaboration. However, contesting free will with the fact that people are not necessarily conscious of the habitus doesn't make their practices mechanical. For Bourdieu, they are both individual and systematic, hence habitus functions neither fully voluntarily nor fully involuntarily, but as a dialectic between the will and the structure over time.

The most important relation which arises here is the one between history and practice, where habitus appears in practice as history turned into nature, and where unconsciousness is nothing other than 'the forgetting of history.'This genesis amnesia is what makes habitus natural, that is, 'the second nature of both the humans' practice and the experience, perception, and interpretation of the practice in the social realm.

The main outcome of the process is the creation of a commonsense world, predicated on a consensus on the meaning or sense of practices and the world in which they take place. Within that framework, Bourdieu defines doxa as the beliefs and values that are self-evident and taken for granted, functioning as an unconscious modus operandi for thinking, expressing, acting, experiencing, and perceiving. For that reason, he opposes doxa to the (orthodox or heterodox) opinion, which belongs to the 'universe of discourse (or argument), whereas doxa is located in the 'universe of the undiscussed (undisputed).

A common sense, or truism, generated by doxa operates by means of a circular logic wherein it is never questioned because it hasn't come from any questioning or, even farther, 'it goes without saying because it comes without saying.'220 Since it is unaware of the very question of legitimacy, which arises from competition for legitimacy, and hence from conflict between groups claiming to possess it. Bourdieu concludes from here that what doxa excludes or conceals is precisely the recognition of other, antagonistic beliefs and values. And thanks to the circular mechanism of securing misrecognition and being misrecognized, it engenders the dominant social structure that tends to naturalize its arbitrariness as universal, thereby reproducing and reaffirming the power relations that produce it.

SOCIAL ROLE

Another significant sociological model of performance of the self is offered by the concept of social role in Erving Goffman’s book The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. It is considered the first twentieth-century analysis of the theatricality of social life. The author uses the model of theater performance—not in a metaphorical sense but through elaborate dramaturgical principles of theater—in order to theorize human interaction and the social construction of the self in diverse social realms.

His point of departure is the premise that human actions are social and relational. or, more specifically, that they are ‘social performances because, in parallel with being oriented toward their inherent purposes, they aim to give certain impressions to others in order to control their response and conduct. In addition, social roles are not what an individual creates, rather, they are socially defined (like the role of an experienced doctor or a credible politician) and then chosen by individuals and adapted to their particular activities.

Therefore, Goffman’s notion questions the idea that there is a pre-existing inner self that is to be expressed, much more, what characterizes human conduct is first and foremost a learning of aspects and patterns of expression that we subsequently enact in order to construct ‘our selves’ under particular socio-historical conditions. However, his study is not a constructivist manifesto about the self, but rather a sociological analysis of human conduct in Western, primarily Anglo-American, society in the mid-twentieth century.

So we shall briefly present some of its crucial theses and then consider their epistemic and socio-political legacy. Goffman positions all human doing inside social situations that cannot be defined in only one way, thus the participants need to achieve a working consensus in order to define particular situations they find themselves in. Furthermore, since the consensus gains an imperative character, they are compelled to adjust their conduct to the accepted definition.

Apart from that, the author distinguishes between two general modes of communication: ‘the expressions we give, which mostly refers to verbal and intentional communication, and “the expressions we give off, those that are non-verbal and often unintentional, but which people are sometimes aware of and capable of manipulating.’ In social performances, there is either symmetry or asymmetry between the two, depending on the extent to which they agree with or contradict one another.

Within that framework, Goffman identifies and analyzes several crucial aspects of performing social roles: ‘belief in the part one Is playing, ranging from a full assumption of the role to cynicism, ‘front.

That is, the collective representation functioning as the standardized and standardizing aspect of the individual's performance, including the setting and the personal front (the expressive equipment, such as appearance and manners, whose pertinence to individuals is perceived as natural), "dramatic realization," which indicates that since human actions are relational, in every action there is an intrinsic negotiation between doing and presenting the doing to others, "idealization," which modifies performance to fit into the values and expectations of the society in which it takes place, thereby regenerating them and which is achieved by hiding inappropriate details, exaggerating the importance of one's actions, relationships to others, etc., maintenance of expressive control.

This text refers to Erving Goffman's "The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life," which was first published in 1956 by the University of Edinburgh Social Sciences Research Centre. The two terms "dramatic realization" and "idealization" were first explicitly mentioned in the first American edition, published in 1959. The text discusses the fragility of social roles caused by the discrepancy between "all-too-human selves" with their changing moods and energies, as well as by more bureaucratized socialized selves.

"Misrepresentation," instead of addressing the false presentation of the real self, addresses the facts regarding the performer's status, competence, etc., which in turn authorizes her to give a certain performance. "Mystification," on the other hand, is concerned with generating awe by keeping social distance, regardless of whether the secret behind the mystery exists or not, with the aim of protecting the performer and allowing her to act as she sees appropriate.

Goffman's study is grouped within the branch of social constructivism, which considers performance constitutive of the individual as a social subject. However, the definition usually trips over a few points in his book, such as the asymmetry between the expressions we give and those we give off, misrepresentation, and the discrepancy between all-too-human selves and socialized selves.

For instance, the last point mentioned might indicate that Goffman believes in a pre-social self that expresses itself through social roles—or—the asymmetry between two types of expressions seems to open the issue of the real self. However, even when it is about the misrepresentation or the asymmetry between the expressions we give and those we give off, Goffman never concludes that it is a slip that reveals the real, natural, and authentic self that lies behind its performance. He rather speaks about degrees of socialization, and the only distinction he maintains is the one between the individual and the character she performs, solo or in a team, while playing one of the many social roles in her social life. In fact, the issue of the real and true remains outside of Goffman's interest throughout the book. Instead, he keeps his focus on a sociological analysis of how human actions are performed, as well as how, on the one hand, the asymmetry impacts our performance, and on the other hand, what kind of impression of reality can shatter the fostered impression of reality.

Here is where we find Goffman's study comprehensive, since here the issue of production and reproduction of social values by means of performances of the self is opened by locating both the individual and the character in the domain of the social. Goffman explicitly claims that "when the individual presents himself before others, his performance will tend to incorporate and exemplify the officially accredited values of the society, more so. in fact, than does his behavior as a whole." He states that the study does not speak about the existence or nonexistence of the true, natural self in absolute categories, but instead offers an insight into how highly valued the natural, spontaneous, or authentic is in twentieth-century Western society and how difficult it is to achieve.

Goffman's study is an analysis of social constructivism rather than a socio-constructivist analysis, as it unravels why we in our society cannot understand what the self is without understanding performance, which implies the construction of social roles and conduct. Thus, the performance of the self is analyzed through Goffman's work.

Goffman's study paves the way for a wider dialectical analysis of society, examining the values embedded in human conduct through social roles and their more or less preferable aspects, while in turn being created by the social roles that become patterns of human behavior.

In a comment on the limits of Goffman's 'theoretical system, the sociologist Richard Sennett situates his history of public culture and public space as having evolved from the mid-eighteenth century to the end of the nineteenth century. Although Goffman acutely observes a variety of social situations within the paradigm of performance and role-playing, his analysis is static, fails to account for historical changes, and gives 'a picture of society in which there are scenes but no plot.'

Sennett's study is relevant for its strength in foregrounding the eighteenth century, when the public life of the city was conceived upon a clear divide between the private realm of natural yet impersonal order and the public realm of conventional performance, or in other words, on theatrical acting where public behavior was a matter of detachment from the personal self. The firmly maintained boundary between the public and the private is reflected in the fact that "the public was a human creation; the private was the human condition." The nineteenth century witnessed one of the consequences of the French Revolution in its idea of liberty as joined to a belief in individual character as a social principle. **9 an idea that confuses public behavior with personality and intimacy. Here, a culture of personality replaces the eighteenth-century ideal of civility, of public rhetorical gestures as expressions made at a distance to oneself. The man who inhabited the public realm of the eighteenth century was an actor whose freedom rested on the separation of the character from the act, which, paradoxically, entangled spontaneity of expression with impersonality of convention and enabled a greater mixture of classes. Can it be that the freedom to feel is greater when one's personality and one's identity in society are quite clearly separated? Can spontaneity and what we have learned to call 'artificiality' have some hidden and necessary relationship? They do, that relationship is embodied in the principle of speech as a matter of signs rather than symbols.

Thus, Sennett confirms the view of the artificiality of public performance, like Goffman, but limits it to the description of a particular historical figure: the man as actor in the eighteenth-century régime. The body of the public actor was regarded as a mannequin who wears the mask of the social role and whose speech is coded in signs rather than symbols. While the mask and the clothing reveal his social rank, the talk is a free flow to the extent that it can suspend the social rank, as was the case in the first public places of anonymous gathering, such as coffeehouses and pubs.

Sennett accounts for three distinctive conceptions of man as actor. The first, summarized by the idea of theatrum mundi or 'the world is a stage,' reflects the common sense view of 'man as actor,' where ordinary life and dramatic performance, the street and the stage, mingle and even literally translate into one another. It is best described in one of Montesquieu's Persian Letters, where the hero, upon walking into Comédie Française one night, can't distinguish between actors and spectators. Theatrum mundi denotes the morality of divorcing human nature from man's acts, which then characterized the social conduct of the everyday notion of man as an actor by the tones of amusement, cynical toleration, and pleasure.

The second register, Sennett remarks, is conceived in Diderot's Paradox of the Actor (written in 1778, but published in 1830), the first view of acting as a secular activity. It is best summed up in the following: 'Do not people talk in society of a man being a great actor? They do not mean by that that he feels, but that he excels in simulating, though he feels nothing.' Diderot considered artifice superior to nature in expressing an emotion. Through the artifice, the actor studies the emotion in its essence so as to become master of its effectiveness and thus arouse the same emotion in the spectator. Diderot's presentation of emotion as a rhetorical expression is fundamentally different from the representation of emotion, because in the latter, the recipient is supposed to empathize and identify with the true person suggested by the actor, rather than be moved by the act of the emotion. Social acts are expressible only when they are repeatable and not unique, according to Diderot.

The third conception in Sennett invokes Rousseau's views on cosmopolitan life. Sennet studies the third term standing between the actor and the city—moeurs—best defined as the complete manner, the style a person possesses as well as her moral conduct. The great city is a theater. Its scenic aspect is principally the search for reputations. All city men become artists of a particular kind—actors, in acting out a public life, they lose contact with natural virtue. The artist and the great city are in harmony, and the result is a moral disaster (#4). Rousseau sees a corruption of morals in both abundance and play when they occur in social interaction, for they are beyond the principle of necessity that the Calvinist order of functional survival commands. Social interaction leads to dependence on others for a sense of self and, eventually, to a loss of an internal sense of the self. He thus anticipates what will become the norm in less than a hundred years—the culture of personality—yet his prophecy didn't exactly play itself out as he imagined it would, namely, by invoking the virtuous, intimate life in the small town where more leisure time would allow the citizen to search for her true self, the honesty of her soul.

To conclude, Sennett’s study is a critique of the new paradigm of the intimate society that is settled from the nineteenth century to this day. He supports this critique by the image of theatrical social conduct in the eighteenth century in which the value of ‘civility’ is strongly upheld as ‘the activity which protects people from each other and yet allows them to enjoy each other's company. Wearing a mask is, for Sennett, ‘the essence of civility, but the masks must be created by those who will wear them, through trial and error (233).

In his later work, most notably the three-volume work, The History of Sexuality, and in various lectures, interviews, and essays from the end of the 1970s and the early 1980s, the French philosopher Michel Foucault developed a new conceptual framework for his study of the subject and the production of subjectivity, which he discussed using the term technologies of the self (234). Technologies of the self form the fourth level in the system of technologies that describe production, sign systems, power, and fourthly, self. They define a mode of action that an individual exercises upon herself and uses to produce her subjectivity. In a more comprehensive definition, Foucault contends that the technologies of the self ‘permit individuals to effect by their own means, or with the help of others, a certain number of operations on their own bodies and souls, thoughts, conduct, and way of being, so as to transform themselves in order to attain a certain state of happiness, purity, wisdom, perfection, or immortality” (234).

This quote should be read together with what Foucault proposes with regard to the self in a lecture from the same period (1980), which seems contradictory to the earlier anti-humanist, anti-subjective claim of the ‘end of man’ that he made in his archeological method of discourse analysis. Foucault doesn’t retreat to a positive foundation of the self here, but instead suggests that the self should be studied as capable of critical self-transformation through the history of technologies. because ‘maybe the problem is to change those technologies. And in this case, one of the main political problems would be nowadays, in the strict sense of the word, the politics of ourselves’ (776). By the ‘politics of ourselves,’ a concept that anticipated, through its own influence on humanities, debates on identity politics that would arise over the two following two decades, Foucault indicates ethics as his area of study: ‘the considered form that freedom takes when it is informed by reflection, *”7 or, in a brief formulation, the ‘practice of freedom’ (777). Freedom and power relations are mutually conditioning and not mutually exclusive terms here, since Foucault argues that power relations are mobile, reversible, and unstable, thus allowing the possibility of a resistance whereby subjects practice freedom. Foucault's preference of the practice of freedom over acts of liberation is tailored to Western democratic society, in which he develops his theory, for he admits that there exist states of domination where the relations of power are fixed and asymmetrical to the extent that freedom exists in an extremely limited margin. ‘Governmentality’ is then a concept proposed for the Western genealogy of power relations [It covers] the whole range of practices that______ ""

"TheHistory of Sexuality, Vol. 3: The Care of the Self, trans. Robert Hurley (New York, NY: Pantheon Books, 1986), originally published as Histoire de la sexualité, Vol. 3: Le souci de soi (Paris: Gallimard, 1984). Apart from the third volume, which is our primary focus here, and which, together with volume two, was published posthumously, we will refer to Foucault's following essays, lectures, and interviews: 'About the Beginnings of the Hermeneutics of the Self: Two Lectures at Dartmouth,' in Philosophical Theary 21. no. 2 (1993), 195-227; 'Technologies of the Self,' from the final lecture of a faculty seminar on 'Technologies of the Self' at the University of Vermont, Autumn 1982. Foucault, Essential Works of Foucault 1954-1984, ed. P. Rabinow and N. Rose (London: Penguin, 2000), see esp. Vol. 1: 'Subjectivity and Truth,' 'The Hermeneutic of the Subject Solitude,' 'Self Writing,' 'On the Genealogy of Ethics: An Overview of Work in Progress,' and 'The Ethics of the Concern for Self as a Practice of Freedom.'

The Self and the Public:
As individuals try to control, determine, and limit the freedom of others, they are themselves free individuals who have at their disposal certain instruments they can use to govern others. Thus, the basis for all this is freedom, the relationship of the self to itself and the relationship to the other.

Three questions about Foucault's technologies of the self interest us here: Firstly, how does the notion of technology enable Foucault to give precedence to the individualist mode of subjectivation beyond the collective dimension of practice? Secondly, what sort of performance of the self can we infer from the techniques of the self if these are primarily contained in the private domain of the care of the self by oneself? Thirdly, and by consequence, when do the techniques of the self coincide with civic and political activity? Does the study of technologies of the self only serve to inform us about the changing boundaries between the private and the public spheres of the social field? Let's answer these questions in succession.

Having discovered the discursive relation between the truth about sexuality and the constitution of the subject in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Foucault comes to the notion of 'truth games' as specific techniques, guided by a set of rules that human beings use to understand themselves and produce truth. In comparison to ideology, technology is a rather neutral term, as it designates a set of procedures that lead to a certain result. For Foucault, the term serves to explain philosophical discourse about the living praxis in antiquity, wherein the self is cultivated by the imperative to take care of oneself. In the Greco-Roman age, this practice is defined as an art of living, an aesthetics of existence, where the 'care' involves a sort of work, an activity, an attention to and concern with something, a knowledge and a technique. Unlike later Christianity, which instilled a religious system of prohibitions upon the self-renouncing subject who prepared for the afterlife, the Greco-Roman 'problem' could be formulated thus: which tekhne do I have to use in order to live well and live as I ought to live?

The answer to why this tekhne pertains to the individual is that in the times of Socrates and Athenian democracy, taking care of one's own life (tekhne tou bi______ 

He also teaches them to occupy themselves with the city, how to be useful for the polis. Foucault stresses that various practices of reading, writing, speaking, corresponding, counselling, walking in the city, and so on, weren't exercises in solitude, but a true social practice. Hence, technologies of the self aim, first and foremost, to shape the subject as both a private and a political 238 | Foucault. Ethics. 300

According to some of Foucault's commentators, Foucault's turn to biopolitics here seems inconsistent with his earlier anti-humanist critique of the autonomous subject. It discloses a quasi-liberal Foucault who presupposes a partially autonomous and reflexive subject. Cf Eric Paras, Foucault 20: Beyond Power and Knowledge (New York: Other Press, 2006); Paul Patton, 'Foucault's Subject of Power.' in The Loter Foucault: Politics and Philosophy, ed Jeremy Moss (London: Sage, 1998), 64-77.

Amy Allen seeks to resolve the apparent paradox from the position of critical theory and the post-Kantian legacy of the Enlightenment in which she situates Foucault by claiming that in the ethical project of self-transformation by technologies of the self, Foucault retains the critique of the transcendental and phenomenological subject but amends his critique with the power of self-constitution beyond the limits of the contingent forms of constraint imposed by the power-knowledge relations that structure the social. Amy Allen, Foucault and the politics of ourselves, History of the Human Sciences 24 no 4(2001) 43-55.

In person, one a citizen in whom the distinction between the private and the political is overcome by participation in the public as a civic activity. The idea that the care of the self centralizes the self beyond the city, in withdrawal from political life and in movement toward a concern with the self alone, only begins with the Epicureans and then culminates in Seneca, himself a fine example from the Roman period. Foucault explains it as a kind of 'individualism that, owing to an increasing detachment from the city and the political life on the part of Roman citizens who lived isolated from one another and more reliant on themselves, accords more importance to the private sphere of life and to the values of personal conduct.

In what sense could these past technologies of the self be accounted for as 'performances' of the self? Foucault avoids qualifying them as performances, although when he examines the Christian technique of exomologesis, whereby one is obliged to disclose oneself either to God or to the community, he describes the penitential rite as a theatrical self-presentation involving a dramatic recognition of the sinner's status as penitent whose public confession of sins bears witness against herself.

Although practiced in the private domain where one's care of the body includes physical exercise or food regimes, or meditation, the Greco-Roman technologies of the self involve communication with others, an obligation to reciprocally exchange 'soul service'. Yet, the reason for considering them as performances of the self lies elsewhere, in the very act of observance, in the reflection of showing that one is doing to oneself, in devising externally, through thought, the principles of action according to which the actions are then evaluated. Thus, Foucault's metaphor of the money changer in Epictetus brings to mind the proceduralist logic. ‘As soon as an idea comes to mind, you have to think of the rules you must apply to evaluate it.’

What makes techniques of the self difficult to discern is their invisibility, conditioned by their lack of material apparatus, Foucault argues, but this doesn’t make them less an issue of performance. The sense and function of the technology of the self as a performance of the self has changed over history, from the aestheticization of life in the ancient Greco-Roman cultivation of the self to self-mastery, self-renunciation, and self-sacrifice in Christianity, to the modern (non-ascetic) subject of knowledge who accesses truth by way of direct evidence, or common sense (according to which she is the autonomous founder of knowledge), all the way to the psychoanalytic techniques of the twentieth century. However, a major shift is noted from the Greek care of the self as the city to the Roman concern with the self only, which prompted Foucault's interlocutors to ask him if the latter is just an early version of self-absorption, which many consider a central problem in our society.

Foucault denies this. In the Californian cult of the self, one is supposed to discover one's true self, to separate it from that which might obscure or alienate it, to decipher its truth thanks to psychological or psychoanalytic science which is supposed to be able to tell you what your true self is. Therefore, not only do I not identify this ancient culture of the self with what you might call Californian cult of the self, but I think they are diametrically opposed.

In response to this charge, Foucault classifies three kinds of individualism, which return in different epochs:

1. The individualistic attitude, which values the individual in her singularity and independence vis-à-vis the structures to which she belongs.
2. The appraisal of private life, advocating the values of family relationships, domestic activity, and patrimonial interests.
3. The intensity of the relations to self as an object of knowledge and a field of action qua transformation, purification, or salvation of the self.

While the first could be compared to a heroic, übermenschliche individualism or a radical isolationist individualism—the maverick—, as in Ralph Waldo Emerson's notion of ‘self-reliance’ and Henry David Thoreau’s life experiments, the second is given a historical coordinate only at the emergence of the bourgeoisie in Western Europe and North America in the nineteenth century. The third kind remains somewhat vague: on the one hand, it conforms with the ancient cultivation of the self, and on the other, it also entertains the narcissistic self with its (often psychologized) cult of personality.

We can infer from his dismissal of the second type—made by saying that an individualism in societies that cultivate the private, domestic, and patrimonial sphere is weak because the relations of oneself to one's self remain undeveloped—that he gives precedence to the third kind. The intensification of the relation of oneself to one’s self best corresponds to the technologies invested in the aestheticization of one's own life—to ‘the idea of the bios as a material for an aesthetic piece of art,’ and the idea that ethics can be a very strong structure of existence, without any relation with the juridical per se, with an authoritarian system, with a disciplinary structure.

Foucault admits that these aestheticizing technologies fascinate him. Although we have pointed out that Foucault's practice of the self isn't entirely individualistic, but always developed in the context of, and through relations with, others (which is sufficiently explained by the concept of governmentality), an account of what the technologies of the group or collective, as it were, are or have been (which might explain the politics of collective action) is missing from his ethics. [1] Perhaps this significant omission or silence on the collective dimension of politics would no longer imply a technology, but rather an ideology, the notion of which Foucault, as we have seen, avoids by any and all means. Performing Identity: What remains latent in Foucault's enthusiastic remarks from his last interviews about the technologies of the self, namely, that the constitution of the self through its proper techniques doesn't only imply regulation but can effectuate resistance and transformation, is made explicit in the performative constitution of identity in Judith Butler.

[2] Butler developed the concept of performing identity in the early 1990s. Her theory of identity politics, drawing on Foucault's analyses of the institutional and historical constitution of the subject as well as the theory of speech acts, is situated in poststructuralist queer studies and made a remarkable contribution to the destabilization of the notion of identity.

[3] Butler's basic premise is that gender, as well as sex, are social constructions. In her argument, which relies on the concepts of interpellation and the performative, she advances the then highly provocative thesis: There is no gender identity behind the expressions of gender, identity is performatively constituted by the very expressions that are said to be its results.

[4] Butler considers gender and sex to be aspects of the identity of the social subject and therefore locates the whole problematic inside the broader process of social subjectivation. According to her, the subject, in order to exist in the domain of the social, in order to be recognized by the law, in order, at bottom, for her life to be qualified as human, is produced by the process of normative regulation, which involves the ritualistic, embodied repetition of conventions.

[5] A part of that process is exclusion, and in the uninhabitable social zone, the zone of unthinkable and unlivable life, Butler seeks out numerous abject beings. The norm does not normativize them according to heterosexual categories, hence they never achieve the status of the subject, although they are produced by that norm.

[6] The inclusion of those beings as subjects in the social community is the crucial political question Butler is concerned with. On the one hand, the exclusion through which they apparently do not cease to exist exposes them to the oppression and injuries of the norm-governed community while denying them the possibility to politically partake therein, and on the other hand, they become the negativity of the subject, its 'constitutive outside'.

[7] In Gender Trouble (1990), Butler adopts the Foucauldian thesis that nothing precedes the process of regulation, regulation produces subjects as well as that which it excludes at the same time. This calls into question the possibility of the political action that strives to intervene in the norm-governed context. For Butler, however, the constructive production of the subject does not entail determinism. The subject is not determined by the rules through which it is generated because signification is not a founding act, but rather a regulated process of repetition that both conceals itself and enforces its rules precisely through the production of substantializing effects. She takes this further through elaborations of the performativity of gender and sex, where the perspective of the performative allows us to see that the norm, the subject, and the failure are produced simultaneously and, even more importantly, that they are constitu-tive of each other. Let us give a brief overview of her argument. Her key intervention in the theory of the performative, as expounded in Bodies That Matter and developed further in Undoing Gender, articulates not only that the subject of the performative constitutes the discursive position in the structure of the speech act, but also that the thing at stake in the performative production of the subject is the law's investment in the body.

According to Butler, the regulatory norms instill the body with materiality, that is to say, they materialize the body's subjective attributes. Apart from that, the initial premise—with Austin as the reference—is that the subject of the performative does not exist before the speech act. The act can be performed either felicitously or infelicitously, depending on the context in which it takes place. The former brings about the subject of the performative, and the latter doesn't produce anything. Yet, the failure has a constitutive role, and Austin already infers that the performative that cannot be performed infelicitously is not performative at all. He doesn't advance the failure, while Butler makes it a central issue. For her, the constitutive nothing is a stain on the procedure, which tends to be hidden in order for the performative to be assigned a supposedly inherent juridical power. The exclusion plays the role of naturalization. In that sense, performativity is a larger concept than performance, for it involves its negativity and contests the performance’s right to the whole truth of the subject.

'What is performed,' Butler asserts, 'works to conceal, if not to disavow, what remains opaque, unconscious, unperformable.' The reduction of performativity to performance would be a mistake. What she proposes as one way of resisting normativization is the parody as a critical mimesis—her example is drag performance—which displays an awareness of the substantializing effects of the repetition of the norm and thus discloses the process of naturalization. However, it's still not clear how the awareness and disclosure lead to the subversion and rearticulation of hegemonic norms.

To achieve that, the excluded site of the failure needs to be activated and transformed into a social agency. Butler here introduces Althusser's scene of interpellation, insisting that the act with which the law hails and at the same time forms the subject is performative. The reprimand [by the policemen, with Althusser] does not merely repress or control the subject, but forms a crucial part of the juridical and social formation of the subject. The call is formative, if not performative, precisely because it initiates the individual into the subjected status of the subject. Thereby, the subject needs to recognize and appreciate the law in order to put it to work, from which Butler infers that the unhappy performative opens the space for the disobedience of ‘bad subjects.’

Her thesis—misrecognition of the interpellation can parody and in that way subvert the law—is grounded on a Žižekian-Lacanian insight. The law, since it is not only formative but also performative, is not immune to its subjects, to its embodiments, to the bodies that bear it. Still, the performance as a ‘bounded act’ is not sufficient, and what is in question here is a long-term process of subjectivation as repetition of the performative.

At this point, it becomes clear that the necessity of iteration is exactly what makes the performative imperative fragile and dependent upon performances that, while citing it, twist, remake, and change it. The other issue that concerns us here relates to the structural place held by the motivation to change the norm within the process of subjectivation. In other words, who is the one who changes it?

Butler's early answer is that the attempt to change comes from affectivity, a pre-subjective existential narcissism that characterizes the body as the main bearer of 251 | Butler, Bodies That Matter.

The law. Whether it is an individualist perspective on the subject or not, the framework apparently centers the individual subject and, in the last instance, concerns itself with how to emancipate the individual from the social institution. In such a framework, the method of how to make the subversive activity a more comprehensive social practice—except by a mechanical proliferation of the activity—remains undeveloped.

But in her later work,2*4 Butler developed and changed this perspective somewhat, moving toward ethical problems and the relation, the encounter with the Other. Affectivity and embodiment remained in her focus, but she has transitioned toward a broader social register of the precarity and the precarious, emphasizing more and more a need for collective formations and actions.

In political terms, in the course of that transition, the performing identity concept shifted from a liberal stance of Cultural Studies toward a clearer New-Leftist position.

The brief overview above singles out from the history of theoretical concepts those which elaborate the external construction of the self and its identity in the performative mode. It provides us with notions that we will draw on in the last two chapters, both of which focus on how individuals are performed in an individualistic manner. We will observe strikingly similar genres and techniques of self-performance in the arts and everyday life.

Privileging art doesn't imply a familiar approach by which art is considered the model for how the individualistic subject is economically and politically constituted today, as some studies have recently suggested.

Although many of the concepts of self-performance above have had an impact on practices of theater, dance, and performance—such as Mauss's body techniques in the physical theater of Jerzy Grotowski or Eugenio Barba, or Foucault's and Butler's theses of self/identity construction in performance art since the 1980s—we will deliberately avoid this transference from social theory to art.

Our claim is slightly different. The peculiarities of the performative production of subjectivity in art can shed light on the intensive form of individualism also found in every domain of social life. Through art, we can observe how individualism operates as an ideology and which notions and manners of performance it exercises. In 2004, Butler published "An Account of Oneself" (New York: Fordham University Press), and in 2005, "Gender Trouble" (New York: Fordham University Press). These works were influential in tracing the connection between the individual and authorship in art.

In "Four Choreographic Portraits," a performance project by Christine De Smedt, the relation between artistic authorship and the artist's self-understanding of the role of the personal is addressed. This raises questions about the inclusion or exclusion of the personal in art and the consequences of such decisions.

The Foucauldian premise suggests that the connection between the personal and authorship, which may seem solid, is a product of a particular moment in Western history and could change in different social contexts or historical moments. This idea invites a deeper exploration of the relationship between the personal, the author, and performance in the public sphere. Thus our concern here is not "What is the problem with me, an author, not including the personal in my artwork?" but rather "What is the problem with the art for which the personal is an essential condition for it to be art?"

But, first of all, what does the "personal" mean? In ordinary speech, as well as in dictionaries, it signifies individual, unique, distinctive, particular, authentic, private, intimate, one's own, etc. From which we can hardly induce a coherent definition, as the term obviously carries very different denotations. Apart from that, the notion of the 'person' is close to concepts of individual, self, and identity, which, from a theoretical viewpoint, deserve serious definition. Still, the way they operate in the Artworld doesn't presuppose a clear demarcation line, and the terms often overlap, which would lead us to assume that the overlapping is an important aspect of how the personal functions in this context.

And while we will discuss its foundational status in a moment, at this point, we would like to introduce a basic systematization of the ways in which the term 'personal' is employed in art. It addresses * unique and associated qualifications, like particular, distinctive, one's own, etc., which refer to the particular and distinctive identity and individuality of the artist, expressed in art by her specific signature, by the artwork that only she can do, + the private and the intimate, which address the life-story and related experiences, thoughts, feelings, and self of an author as an individual human, which serves as a repository of her inspiration or even forces her to make art; «the authentic and the original,» which refer to the proximity of a work of art to the modal-image shaped in the mind of its author, then materialized in the unique work of art, whose aura of authenticity provides the audience with a ritualistic, artistic, or aesthetic experience.

This is the case in Four Choreographic Portraits. "| realized that in my work there was a hidden premise not to involve biographical and personal elements. But what do | mean by personal? What is the relationship between how! think the personal and the work | make?" Christine De Smedt, "4 Choreographic Portraits," in companion booklet to 4 Choreographic Portraits (Ghent Les Ballets D de la B 2012), 3135.

Although we would refrain from hasty conclusions, we cannot but remark that the systematization given above already demonstrates that the personal again addresses at least three different concepts as well as different registers in the realm of art. Hence, amounting to a rather elusive object of analysis, critique, or questioning. In view of all this, we would regard it as a habitus of thinking—a doxic commonsense in Bourdieu's sense—and try to challenge its self-evidence by pointing to and discussing the constructive seams of the seemingly smooth and natural bind between art and the personal.

THE BIRTH OF THE ARTIST'S PERSONALITY: A CRITICAL HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

If we look into history, we face quite a surprising trajectory for the construction of the conjunction between authorship and the personal, along with contextually conditioned changes of the notion of 'art' itself. According to the traditional Western division of human activities into labor, work/production, and action/practice, which can be traced back to ancient Greece, labor responds to the general cyclical human metabolism with nature, while production and practice distinguish the human being as specific and unique on Earth.

According to Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics, the distinction between the two was fairly sharp in his time, where production (paresis) was the act of shaping, of 'coming into being in a particular shape,' and practice (praxis) implied a performed action, intervention—a voluntary activity in public. As a consequence, poiesis claims a value, a goal beyond itself; it results in a product, a piece of work that invests in the civilization, whereas praxis results in the public action itself and, accordingly, focuses on the organization of actual social relations. Craft and art are paradigmatic instances of production, and political action is a paradigmatic instance of practice. At this______ In classical Greece, from Plato to Aristotle, the understanding of poiesis changed. For Plato (in Symposium), poiesis means the cause for the creation of something previously nonexistent, which may relate to nature or man (Plato doesn't make a distinction). He conceives poiesis as the unique activity of creating. The difference came with Aristotle, who distinguished (in Physics) what exists by nature and claims a cause and origin in itself from what exists by other causes—the principle of its creation being the productive activity of man. Art was, consequently, related to the latter form of poiesis and distinguished from natural creation, and, as such, for a long time, it made no reference to the personal, the individual, the self, or related categories.

In classical Greece, such a view was very explicit and was confirmed in Aristotle's Poetics, where poetics refers to poiesis and designates art as a paradigmatic form of the human capacity to make and create. Later in modern Western society, the definition and social position of art, as well as its relation to the personal, changed remarkably. These changes relate to the circumstances of production in industrial and then post-industrial capitalist society and its liberal and individually oriented epistemology, which feature divisions of production, a transformation of the concept of practice, and a configuration of the public and the private.

The division of poiesis that we would single out as key to understanding the increased interest in the figure of the author lies in the division of aesthetic and industrial production. According to Giorgio Agamben, the division and the related distinction of human products into works of art and products in the strictest sense (industrial, technical) correspond with the development of modern technology and the first industrial revolution in the second half of the eighteenth century. At that time, the following characterization was introduced: the aesthetic products are characterized by authenticity, and technical products, by reproducibility. And at this point, the artist as a person entered the art sphere.

The notions of authenticity and originality, which Agamben considers synonymous, have been widely embraced by Western art since the nineteenth century, with different connotations. Apart from their connection with the ideology of individualism, which promotes the figure of the individual throughout modern Western society, all these connotations share a common production basis, ie their nineteenth-century interpretation. Here, the principle of originality, according to Agamben, implies the proximity of an artwork to the origin, the image-model in the artist herself, which is lost in technical products due to their mass reproduction. As a consequence, unique, unrepeatable, credible, and similar modern features of the artwork all derive from the basic principle of originality, made possible by the permanent proximity of an artistic product to its origin in the artist's particular mind, in her mental image, which functions as a model for the product.

Once introduced, this principle provided artworks with an aura of authenticity and, in the long run, distinguished art from other, reproductive forms of poiesis, like industrial production and technics. However, in the early twentieth century, according to Walter Benjamin, the aura was endangered by new art forms—photography and film—that involved reproducibility, depriving the audience of the unique aesthetic and ritualistic experience of art. 

This caused a shift in the discourse on authenticity during the twentieth century from artworks to artists, which we will look at later. One more historical process that should be explained here is the gradual change in the relations between poiesis and praxis, as well as the transformation of the notion of praxis. In his essay ‘Poiesis and Praxis,’ Agamben demonstrates how, throughout Western history after the classical age in Greece, these changes have happened on a conceptual level. According to him, the process of the convergence of poiesis and praxis can be traced back to the Roman era, and it is already manifest in the translation of the Greek term poiesis, which designates human ‘pro-ductivity,’ into the Latin agere/actum, meaning ‘to act, to do, which means ‘the manifestation of a will that produces a concrete effect.’ Later, Christian theology proclaimed the Supreme Being as an actus purus and firmly tied the interpretation of being as actualization and act to Western metaphysics. However, the process of convergence wouldn't be possible without a radical change in the notion of practice. Agamben made an important point in this respect when he noticed that, in the modern Western world, all human doing began to be perceived as practice—but now conceived as a productive activity. In this process, the meaning of praxis was not only broadened to such an extent that it became a general term for all human activities; it went through a complete transformation to the point that it started to signify a manifestation of the human being's will and vital impulse, along with the concrete effects thereof.

In these epistemic and social processes, the conception of art changed accordingly. During the nineteenth and even the twentieth century, art was also predominantly seen as practice; but practice is now seen as an expression, manifestation, and actualization of the artist's will and creative force. As instances of this reinterpretation, Agamben cites Novalis’ definition of poetry as a willful, active, and productive use of our organs, also citing Nietzsche's identification of art with the will to power; Artaud's aspiration to a theatrical liberation of the will, and situationist efforts, based on human creative impulses, at crossing the borders of art. As Agamben underlines, ‘The metaphysics of will has penetrated our conception of art to such an extent that even the most radical critiques of aesthetics have not questioned its founding principle, that is, the idea that art is the expression of the artist's creative will.’

This is another path through which the importance of the personal has been promoted in art, where it was identified as the essence of the unique creative will of the artist—now seen as ‘the creative genius’ that forced her to do art. In this paradigm, the personal mostly refers to her biography, experience, private life, inner self, or, in more picturesque words, her traumas, failures, loves, dreams, fears, adventures, and miseries, which, in a stereotypical vision, function as the strongest of the creative forces. Besides understanding art practice in terms of the metaphysics of creative will and allying art with authenticity or originality, the social process that influenced the promotion of the personal in art. 

especially connoting the private, was the reorganization of public and private life, which began in the second half of the eighteenth century. Richard Sennett, who described the process meticulously, named the change sharply as the fall of public man. Since we already discussed this thesis in the previous chapter, we would here only stress that the change addresses the new configuration of bourgeois society, where public life was conceived in the eighteenth century as being based on artificial social roles and relations, while the private was the domain of the authenticity of the human being, the domain where we are the closest to our selves. Giving preference from the nineteenth century onward to the private as authentic resulted in its mystification and an escalation of curiosity about it, as it provoked the suspicion that the public subject is only a mask that hides the real person and her motives and reasons. And, even more importantly here, it resulted in a privatization of the public sphere, which has gradually replaced political practice with activities based on intimacy and similar personal and private categories.

As a consequence of these processes, in the art field the ‘monograph’ became the crucial text in art history, starting in the nineteenth century in its presentation of certain artistic opuses as intertwined with the life story of the author, which is supposedly deeply embedded in her work and hence can explain it. Apart from not being very believable—we probably all know boring people who make very exciting art and those who are quite extravagant yet make kitsch—one of the most serious problems with such a conception is that it largely deprives art of social concerns it might possess as a practice, reorienting it toward the individual and her private matters. And if we return to the Greek conception, practice is basically something quite different—public activity, free citizens’ action carried out in a social situation. The political implications of the rejection of such a conception of practice are wide-ranging. First of all, it redirects art as practice from the citizen's public action for and with the social community to the individual's public action against the communal background, or in other words, her personal accomplishment in the public domain.

After the historical construction of the conceptions of art explained above, what we encounter in the twentieth century as common sense is a personalization of art sustained by the consensus of creative will. Agamben’s list of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century art practices, where we may come across such a conception, might be broadened by many more or less recent inputs such as abstract expressionism and action painting, the majority of emancipatory and ludic neo-avant-garde theater, humanistic theater anthropology, expressionist dance, post-modern autobiographical and identity-based literature, and performance, graffiti, and similar forms of street art. Not to mention numerous open and processual formats of contemporary work, including the widespread notions of energy, creativity, liberation, expression, impulse. and so forth
From a critical standpoint, it may be claimed that these artistic forms and concepts tend toward an atrophy of the political potential of art practice. This criticism rests upon the inference that, in these cases—which are many as well as paradigmatic of the twentieth-century Western Artworld—the aspect of free human action within the social realm is, in principle, replaced by a creativity that strives for the humanistic emancipation of the artist as an individual: her personal realization, affirmation, and liberation. This trend was fostered additionally by the emancipatory politics of the 1960s, condensed into such slogans as ‘be individual,’ ‘be unique,’ ‘be different,’ ‘be yourself’ and so forth. There was an explosion of intimacy in the public sphere, which Sennett traced back to the early nineteenth century, though now it was accompanied by warmth, friendship, personal liberation, and accomplishment. And private happiness as publicly relevant issues and requests.

This kind of celebration of the individual, invested in resistance to the mass society developed after World War II, gradually led to the cult of personality in many social spheres. Accordingly, in the art field, the artistic aura has shifted from artworks—which since then have been produced both as unique objects and reproduced copies—toward artists themselves, who are assigned the social role of being authentic, different, outstanding, and above all, non-conformist personalities. Today, we can observe how this trend is gaining momentum in the course of a continued blurring of the borders between practice and production, understood, by post-Operaist and bio-political theorists such as Antonio Negri, Michael Hardt, Paolo Virno, and Maurizio Lazzarato as the general human condition of contemporary Western capitalist society, the production of which is based on the post-industrial fostering of immaterial labor and the post-Taylorist and post-Fordist organization of work.

The theorists mentioned above claim that post-industrial production is more concerned with the cultural-informational content of material products than the products themselves. The production of images, tastes, opinions—and subjectivity. Likewise, as Lazzarato warns, in the work process, management is based on the slogan ‘become a subject (of communication) and tends to become more totalitarian than the old divisions of poiesis due to its attempt at engaging the whole worker's personality and subjectivity in the production of value. Thus, the expression of a supposedly unique individuality becomes an asocial imperative in the capitalist world. An employee is no longer obliged merely to get the job done; in Lazzarato’s words, "one has to express oneself, one has to speak, communicate, cooperate." Therefore, subjectivity is capitalism's biggest output. It's the single largest commodity we produce, because it goes into the production of all other commodities. The same is true for the Artworld, where the imperative is visible, for instance, in the recent proliferation of artistic events organized as encounters’ between artists whose primary task is to be present, in person. The imperative has resulted in the glorification of the artist's signature, in establishing the artist's name as a brand, and in promoting the artist's personality as the art product par excellence. Thereby, the principles of work in (economic) production and in art overlap, and artists are becoming the paradigm of immaterial workers—but in a very opportunistic sense. In saying this, we are trying to focus attention on the fact that Apart from being romantic and metaphysical, the exaggerated role of the personal in art is also very profitable for the capitalist art system. If, in spite of this criticism, it still seems difficult to speculate on an art practice that is extricated from the ties between the personal and authorship, we would like to give some concrete twentieth-century examples of different or even opposite conceptions of art.

Firstly, we should depart from the idea of the Western Artworld as the only possible horizon for thinking about art. The paradigm of art in real socialist states—excepting Yugoslavia—already faces us with quite a different perspective: socialist realism. It can be traced back to the post-revolutionary Soviet Union, where it was officially adopted by the Congress of Soviet Writers in 1934, and then it became prevalent throughout the entire postwar Eastern Bloc, where it affirmed the socialist social order, also functioning as a counterpoint to abstract expressionism, which was promoted in the US as a paradigm for art as an expression and actualization of the artist's unique creative impulse.

A telling testament to how the conception of the artist expressing personal freedom contributed to a political cause is situated in the late 1960s, when the US government recognized in abstract expressionist art, especially the actionist painting of Jackson Pollock, a propaganda tool during the Cold War. The Congress for Cultural Freedom was founded in order to promote the idea of individual liberty and autonomy as a defense against the threat of totalitarian communism, and its members included the art critic Clement Greenberg, Pollock, and the artists Robert Motherwell and Alexander Calder. The institution was financed by the Ford Foundation, as well as the US government. The Museum of Modern Art issued a program of traveling exhibitions which sent American art abroad with the message of personal, individual freedom, and Life magazine joined with a spread titled Arms for Europe, where the ‘arms’ would be cultural rather than military. This elicited a reaction on the part of the Communist Party in the USSR and Eastern Bloc countries in Europe against American abstraction as decadent and reactionary.

In the socialist realist conception of art, instead of being regarded as a creative genius, the artist is rather seen as a social engineer. That is to say, she is a cultural worker who works in the domain of the social super-structure and who—like all other workers—deals with and works for society in her own domain and by her own means, instead of expressing her unique personality against the community. Moreover, focusing on the individuality of the artist is seen as a ‘bourgeois luxury,’ quite inappropriate in the situation where the new social order, based on collectivity and equality as a radical critique of Western capitalism and individualism, was meant to have been established. Although this approach provides us with an example of the real, existing twentieth-century conception of art, wherein the personal is an irrelevant or even forbidden aspect of making or doing art, it has its widely discussed shortcomings. First of all, since it developed in the states that tended toward totalitarianism, the approach often resulted in a replacement of the Western pressure put on artists to be unique and invest their unique personality in art with the even bigger pressure to exclude any particular, individual, or personal elements from art. This way, socialist realism finally affirmed the figure of the artist as a party member, an impersonal maker who was subsumed under and thus more or less merely promoted (by artistic means) the party's politics and its vision of society.

The other case we would like to mention here is the famous theoretical debate on the relation of the author to the artwork, which—within the poststructuralist theoretical platform of the 1960s-70s—was opened by Roland Barthes's ‘death of the author,’ followed by Michel Foucault's rethinking of the discursive position of the author subject. We are recalling this debate, since Barthes breached the common-sense thinking of the work of art in its connections to the author as the person who lies behind it—he mostly refers to the writer—by claiming that the author is ‘dead,’ since she neither controls the meaning of the artwork regarded as text (or signifiers weave) nor, accordingly, holds the key to reading it. Put differently, in the complex cultures of signifying practice, meaning is determined only intertextually, whereby artworks interact freely among themselves and are closer to each other than to their authors. From this perspective, the author as an individual human is completely irrelevant to the functioning of artworks in society, and the writer, or in a broader sense, the artist, is more a ‘scriptor,’ an operator of the surrounding texts, than a lone genius from which the artworks spring.

Foucault will agree that the author's personality is not essential for an artwork, and the notion of the author 'function' which he affirmed should not be confused with the person of the author, nor does it refer to the real individual. However, according to him, the author as an artistic/textual subject is still needed in order for readers or audience to reconstruct a genealogy of a discourse to link it and to understand it in its linkage. And while the author's name here has a primarily classificatory role, the ‘author function’ is instead a ‘narrator who is part of a larger social and discursive system of beliefs and assumptions that determine and even limit meaning. This determination is associated with Foucault's great resistance to the vision of the artist as an individual isolated from the rest of society, and it further implies that even that which is seen as the individual personality of an author is always already a socially conditioned subjectivity. And seeing the author as constitutively involved in social contexts and discursive frames instead of as an isolated, unique individual might be a direction that overcomes its withdrawal as implied in Barthes’ proposition. Keeping this remark in mind, at this point, we would leave the Barthes/Foucault debate and once again change the terrain of discussion. 

Chapter 7: Rethinking the Person of the Author

The last topic we would open here is how various and different performances of a self and its multiple social roles relate to the supposedly unique, coherent, and relatively long-lasting entity we call a person. Furthermore, we will examine how the multiplicity, incoherence, and difference may be seen as integral elements instead of undermining it. In some aspects, these issues resonate with postmodern thought, where theses about multiple, dispersed, socially constructed identities have been articulated.

We will now skip the previously discussed topics and start by recalling Goffman's conception of social roles and the conclusion to which his study leads: without understanding performance, we cannot understand what the person as a social category is. Goffman's theses from the late 1950s not only interfered radically in the prevalent Western understanding of the person as formulated over the last few centuries but also showed how social constructivism in regard to the authentic self as the core of the person operated in Western society in the mid-twentieth century.

The historical genesis of that understanding is traced precisely by Sennett, who claims that the fall of public man that has taken place in European bourgeois society from the late eighteenth century onward is caused by the view that while the public is the sphere of artificial social roles, the private is the domain of the human being's authenticity, the realm where we are closest to ourselves. This historical and geo-political sharpening is crucial for the issues we are opening here: because only thanks to this sort of interpretation, it stands to reason that the authentic, private person needs to wear a costume or a mask to go public, and that public social performances are exactly what 'de-personalize' us.

What we can conclude is that, from the point of view of the early eighteenth century, what a person did in the social situation had a founding role, it was real and not what masked the real. The etymology of the term 'person' signals the same reversal of our habitual thinking about its uniqueness and essential coherence. The person' and 'personal' come from the Latin 'persona', from the Greek 'prosopon', which actually means 'mask' and derived from Greek theater; then migrated to theatrical vocabulary as 'dramatis persona', meaning 'theatrical character'; and then 'persona' in current everyday speech. So originally, 'person' was used to refer to someone other than oneself, someone other than we are, and obviously other than what we today consider 'person' to be. This brings us in medias res of the ambivalent title of this chapter, which oscillates between theatrical and legal denotations. Suggesting that the 270 | This could require a broad rethinking of the notion of the person, but we will again narrow the discussion down to a framework of the performing arts 271 | Sennett. “Public Roles." in The Fall of Public Man. 64-89 142 Part III The Self and the Public person of the author is what emerges from being in the person of the author. In other words, the author as person and especially as personality is a social role with quite clear social and historical coordinates. For this reason, we would claim that the person is a persona rather than its opposite, since there is no individual human who is not a social being from the start, constituting herself with and before others. Seen in this way, the seemingly complicated question of the multiplicity of social roles and differences in performances of a self indicates that the person is basically about founding self-performances in their own right.

This constellation was almost lost in the later history of Western thought—theater discourse included—partly due to the influence of the Christian understanding of the person in terms of hypostases as different appearances of the same, of the essence of being, and later also due to the aforementioned historical process in the eighteenth century, a process which turned this understanding into a doxic common sense that reproduced the social order that created it. Therefore, the reasoning that came out of these changes still reverberates in the dilemma we have today when speaking about the person and the performance, be it in art or in the wider social sphere. Is there such a thing as the person who performs different personas, or is the person an outcome of these performances? Although postmodern multiple identities and Barthes' dead author can give us clear answers while contesting the traces of both Christian and bourgeois postulates in this matter, we would take the problematics further, because these answers cannot resolve the problem which latently resides in this dilemma, the problem, namely, of responsibility in the doing of art. We will introduce this problem as the final point of the discussion.

Foucault's and Barthes’ conceptions point precisely to and relieve us from the pseudo-essential constitution of the author by the personal. That is, her personalization, means a privatization of the author subject and ultimately leads to its depoliticization. However, in order to repoliticize the author, de-essentialization is not enough. And at this point, we meet the limit of the Barthesian and postmodern theses which void the locus of responsibility, either as a result of the author's loss of control over meaning, playing freely in intertextual space, or by a dispersion of the author subject into multiple, socially, and arbitrarily constructed identities. This is why we found Foucault's remark about the contextual conditioning of the author-function worth keeping in mind, as it implies that although the author as an individual human does not control the artwork and its functioning in public, as a part of larger social and discursive systems, the author does determine it—or at least takes part in determining it, thereby assuming a portion of the responsibility for it as well.

Therefore, what seems to us politically more radical than the withdrawal of the author is to reassign her the responsibility for what she does in art as a public matter. Not, in this case, due to a preexisting personality expressed or actualized in her doing, but because one is what one does in a certain context. However, one should be reduced neither to the preexisting inner self nor to the arbitrary external readings of the deed. Instead, in doing, the ‘self-construction work’ is accomplished as a joint effort between self-awareness, bodily existence, and external social agencies. And how these three different and possibly incoherent and divergent aspects of the self are put together, is what determines the responsibility of the author in the public sphere. 

Yet nevertheless intertwined, forces correlate! Is changeable and depends precisely on the predominant ideology or, more often the prevailing doxa that operates in a certain context, defining the social subject and role of the doer. Furthering this thesis, in closing, we would reverse the entire problem of art and the personal by concluding that no author can indeed escape the responsibility for doing art, and ‘the person’ is too weak an alibi to mask it for long.

However, we would like to add that we are aware of how our analysis—which contributes to theoretical efforts to contest the essentialization and depoliticization. at the hands of the personal. of the author as a social subject—can only explain the ways in which this paradigm for art is constructed and cannot really destabilize it. It cannot because the cult of personality in art as well as in all other spheres of contemporary society is a doxa that has to do neither with its own conceptual strength, nor with a humanistic concern for the fragile human terrified of false public life. This doxa is only one aspect of an ongoing, overall privatization of the social which can be traced to social relations and relations of production in neoliberal capitalism, a privatization that musters any and all means necessary to promote individualism and personal rights, thereby legitimizing the public relevance of private interests and property.

If there is one performance genre that has retained a privileged status since its emergence in the beginning of the twentieth century, it is solo, first and foremost in dance. Solo dance performance is the format in which the pioneers of modern dance, such as Isadora Duncan or Mary Wigman, acted out not only a historical rupture with ballet, but also their own emancipation as women who choreographed and interpreted their own dance in the first person. The coincidence of the body that is both the source, the material, and the instrument of movement determines a conflation between that body and the self, binding the subject to her sense of self-identity through physical, emotional, spiritual, etc. experience. Solo is probably the most abundant format in dance performance, a mandatory test of artistry in education, as well as a fetish item in a choreographer’s oeuvre. It is often the most inexpensive commodity traded in the performance world nowadays, too. But it is also the form in which many bodily systems and techniques are instructed and exercised in the everyday, ideologically framing the present-day practice of the care of the self through embodiment.


This chapter will examine solo dance as a technique of the self and the related practices of improvisation and body systems from two symmetrical points of interest. Firstly, we will take a naive departure by asking ourselves why solo has been a privileged form of dance and performance since the beginning of the twentieth century. Why are configurations of two or more bodies or group choreographies in modern and contemporary dance through-out the last century until today less prominent than before? How does this relate to the disposition of the public and private spheres of the social field? Answering this question will unpack what historically and politically underlies the emergence of the solo, its characteristic association with democracy in America, to paraphrase Alexis De Tocqueville's seminal work as well as the exclamatory title of Duncan's essay. See America Dancing. Not only does solo owe its stable predominance to an individualism that ideologically frames capitalist relations of production and to the rise of bourgeois society since around 1800, moreover, it is strengthened in the current form of post-Fordist capitalism to the extent that it could be claimed as the performative mode of production, dominant even when it includes collaboration and teamwork.

The other side of our inquiry is social. What______ The first and most ingrained concern of self-expression in dance is the operation of empathy as its intended effect. Self-expression is bound up with the view that dance arises from an expression of an interior compulsion of the dancer and choreographer, whose movement is an index of their interior psychic life. The "expressionistic" dance of Mary Wigman and her American counterpart Martha Graham was advocated on the basis of the connection between movement and personal feeling. John Martin's conception of modern dance was linked with self-expression through the foregrounding of emotion as the cause, meaning, and effect of movement in its aesthetic form, which he defined with the term "metakinesis."

In Martin's theory, there is a necessary correlation between the physical and the psychical as two aspects of a single underlying reality. The causal relation between the performer's feeling, her movement, and the feeling it arouses in the recipient of the movement is founded upon a speculation about the muscular isomorphism in the body of the performer and the spectator, a kind of "inner mimicry."

The ideological fallacy of emotionalism is that it instills a unilateral determination of cause and effect in the genesis and the reception of dance. Movement is predicated of the body that feels, and because it arouses the feeling in its beholder, it is believed to be a medium for the transference of an aesthetic and emotional concept from the consciousness of one individual to another. Such a belief is the very essence of an aesthetic ideology, as Hewitt argues in "Social Choreography: Aesthetics as Performance in Dance and Everyday Life" (2005), because it idealizes the body as a locus of truth.

If we isolate this belief from its originary historical context of modern dance, we observe how it epitomizes an act of private communication under the spell of intimacy. Out of the dark place of the stage looms a figure under the spotlight whose dancing and speaking will always be in the first person because her performance is, as a matter of intuition, thought to reveal her true self or indicate her personal. 

Emotional life solo dance functions as a truth-game in the Foucauldian sense, where the body is understood as the means for expression of individual freedom. It is deemed to offer a physical experience of transcendental subjectivity, suppressing the contingencies that structure experience and reducing the expression of movement to the individual self or to the form that reassures its identity. Thanks to the legacy of modern dance established by the choreographer-dancer's dancing solo in the twentieth century, solo dance today still raises the expectation that it will serve the dancer to present her art of dance, where art bears a sense of craftsmanship, original invention of movements, bodily expression, and even, to a varying extent, a conviction or statement of faith in one's own kind of "art-religion," founded on one's inner compulsion to move.

Dance education pedagogically legitimates and reinforces solo as the truth game: solo is a standard format through which dancers and choreographers are trained to use their own body as an instrument of expression, referring to their individual self and their inner motivation.

The intimate and private act of communication in a solo consists of the situation in which the dancer seems to reveal her art primarily to herself and with herself, whereas the others are allowed to observe this as an emergence of discovery. At the core of solo's intimism lies something which Jacques Derrida has analyzed under the terms 'auto-affection' and 'metaphysics of presence,' often invoking a genre that is close to solo, as solo is often interspersed with its elements—autobiography—as the perfect instance of auto-affection as self-relation.

Auto-affection occurs when one affects oneself, when the affecting is the same as the affected. It has also been described in the late writing of Maurice Merleau-Ponty as the chiasm in the intertwinement of the subject-object positions in the body—the hand that touches is touched.

If modern dance has a special affinity with the phenomenological notion of lived experience (as in Edmund Husserl), or even, as in the later phenomenology of Merleau-Ponty, with embodied experience in the living present of the performance, solo is the form that best entertains this illusion of self-proximity, of there being no external detour between moving one's body and sensing one's body move, seeing oneself in the mirror, hearing oneself speak.

Derrida's deconstruction of auto-affection in phonocentrism, or in self-image in the mirror, highlights the hiatus that detaches the subject from the self, a gap which spaces out the difference between the I-eye and the self as an other. Here we invoke Derrida's critique of the self-identity which is constituted in one's own immediate experience of self-presence because the production of solo in contemporary dance, but also many other bodily techniques of the self, rests on the essentialist phenomenological postulates of consciousness as the embodied experience of one's living present. Derrida's deconstruction critically unfolds the consitution of the modern subject in self-presence and logos, which situates his critique in the Western history of metaphysics. But for an account of the persistence of solo today, Derrida’s critique won't suffice. An explanation must be sought elsewhere, as the next section will convey in the materialist critique of the relations of production that sustain and perpetuate the fantasy and success of this format. 

A WHEEL THAT TURNS ON ITSELF IN A ROOM OF ITS OWN

Taking her cue from Badiou's famous essay ‘Dance as a Metaphor for Thought,’ where the French philosopher describes dance as a figure of a wheel that turns on itself, ‘like a circle in space, but a circle that is not drawn from the outside, but rather draws itself,'27? the Slovene philosopher Bojana Kunst argues that contemporary dance is still mired in the modern notion of the autonomous, self-determined subject, where ‘bodily autonomy’ recurs as an aesthetic utopia time and again. She writes:

Autonomy thus became the key strategy employed by the body to enter the stage of modernity and disclose its own contemporary flow. it is autonomous yet evasive, self-disclosing yet artificial, an eternally wanted but never touched self-rotating wheel.

Kunst identifies the paradox that governs the autonomy of the subject in dance through the autonomy of the body: The more exclusivity it claims through self-reference expressed in the spontaneity of one's authentic movement, the more its autonomy is reduced to a fleeting moment. Thus it discloses its obsession with presence and being-in-the-present at the same time as it decries the historicity and context it rests upon.

Apart from being an aesthetic utopia, the quest for the autonomy of the solo-dancing body resurged as a political strategy in the performance of the particular, where the identity of the subject lies in alterity, in the difference of gender, sexuality, race, nationality, culture, HIV/AIDS, or even, in the 1980s and 1990s, as a constructed story of oneself. Although it particularizes the self, this usage of solo still maintains the regime of representing a certain identity. Only a few initiatives can be noted that utilized the format of solo to undo its representative function and destabilize the identity and subject position of the dancing body. Their strategies include composing monstrous bodies, making assemblages of part-bodies of opposite genders and of human and non-human, treating body as an object, and appropriating expressions of foreign bodies in lieu of original and authentic movement—all of which are strategies, as could be concluded, that revolve around otherness.

"The solo dance that might result from a residency, but also any other working situation, is an inexpensive and efficient product, easy to tour and transport from one theater to another, making networking appear as a smooth space of artistic operation." However, the real commodity that the residency pays for isn't the solo, but the space and the money that amount to an allowance supporting the artist's life, which is subsumed under labor that defers her achievement. The production of the solo often turns into a work-in-progress that supports itself through the artists’ relaying from residency to residency.

"Territory, with its movements of deterritorialization and reterritorialization, implies a mobile, shifting center, the agency of which rests in the nomadic subject of the artist. Proficiency in making a territory emerge, inhabiting it, leaving it, and entering another territory is equated with the ability to navigate opportunities in the market, where the artist as product is regarded as the ultimate object of exchange." According to the dance artist Dragana Bulut's interpretation, where she cites the Slovene theorist Marina Grdinic by directly inscribing her signature on stage in a solo, the dancer establishes a brand of her art. The solo ties the author to the self, not in relation to itself because there exists no interiority. The interiority is exteriority, it is my brand. While the solo was historically introduced as an autographic act, or as that which the performance theorist Rebecca Schneider qualified as a ‘precise and human gesture of ‘unrepeatable and unapproachable nature’ that ‘rescues origin, originality, and authenticity,’ nowadays it more and more becomes a fragmented and dispersed practice of the self.

You are an artist and that means you don't do it for the money. That's what some people think. It's a great excuse not to pay you for all the things you do. So what happens is that you, as an artist, put money into projects that others will show in their museum, in their Kunsthalle, in their exhibition space, in their gallery. So you are an investor, you give loans that nobody will repay you. You take financial risks. You speculate on yourself as an artistic asset. You are a trader. You cannot put all your money into one kind of artistic stocks, so you diversify your activities. You manage the risks you take.

You would say it differently. I know. You say you suffer from a gentle schizophrenia. You are multiple personalities. You are a photographer, but also a DJ. You have a Magazine, you are a publisher, but you also organize parties. You take photos from party people. You throw a party when you present a Magazine. You make magazines with photographs of party people. You throw a party and you are the DJ.

The notion of the artist as an entrepreneur of herself involves désoeuvrement through multiple activities and operations that propel the self of the artist through networking and circulation. The fragment above also points to how the artist's solo practice spills into life, making art and non-art, art and life, and work and non-work indistinguishable.

BETWEEN PRACTICE AND THERAPY

In common parlance, dancers and performance makers nowadays refer to their work not as art, but as practice. This corresponds to what we discussed in chapter seven as the transformation of the meaning of practice into the manifestation of the human will and vital impulse. In dance and performance, it acquires the specific significance of training, exercise, repetition by which contemporary artists take a humble workerist position that considers their art as existing outside of masterpiece culture.

We might ask ourselves what is problematic about this denomination if it can only accurately describe the current post-Fordist subsumption of life under art and capital. 

It conveniently resolves the impasse of the earlier critique of the gap between process and product. The question could be posed differently by asking whether there is an aim to such a practice that could be tested, a problem that the practice poses, revolves around, and tries to solve; and what this practice enables or achieves, or if it is an end in itself. These questions arise from a paradigmatic case of the conflation of solo dance with daily practice, Deborah Hay's Solo Dance Commissioning Project (SDCP), which we will briefly examine here. The project was initiated by the well-known choreographer, whose work carries the aura of experimentation with the everyday as practiced by the neo-avant-garde Judson Dance Theater in the 1960s. It starts as an eleven-day-long residency where dancers commission Hay to guide and coach them in making a solo performance. At the conclusion of the residency, each participant signs a contractual agreement to a 287 | Dieter Lesage. ‘The Portrait of the Artist as Worker, In Vertoag over verzet Politiek in tien von globolisering (Antwerp: Meulenhoff/Manteau, 2004) 288 | See Chrysa Parkinson “On Practice.” in 6MiL, ed. Mette Ingvartsen samizdat, 2008), 24-33.

The technology for the practice that she offers consists of concepts through directives that each performer translates individually into movement in his/her unique way, and meditation-like exercises that bind the artist to the material. The outline of the project underlines its uniqueness in that the artist is also obliged to raise funds for Hay's fee, and for her, the artist's own income in her own community, where 'family, friends, local, state, or national granting agencies, corporations, become the patrons for each dance.'

Several points from the discussion above appear problematic here. The solo performance of the dance artist is authorized by the guru who transmits conceptual directives and exercises accumulated throughout her own lifelong practice. The contract doesn't only posit Hay's ownership, but financially instructs the artist how to sell this future brand-name product to a community in which it could belong. Apart from the tight grip of the hierarchical division of labor and profit implied by this contract, the dance artist submits to a process which explicitly rests on passing faith without critical reflection, as Hay succinctly defined her notion of practice as 'learning without thinking.'

The lure of faith lies in consistency validated through a solitary labor-intensive process where the dancer binds her body to movement, under the auspices of the master. The question arises as to what motivates dancers to seek such guidance from a guru. The project gives insight into the motivations of individuals, one of which is particularly striking to us:

Through her courageous choreographic and performance practice, remarkable language and immediate presence, Deborah has touched and stimulated the most essential places in my artistic expression, encouraging the integration of every aspect of my performing self with my dance. And here remember the pleasure in dance, experience an availability, a flexibility, a wholeness rarely evoked through any other form—touching on my child, adult, fool, craftsman, artist, and essential nature—accessing a very alive and ready state from which to work. The process of creating the solo within Hay’s project thus instills a technology of the self in which the artistic sense of self is reinvigorated through a vitalist commitment to physical work.

The statement above would lose nothing of its specificity if the words "choreographic," "performance," "artistic," "with my dance," and "dance" were omitted. It would read as a report of successful psychotherapy whereby the patient regained confidence in her capacities as well as joy in work. The project displays a model of governmentality where the individual internalizes disciplinary mechanisms by investing desire and fantasy about self-actualization in work. Salo Dance Commissioning Project is an intensive example of how dance provides a set of vitalist techniques of embodiment in which the self is performed at the boundary between individualistic artistic work and psychotherapy.

But modern dance has a long history of engagement with the performance of the self in various body systems and movement practices since the 1950s. A more explicit example among many body system techniques is Authentic Movement, developed throughout the twentieth century. It was originated by Mary Starks Whitehouse (1911-1979), who associated modern dance’s practice of self-expression with Jungian psychotherapy in group processes where participants engage in spontaneous expressive movement exploration. Movement that arises from self-expression was termed "authentic" by Whitehouse's follower Janet Adler, who developed the discipline of Authentic Movement on the following premise:

When the movement was simple and inevitable, not to be changed no matter how limited or partial, it became what I called 'authentic'—it could be recognized as genuine, belonging to that person.

Another widespread technology of the self in dance can be found in improvisation as a mode of performance. Here, movement is spontaneously generated as it is performed before an audience. Improvisation, based on the legacy of contact improvisation, promotes a holistic approach to the body that celebrates the unconscious and a free flow of subjectivity manifested in a form of visceral thinking, as opposed to the rational control of mind and thought expressed in language.

In the lingo of practitioners of improvisation, whose legacy is built on contact improvisation, one of the recurrent themes is a concern with the self expressed as "losing" and getting in touch with oneself. "Loss of the self" is specifically linked with a sensibility of time, improvviso ex tempore, which is perceived in the dancer's auto-affection as "unexpected and "unknown." According to such practice, improvisation offers a technique of inducing the experience of the sublime within one’s presence and being in the present. Movement without a pre-given rhythm and time frame becomes open-ended and thus "unforeseen." This, according to Steve Paxton, whose role nowadays spans from pioneer experimentor to master of improvisation, calls for an interpretation of "out of time" (ex tempore) in two contradictory ways. The time of improvisation should be equated with the human experience of duration, which Paxton defines as the experiences accumulated in life. “Out of time” means that, out of experience (conscious or not), there is material for making something, writes Paxton. Similarly, improvisation has served to void the body from the self, in the famous practice of “detraining” proposed by Paxton in his Small Dance.

The process of detraining involves relaxation, which is, according to Paxton, a voluntary act of a certain kind. An act of “Won't” – that is, won't hold this tension any longer. It's not a negative. It's the opposite of insisting that you have to be what you are in terms of the tensions that have arrived within your body. That insistence is very much some part of the body that says ‘This is me. this is myself.”

Joao Fiadetro, a Portuguese choreographer whose work is based on improvisation, reports that “although the unexpected is extremely rare to an experienced player, it is precisely for that moment that I work—to see a good player in suspense before an ‘unexpected’ and 'enigmatic move from his opponent. I truly believe that it is exactly in that void, the time in parentheses, where life stays on hold for a brief moment, that art (like the game) becomes sublime.”

In an interview with Steve Paxton, he said, “In the midst of standing still, something else is occurring, and the name for that is the Small Dance.”

An exercise of the emancipation of the physical self, detraining has the purpose to reach the deepest hidden ground of the body—its automatic unconscious movements and sensations. Detraining should enable a kind of existence that appears truer and more essential than the truth of the subjective experience of a particular self. Whether it aims for embodiment whereby the sense of self becomes organically bound up with the body or, conversely, paves the way for desubjectivation through the immanence of the body, as we have observed in the various cases above, dance improvisation encapsulates both the individualist ideology and technique of the self in the biopolitical age.

It underlies a large part of solo dance practice for the simple reason that it facilitates a free flow of expression in the first person, considered the truest, most intimate and personal experience of oneself. It favors the inner life of the self in the body, whose privacy is cultivated through imagination and metaphors in which movements, sensations, and emotional states are described. A common technology of dancers entails invoking images that correspond to movements while dancing. The work of the imagination can be based on belief, like in the Body-Mind Centering system, which is founded on a dual claim: firstly, a movement can be initiated in places in the body such as bodily organs and fluids that elude any scientific verification of their host's ability to be aware of them, secondly, the nature of the place in which the movement is initiated will be reflected in the quality of the movement. Or, the production of images can be equated with an intentional feigning, a pretending to know the cause of one's affection and movement for the sake of sustaining such experience. Regardless of being unconscious or voluntary and intentional. The production of images in the dancer who focuses on her own body (primarily in solo) resembles early psychiatric and pseudomedical practices of psychotherapy, such as the power of imagination and autosuggestion, developed from the end of the nineteenth into the early twentieth century, approximately during the same period as the solo dance emerged in early modernism. The method of the French pharmacologist and practitioner of hypnosis Emile Coué and autogenic training by the German psychiatrist Johannes Heinrich Schultz are exemplary here.

While the Couée method centers on the routine repetition of an expression by eliminating the resistance of willpower and independent judgment, autogenic training involves exercises practiced daily in which a set of visualizations is repeated to induce a state of relaxation caused by its influence on the autonomic nervous system. The exercises read like a score in a manual or how-to of self-mastery. The tasks are to be executed in the imagination rather than in movement, yet the very form of writing in the imperative, in the direct address, and the call to occupy oneself with one’s own body and consciousness makes any comparison with dance scores quite striking.

The Swedish choreographer Efva Lilja begins her booklet "100 Exercises for a Choreographer and Other Survivors" with the following Exercise 1: "Stand still. Close your eyes and think of the last three sentences you spoke. Seek movements that express what you meant. Take a step and formulate three sentences that express the experience of what you are now doing. Do it!"

Exercise 2: "Stand still. Close your eyes and let your hands scan your body's contours. Touch every part of the body, with particular attention to those parts you normally cannot see. Write down your experiences and save them as Portrait No! 001."

The mantra-like repetition of the imperative "do it" indicates submission to the task, an advice to refrain from any further thought and judgment, which is presented as necessary to attain the state or experience that the exercises promise. The concrete and simple nature of the task that resembles an everyday routine contrasts with a vague sense of purification to be reached, or perhaps livelihood in an intensified experience of one's own vitality.

The sense closes upon the self, writing it—at least for a moment of this intensive experience of being in the present—out of history, geography, social and political context, relations with disturbing others, as well as away from any thought which problematizes itself.

The above analysis has not attempted to reduce solo dance or dance at large to its relation to self-identity, instead, its aim has been to observe how the tradition of dancing solo has produced an intensive model of performance of the self and what we can observe about the particular techniques of the self today through this model.

Our conclusion rests on the image of the closing paragraph above: one of self-absorption. If the intimate society from the end of the nineteenth century, as Sennett defines it, has yielded the narcissistic self that confuses the spheres of private and public, the question remains______ Post-Fordism, the experience society, and so forth—changed with respect to the position and performance of the self in those spheres. What can be preliminarily inferred is that the change is of a degree and not of a kind: the performance of individuals demonstrates absorption in self-affection and the experience of oneself. This might not mean that the division between public and private is abolished due to the public sphere's overpopulation by individualistic interests and expressions, but that the divide persists in the disconnection of the techniques and performances of individuals from the public as a political sphere. The loss of the public sphere is attributable to the public.


The Self and the Public as it turns toward the individual, stimulating the individual's self-expression and auto-affection, its preoccupation with its own well-being, bolstered by a practice of techniques that intertwine or inhabit the border between art and therapy. One of the implications of this centralization of the self in society, which we will pursue further, is how self-absorption stands as an obstacle to the social imagination of group formations, collectivities, or movements that would reclaim the public sphere.

Among the questions that arose here to be pursued further, we register the following: how are individualism and collectivism ideologically confronted today? One path to answering this is to search for the models of collectivity upon which the public sphere has been historically constituted. Another way is to examine how the performance of the self functions within group, collective, and mass agencements of the public. Yet another set of problems revolves around art and the public sphere, on the one side, and art and the public and common good, on the other side.

The status of art within many debates about the transformation of the public sphere and society today is volatile, and, as we remarked, in some cases controversial—when art is uncritically set as a model of revolutionary change or as a playground for exercising radically adverse developments of capitalism. The most difficult inquiry concerns the defense of art as a public and common good. This will necessitate its measurement against more unequivocal social demands and concerns, such as free education and healthcare.

Lastly, for us to further explore the relations between self and group, collective, and mass configurations of the public, as well as the set of functions and places art can occupy in the public sphere today, we will have to revise our analytical framework, derived from performance, where, in addition to choreography, drama and performance, dramaturgy, and staging will resurface [159, Final Remarks Public Sphere by Performance].





===============================================================\n\n\n




Rave Culture and Religion


Rave Culture and Religion

Rave Culture and Religion explores the role of the technocultural rave in the spiritual life of contemporary youth. Documenting the sociocultural and religious parameters of rave and post-rave phenomena at various locations around the globe, scholars of contemporary religion, dance ethnologists, sociologists, and other cultural observers unravel this significant youth cultural practice.

The collection provides insights on developments in post-traditional religiosity (especially 'New Age' and 'Neo-Paganism') through studies of rave's gnostic narratives of ascensionism and re-enchantment, explorations of the embodied spirituality and millennialist predispositions of dance culture, and investigations of transnational digital-art countercultures manifesting at geographic locations as diverse as Goa, India, north-eastern New South Wales, Australia, and Nevada's Burning Man Festival.


Rave Culture and Religion will be essential reading for advanced students and academics in the fields of sociology, cultural studies, and religious studies.

Graham St John is Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Centre for Critical and Cultural Studies at the University of Queensland, where he is working on a critical ethnography of the Australian techno-tribal movement, and researching new youth countercultures and unofficial strategies of reconciliation. He recently edited Foreword

Never trust a writer to chronicle a movement. Those of us filing early dispatches from the temporary autonomous zones later known as raves really thought we were just observing the scene—well, participating in the way that all journalists since Hunter S. Thompson have had to acknowledge their own presence at the fringe of the story, but not really engaging in the event as one of them, those kids who really think something is happening beyond a bunch of people dancing on drugs. Right. You try going to a rave as a spectator and see what happens. For me, it all began while I was researching a book on early cyberculture. Around 1990, the entirety of California's emerging digital society seemed to be summed up by a single image: the fractal. I'd see the paisley-like geometry on Grateful Dead tickets, in new reports out of UC Santa Cruz about systems theory, on the T-shirts of kids also wearing cryptic smiles, in books on chaos maths and on the computer screens of virtual-reality programmers at Sun. These depictions of non-linear math equations—equations that cycle almost infinitely rather than finding 'solutions' as we commonly think of them—embodied a new way of looking at the world. As we were all to learn, the fractal is a self-similar universe. Zoom in on one level, and you find a shape strikingly similar but not exactly the same as one on a higher level, and so on. The fractal is a conceptual leap, inhabiting the space between formerly discrete dimensions. It allows us to measure the very rough surfaces of reality—rocks, forests, clouds, and the weather—more accurately and satisfactorily than the idealistic but altogether limited linear approximations we'd been using since the ancient Greeks. The fractal heralded a new way of looking at the world—of experiencing it—and of understanding that every tiny detail reflected, in some small way, the entirety of the system.

That's why, when an anonymous skate kid on the Lower Haight handed me a tiny swatch of paper with a fractal stamped on one side, I was compelled to turn it over and try to decrypt the little map on the other. By about two the next morning, having found the mysterious location (apparently an abandoned whorehouse in Oakland), I also discovered the true meaning of the fractal.

I was a writer—on assignment from New York, with a real advance. That gave me the perfect excuse to play the part of participant-observer. I stood on the fringe, watching the crazy kids on E drinking their smart drinks, playing with brain xiii machines, and dancing under lasers to the 120 bpm bleep tracks. I thought it was cool. I happened upon an update of the Acid Test, an environment designed to induce altered states of consciousness. I didn't take it so very seriously, though, until I began talking with the organizers.

I was the first journalist on this particular scene, and I got the royal treatment. This was before the rave movement and most of the rest of America became a media circus. There were still a few pockets like this one, and grunge, that remained relatively undiscovered country. But, unlike grunge, the kids making raves in America wanted to be discovered. They believed that they had created a hybrid of countercultural agenda and mainstream hype.

It was a delicate balance, but the main idea was to make love trendy. All you had to do to 'get it' was show up, maybe pop an E, and dance with the beautiful boys and girls. That's right—dance with everyone, not a partner. It wasn't about scoring; it was about group organism. Like a slam-dance or mosh pit, but without the slamming. Just the groove. And the smiles.

If everything went right—and usually everything went right—there'd be a moment, or maybe even a whole hour—when it just clicked into place. All the individual dancers would experience themselves as this single, coordinated being. A creature with a thousand arms and eyes, making love with itself and reaching back as far as creation and forward to the very end of time. They became a living fractal, feeding back on itself—sometimes quite literally with video cameras, projectors, and screens—right through to infinity. And, as Peter Pan, the first fairytale raver, told us, 'beyond'.

Evolution was no longer competition, it was a team sport. Fuelled by music, chemicals, motion, and, most of all, empathy. We were navigating a course through hyperspace to the attractor at the end of history.

Did I say 'we'? Of course I mean 'they'. For I was determined to remain on the fringe. One foot in, so I'd know what I was writing about, but one foot out, so I'd maintain my journalistic integrity. Or so I thought. For what was I really hanging on to by keeping one foot off the dance floor at all times? Perspective? What did that matter when the view from inside the fractal is no less objective? All perspectives are arbitrary.

Besides, how could I write about what this thing called 'rave' really looks like if I didn't know how the group sees itself? After all, that's the whole point of this exercise, right? To create group consciousness and group perspective? No, I wasn't maintaining journalistic integrity at all, I told myself. I was just afraid of losing myself to the sea of love, breaking the boundaries that helped me maintain the illusion that I am me, Douglas, the separate person from you and them. So, as I'm sure you've guessed by now, I went in. It was contagious, alive, welcoming, and so very very seductive. I felt a lust for merging with this creature and its many component people. They got me, and then I was it.

I dutifully wrote my books about what I found out: there's a bunch of people dancing to a new kind of music, but it isn't just dancing because they've learned how to make God. Add a few bracketing devices so it doesn't look like I necessarily believe they can do what they think they're doing, and call it a day.

I couldn't emerge from the experience of rave without becoming its chronicler and propagandist. My work of that period is more valuable as an example of what people wrote like when they were experiencing the rave reality. After I was done with my 'non-fiction' book about this culture, I wrote a fictitious novel that was entirely more accurate.

The contributors to this book have taken the time and exercised the discipline necessary to put rave in its proper historical and social context as a religious movement. I may have some problems with the word "religion" because it sounds so organized and institutional, while rave has always been such a spontaneous and emergent phenomenon.

If it really is a religion, then I suppose rave is over in some respects. Once it can be catalogued and comprehended, is it still a spiritual experience capable of breaking the boundaries between self and everything else? Perhaps not. But beware. You don't have to be on E, or even in a club, to be infected by the very viral thought structures and emotional responses generated by a rave gathering.

The raves on pages ahead of you are still occurring, and no matter how removed you think you might be from their effects, the logic of the fractal may just come to include you, too.


Acknowledgements

The compilation of this collection was motivated by extended morning sessions with fellow liminars on dance floors and adjacent environs in the southeast of Australia. The book, and the editor's own contributions in particular, became the progeny of this "community of feeling", and was made manifest with the assistance of various midwives.

Discussions and exchanges with contributors to the collection assisted in its production. Communications with Frangois Gauthier, Hillegonda C.Rietveld, Des Tramacchi, Robert Kozinets and Erik Davis proved particularly stimulating and helpful at various times, and I would like to thank them.

Introduction

Graham St John

Dance parties have transmuted the role that organised religion once had to lift us onto the sacramental and supramental plane. (Ray Castle, in ENRG 2001:169)

From African priests to Korean shamans, there was and still is the belief that dance and music can open communication with intangible powers and produce tangible benefits for the communities involved: self-knowledge; fuller understanding of the natural world; good health; and a sense of belonging to a supportive group in an often dark and hostile but ultimately understandable universe. (Apollo 2001: issue 34)

David danced and sang before God and we're just bringing it back with a funkier beat.! On the other side of nihilism new formations are emerging, this time exploiting the faultlines in the cultural landscape by slipping through the gaps. Ecstatic dance offers one such line of flight. Dance culture exploits the power of music to build a future on the desolate terrain of the present. (Hemment 1996:26)

In early December 2002, several thousand psychedelic trance enthusiasts journeyed to Lindhurst in the South Australian outback where, in the calm of a weeklong sonic onslaught, they witnessed a total solar eclipse. With precedents like the Solipse festivals in Hungary and Zambia, Outback Eclipse attracted young electronic dance music habitués from dozens of nations. Contemporary global events like Solipse, Portugal’s Boom, Japan’s Solstice23 and Australia’s Exodus Cybertribal Festival draw inspiration from epic beach parties at the former Portuguese colony of Goa (India) and Moontribe’s Full Moon gatherings in the Mojave Desert near Los Angeles. While diverse themselves, these events represent a mere snapshot of the moving panorama of that which came to be known as rave:* from the celebration of celestial events at remote locations to electro-salvation at metropolitan massives; 2 INTRODUCTION from temporary Arcadias flourishing in converted warehouses, to transformational rituals like those facilitated by Philadelphia’s Gaian Mind, to the brand-name liminality of super-clubs like London’s Ministry of Sound; from huge corporate-sponsored extravaganzas like Tribal Gathering (where tens of thousands may congregate), to ‘megatribal’ gatherings like Earthdream, a ‘technomadic’ carnival held annually in Central Australia and destined to culminate on 21 December 2012 in accordance with the Mayan Sacred Calendar; from the gospel-inspired exhilaration of house and garage, to the Afrofuturism of jungle and Detroit techno, to techno-pagan doof______ Electronic dance music culture is a truly heterogeneous global phenomenon, motivating new spiritualities and indicating the persistence of religiosity amongst contemporary youth. Despite its hybridization throughout the 1990s, the dance party rave—involving masses of young people dancing all night to a syncopated electronic rhythm mixed by DJs—maintains rapturous popularity in the West, developing diasporic tendrils from Ibiza to London, West Coast USA to Goa, India, Japan to South Africa, Brazil to Australia, and tourist enclaves from Thailand to Madagascar. Commonly accorded effects ranging from personal ‘healing’ or replenishment to transformations on social, cultural or political scales, rave—from clubland to outdoor doof, to technomadic festival—is a hyper-crucible of contemporary youth spirituality. Thus the question motivating this volume: what exactly is the role of the technocultural rave in the spiritual life of contemporary youth?

Emerging in London in 1988, and subsequently exported around the world, rave has proliferated and mutated alongside associated music and body technologies. Its primary theatre of action was and remains the dance floor, a kinaesthetic maelstrom inflected by diverse sonic currents and technological developments influencing that which has been generically dubbed ‘house’, ‘electronica’ and ‘techno’. Throughout the 1990s rave grew prevalent in the experience of urban youth as vast numbers attached primary significance to raving. With the combined stimulus of electronic musics, psychotropic lighting, chemical alterants and all-night dancing, young novices and experienced habitués transcended the mundane in converted warehouses, wilderness areas, beaches, deserts and streets. Decked out in esoteric accessories, ultra violet (UV)-reactive clothing, personalized icons and an array of assimilated ‘religious’ glossolalia, their ecstatic experiences moved multitudes to draw on a plenitude of traditional interpretative religious frameworks—Hindu, Buddhist, Christian, pagan, Australian Aboriginal, mystical, etc.—often refracted through lenses taken up by generational forebears themselves heir to frameworks inadequate for communicating their own revelations. Such communications are fraught with the dilemmas not unfamiliar to earlier generations of youth, for there exists a curious tension between contraries within the culture of rave. The desire to disseminate event-derived revelations, to mount the ‘rave-o-lution’, competes with a desire to remain hidden, covert, cultic even. For many, the orthodox rave is, and should remain, underground, with the location of parties communicated by word of mouth and on subtle flyers distributed through local channels. Efforts to maintain a ‘tribal’ identity, an ‘underground sociality’ (Maffesoli 1996), through commitment to genre (e.g. jungle, psytrance, gabba, garage, ragga, two step, etc.) and to the almost universal envelope-pushing esoterica. Simon Reynolds (1998: xvii) identifies as hardcore, evidence a refusal, an aloofness, an invisibility thought to hold back the long entwined arms of state administrations and corporate entertainment industries—which have made significant advances in regulating and assimilating this culture. Yet, while with acid house ‘a whole subculture attempts to vanish’ (Melechi 1993:38), others rupture this logic of disappearance, desiring to inject the ‘meme’ into the parent culture, to share the conspiracy, converting, through various channels, the ‘hundredth monkey’. While tacticians of dance undertake to transform values without seeking to attract attention to themselves, for cultural luminaries' disappearance and secrecy cultivate paranoia and panic, thwarting the critical mass pursued. Rave enjoys a direct inheritance from disco and house developments in the post-Stonewall gay communities of New York City (NYC) and Chicago in the 1970s and 1980s. As Apollo (Henry Kielarowski) postulates in his intimate history of house, House Music 101, it was in this period in NYC that an oppressed subculture consisting of a fair proportion of African-Americans and Latinos gave birth to house music and modern electronic dance culture. Deriving from gospel, soul and funk, as well as Latino salsa, house is said to be the music ‘of both sin and salvation’, an attempt to ‘reconcile body and soul’ which, in its current manifestations, retains ‘that yearning we all have to celebrate the spirit through the body’ (Apollo 2001: issue 3). Significantly, house evolved at a time when it was widely anticipated by its adherents that it would abolish all ‘the soul sickness of the world—tracism, bigotry, poverty, Puritanism, war—and establish a new order based on peace and love’ (ibid.). The anthem was sampled and remixed in time for the much-mythologized ‘second summer of love’ (late 1980s), and at the beginning of the 21st century, post-rave maintains a millennialist charge. Members of the rave milieu hold shares in ecstatic “communities of feeling’, both clandestine and over the counter. A popular vehicle of hope, compassion, and expectancy—surely amplified at a time when a millennium closes and another begins—rave holds a conspiratorial optimism, perhaps best characterized by zippie Fraser Clark’s widely promoted ‘pronoia’, a term coined by Electronic Frontier Foundation co-founder and Grateful Dead lyricist John Perry Barlow as ‘the suspicion the Universe is conspiring on your behalf.’

Assembled from cyber, digital, and chemical technologies, rave is believed to be the foundation for a culture democratic, empathogenic, cyborgian, and sublime—its culture a determined flight, with varying degrees of success, from pop, rock, and club realms where the dancing body is an object of media, state (and male) surveillance. While indebted to the 1960s, which saw the mass production and distribution of new technologies of transformation (especially LSD) and multimedia excursions like Kesey’s Trips Festival (San Francisco, January 1966), the empathetic character distinctive to rave has been largely activated by the ‘love drug’ MDMA, or ‘ecstasy’—an entheogenic ‘body technology’ regarded as something of a ‘utopiate’ infiltrating house club culture through 1970s and 1980s gay and mixed club scenes, psycho-therapeutic circles, and new spiritual formations in the US (Eisner 1994; Beck and Rosenbaum 1994). In his comprehensive treatment of dance culture, Energy Flash,° Reynolds suggests that ‘E’ was early exalted as ‘the remedy for alienation caused by an atomised society’, with rave evolving ‘into a self-conscious science of intensifying MDMA’s sensations’ (1998: xxii, xxvi). Despite commercial encroachment and state regulatory controls, through Chicago house and with the advent of acid house (in the late 1980s, UK) a utopic strain has nourished the hybrid rave experience and remains at the center of its self-promotion—a utopianism expressed in the pop-mantra PLUR (peace, love, unity, respect), the ‘Four Pillars of House Community’ adapted from comments attributed to DJ Frankie Bones at a Brooklyn Storm Rave in 1992 (Fritz 1999:203-4). Post-rave promoters have successfully endorsed raving as a possibility engine for the self; a nocturnal utopia upon which rave-tourists disembark from their everyday lives; an antinomian otherworld within which event-inhabitants are licensed to perform their other selves; a sacred topos where dance-initiates and habitués (re)connect with co-liminars, nature, and the cosmos. Many commentators celebrate the non-Christian religiosity of dance ‘ritual’, dubbing it, as does chaos art designer Gregory Sams (1997), the ‘new church’. Optimistic or nostalgic, embracing pre- or post-Christian communions, post-rave pundits champion the ‘shamanic’ states of consciousness engendered or ‘trance’ states triggered by the new ritual.

The rhythmic soundscapes of electronic dance music genres are thought to inherit the sensuous ritualism, percussive techniques, and chanting employed by non-Western cultures and throughout history for spiritual advancement. As house is compared favorably with the Cult of Oro in pre-Christian Polynesia, the Hopi Indian Snake Dance, and Yoruba trance (Apollo 2001: issue 33), and raving with Sufi dancing or the Kirtan dancing of Hare Krishnas (Fritz 1999), the new church is, as Jimi Fritz claims in his Rave Culture: An Insider’s Overview, ‘non-denominational’—with the ‘trance states’ serving ‘a more personal journey through the dancer’s own psyche that can ultimately prove to be...rewarding for spiritual or psychological growth’ (Fritz 1999:79).

While rave’s trance dance is rarely culturally encoded and incorporated into everyday life in a fashion that may characterize the experience of the Yoruba, having caught the eye of ‘post-modern theologians’, the new ‘mass’ has been embraced for ecumenical purposes, a circumstance exemplified by the monthly Techno Cosmic Mass in Oakland, California, where the Episcopal priest and director of the University of Creation Spirituality, Matthew Fox, adopts electronic music, multimedia, trance dancing, and rap to revitalize the Judeo-Christian Mass, to reawaken ‘a sense of the sacred’.

Extolled as a source of growth, union, salvation, or the sacred, raving is thus exalted as a site of becoming. Driven by post-1960s millenarianism, many have labored to disclose a ‘revolutionary’ culture holding the potential ‘to ultimately change the course of human consciousness’ (Fritz 1999:38). With rave, class, ethnicity, gender, and other social distinctions were imagined to dissipate. Thus, according to one baton-wielding commentator: “We are the visionaries, and it is our job to slowly change society. There was a women’s movement, a sexual revolution, and many other giant steps taken by previous generations. It is now time for the next revolution’ (Pete, in Saunders et al. 2000:175). In the euphoric head-rush of post-apartheid South Africa, David Dei and Jesse Stagg (n.d.) wrote that ‘fascism dissolves before the resistance of the rave generation’ and the ‘love virus’ said to be infecting South African youth in the early 1990s. Offering a blueprint for social change, trailblazing a path to the promised land, the ‘Mass’, ‘movement’ or ‘rave nation’ elicited by these authors, practitioners, and spokespeople is even thought to seed ‘a new form of liberation theology’ (Hill 1999:97). Sampling ‘brotherhood’ and ‘heart chakras’, rave evangelists communicate their conversion experiences. Amidst a rich vein of reports, Fritz communicates his first rave (at the age of 40): I had walked into a different world. Without judgment or fear, I was in a sea of 600 radiant souls, putting into practice 5,000 years of religious and philosophical hypothesis. Beyond the conceptual world of ideas and dogma, this was a direct experience of tribal spirituality practiced by our ancestors. My experience that night changed my life for the better (Fritz 1999: 5-6). Subsequent to his revelation, Fritz went forth to deliver the word. Other commentary, including that rising to the surface of the global mediascape and evident in the serial moralizing of Christian teen fiction (cf. LaHaye and DeMoss 2001), questions the meaning and morals of rave/dance culture, challenging the quality of the 'communion', the purpose of the 'ritual' and the substance of this youth 'movement'. Gauging the range of responses to youth ekstasis, the collective expression amongst contemporary youth of that which for Reynolds smells like 'Dionysian spirit', is a curious project. For establishment reaction, evident for example in the notorious RAVE (or Reducing Americans' Vulnerability to Ecstasy) Bill in the United States, reveals a trenchant fear of youth transcendence—as authorities, suspicious of bodily pleasure, conflate dance with moral corruption. Yet the prospect is also received with discomfort and even treated with contempt by an academic tradition inheriting the scepticism of Birmingham's Centre for Contemporary and Cultural Studies, for whom neo-Marxist-oriented youth cultural 'resistance' was primary. By and large, youth cultural studies has unsatisfactorily addressed both dance—dismissed as a retreat from (masculine) resistance—and non-traditional youth religiosity. From the jazz, rock, purist perspective, dance maintains a 'seductive' force, thought to 'weaken critical faculties by encouraging us to respond to music in ways which involve neither contemplation nor respect' (Straw 2001: 159). Disciplinary paradigms populated by secular humanists too often baulk at the prospect of young (especially white) people corporealizing utopian dreams, entering alternate states of consciousness and communicating with the sacred (with or without the assistance of psychoactives). This is probably, in part, due to the way rational sociological models cannot possibly circumscribe that which Rudolf Otto named the 'mysterium tremendum', the religious experience which he indicated 'may burst in sudden eruption up from the depths of the soul with spasms and convulsions, or lead to the strongest excitements, to intoxicated frenzy, to transport, and to ecstasy' (1959: 27). Furthermore, the significance of that which the anthropologist of cultural performance Victor Turner dubbed the realm of the 'subjunctive mood'—a world of 'wish, desire, possibility or hypothesis' (Turner 1982: 83)—has been routinely overlooked or misapprehended by practitioners of youth cultural studies. Ludic spaces are too often cast as 'frivolous' and 'inconsequential'. Although recent dance ethnographies conducted on clubbing (Malbon 1999; Pini 2001) provide exceptions, the highly valued, unpredictable and potentially transcendent alterities licensed are often dismissed as irrational and mere 'pretence' as emic play is consigned to the devalued territory of 'make-believe' or 'fantasy' (Handelman 1990: 70). While an apparent depthless 'hyperreality' transpires (see Redhead 1993), the 'fantasy of liberation' (Melechi 1993: 37) thought to characterize rave demonstrates continuity with the ineffectual 'rituals of resistance' thought to underline earlier youth 'subcultures'. Questioning rave's millennialism, some commentators challenge the ostensible levelling of social relations of the liberatory rave (e.g. McRobbie 1994:170; Thornton 1995; Saldanha 2002). Others, like Douglas Rushkoff (1999), have lamented the compromising of rave's 'Sabbath'-like holy day by corporate interests and politics. Others still, usually health researchers, have highlighted the risks to youth posed by ecstasy, often having neglected to report that much of what passes for 'ecstasy' is substituted (often cut with aspirin, caffeine, methamphetamine or other dangerous substances), with national prohibitionary classifications and the intransigent dismissal of harm-minimization strategies unnecessarily compromising public health and increasing risks for the uneducated. The title of one publication, The Love Drug: Marching to the Beat of Ecstasy (Cohen 1998), calls up an image of innocent youth seduced by an insipid robo-pharmacological pied piper. For Reynolds (1998), a dystopic comedown from chemical nirvana suggests that the living dream may have turned nightmare—with raving mutating from a 'paradise regained' to a 'psychic malaise'. With the excessive and routinized use of adulterated ecstasy (and increased polydrug abuse—e.g. mixing with 'crystal meth' and other 'obliviates') 'scenes lose their idyllic lustre and become a soul-destroying grind' (Reynolds 1998:xxxi; see also Push and Silcott 2000: ch. 13). And, together with genre fragmentation, the plunge into rave's dark side has precipitated a 'seeping away of meaning, the loss of a collective sense of going somewhere' (Reynolds 1997: 102).

What is the religious experience of rave? Is it confined to the appropriation of religious resources and iconography such as the ironized Christian motifs of Drop Bass Network's 'Jesus Raves', held in Racine, Wisconsin in June 2002? Is rave just one more cultural sphere in tension with established practices and public policy 'using religion' to symbolize 'ultimate meaning, infinite power, supreme indignation and sublime compassion'? (Beckford 1989:172). Does spiritual rhetoric serve to establish subcultural capital within youth milieus? Or does rave contextualize phenomenal religious experiences? Does it conform to Bauman's perceived devolution or 'relocation' of religious experience as 'the product of a life devoted to the art of consumer self-indulgence' (Bauman 1998:70) or assist in delivering youth from a legion of maladies and stresses, offering meaning, purpose and hope to those whose playground may otherwise be confined to the parameters of Playstation II? A religious experience or a total leisure concept? Should we thus give credence to the experiences of its adherents as genuinely liberating or transcendent? Does rave assist in the provision of assurance in the face of pain, suffering and mortality, providing answers to life's mysteries, or is this a contemporary realm for 'psychedelic theophanies' where, as Huston Smith (1976:155) warned, one more readily finds an addiction to acquiring 'the religious experience' above commitment to 'the religious life'? Furthermore, what is rave's ritual character? Is it a rite of passage—and, if so, what is its level and quality of efficacy? What is its telos? Is it a ritual of communion, a mass 'return' to a 'womb' which sees co-inhabitants secure in a nutrient-rich and numinous pre-separation stage, or an anomic post-partum "dead-zone' catering for escapist desires and tragic careers in over-expenditure? An 'oceanic experience' (Malbon 19______ After all, as Heelas has stated, in the de-traditionalized present, “people have what they take to be ‘spiritual’ experiences without having to hold religious belief” (1998:5). The current volume holds that something substantial is at work in dance culture. Rave culture has certainly not been impervious to niche marketing, consumer pressure, and brand loyalties, and it would not be inaccurate to articulate contemporary formations as part of the ‘meta-experiential goods and services’ industry run by today’s peak-experience providers (Bauman 1998). Yet, as a temporary respite from the cycle of living-through-buying at the heart of possessive materialism, as a community largely for and by youth, rave and its progeny are potent sites of being together. And this, together with an understanding of the commitments undertaken by young people to defend their community from those who would imperil or undermine it, should provide us with a subject worthy of our contemplation.

The collection is divided into four parts. The first, “Techno culture spirituality”, deciphers trends within the fast developments and vast detritus of rave culture. In the road-mapping of a spiritual practice and the fashioning of a teleology, a purpose, a commitment, the dance millennium draws upon a vast repertoire of theistic and communitarian principles. In Chapter 1, “The difference engine: liberation and the rave imaginary”, the editor initiates a comprehensive investigation of rave’s religiosity, exploring the vast psycho-cultural terrain of the rave imaginary. Attending to primary narratives (ascensionist and re-enchantment) and soteriological functions, I explore the liberatory configuration of rave, charting the gnostic and salvific themes implicit in its culture and illuminating contemporary youth participation in key developments (e.g., New Age and Neo-Pagan) of post-traditional religiosity.

While dancescapes are often reported to be utopic experiences, perhaps best translated—in the language of Victor Turner—as a techno-‘communitas’ (a theme cropping up regularly throughout the volume), they are complex utopic sites, often appearing rather heterotopic in character. Elective ‘disappearance’ into carnivalesque zones facilitating sustained experimentation with subjectivity and community enables the modification of self and society but it does so in a hyper-liminal context. As a techno-communion, dance culture constitutes an interfacing of technology and humans, a core theme taken up by Hillegonda C.Rietveld in Chapter 2, ‘Ephemeral spirit: sacrificial cyborg and communal soul’. Undertaking an exploration of techno (trance) and house developments in the history of electronic music, Rietveld concludes that, as an ‘interface spirituality’, post-rave is the ‘spiritual rite of the post-industrial cyborg’. Both this and the previous chapter are partially informed by Erik Davis’s Techgnosis (1998). While the former makes a not always clear division of the posthumanist (spirituality) from the revivalist (sacrality) trajectories of techno, Rietveld makes a corresponding distinction between a cyborgian techno spirit and a gospel-influenced (and thus embodied and ensouled) house community—an analysis informed by the sexual politics of electronic music: where males become more devoted to a machine aesthetic, females are engaged in the scene’s human relational experience. Sacrifice is another key theme common to both opening chapters. While in the earlier contribution individual commitment to underground (‘DIY’) events forges community identification and may facilitate redemption, in the latter an adaptation of Georges Bataille’s concept of sacrifice informs Rietveld’s observation of the dancer losing self to the music, to the machine, thereby assisting transition to a cyborg-like subjectivity in a period of information-technology-induced identity crisis. The theme of self-sacrifice assists our passage to Part II, "Dance, rapture and communion," which investigates the primary activity of raving. In Chapter 3, "Rapturous ruptures: the 'instituant' religious experience of rave," Francois Gauthier draws on seminal French theory to explicate how rave's primary activity constitutes a religious experience. As he explains, the strong and growing "effervescence" of rave in contemporary youth culture, illustrates thriving religiosity in fragmented and non-institutional forms.

In conjunction with an application of French anthropologist and theorist of contemporary religion Roger Bastide, which assists in the transcription of raving as 'savage trance' in a period where 'truth and meaning must come from and be judged on the scale of experience', Gauthier draws upon a depth reading of Bataille to regard rave as an exemplary manifestation of the 'damned', 'blasted' or 'accursed share' of contemporary humanity. Focusing on its tendency towards excess and communion, rave is perceived as a cultural resurgence of the festive, an eternal present 'brewing up mythologies of an elsewhere' which provides 'new avenues for experiences of the sacred in an atomized society'.

Committed to a 'logic of sacrificial consumption', rupturing the profane, becoming 'other' or 'feral' to rock spectaculars and 'domesticated' leisure practices, and facilitating a transgression most readily observable in the abandon of dance or 'trance', rave hastens that which Bastide calls an 'instituant' religious experience. Curiously, the savage religion of the 'instituant' experience parallels performance ethnographer Victor Turner's concept of 'spontaneous communitas', itself indexing a primary moment, an apocalypse of subjectivity. Like the instituant, communitas often catalyses normative social configurations, which themselves stimulate unstructured, or 'anti-structural' paroxysms.

Indeed, Turner's work has become seminal to rave culture studies. Such is demonstrated in Chapter 4, "“Connectedness” and the rave experience: rave as new religious movement?". Drawing upon an ethnographic study of the central Canadian rave scene, Tim Olaveson pays tribute to the utility of Turner and Emile Durkheim, whose equivalent approaches to public paroxysms—as 'communitas' and 'effervescence— offer conceptual value in the systematic exploration of a core attribute of raving— 'connectedness'. Olaveson proposes that rave's techniques and practices of connectedness demonstrate instances of 'syncretic ritualizing' (Grimes) which, in their creative spontaneity, their 'vibe' (a theme arising elsewhere in the volume— Chapter 7-10), constitute a likely source of contemporary cultural revitalization. Thus, his discussion also raises the possibility of understanding rave as a new religious movement, adaptive to the apparent meaninglessness of consumer culture—a prospect tentatively embraced since global rave is hardly a 'movement' or 'cult' with a central body of teachings or a single charismatic leader.

While Olaveson holds 'connectedness' to be a phenomenological experience involving an embodied condition, it is James Landau who attends to the corporeal experience of raving, in Chapter 5. With the assistance of traditional philosophies of depth, in "The flesh of raving: Merleau-Ponty and the 'experience' of ecstasy" Landau describes the lived, bodily experience of ravers' self/other boundary dissolution. Deleuze and Guattari's Body-without-Organs (BwO) and the Lacanian Real are found wanting. But, with its emphasis on reversibility, ambiguity, and interconnectedness, with its non-dualistic ‘ontology of the flesh’, Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenology is cast as a useful model for understanding the apparent contradiction in the ecstatic rave experience: the claim that participants feel simultaneously ‘dissolved within and separate from the universe.’ Such is possible since the body possesses ‘innate 10 INTRODUCTION knowledge’ of its simultaneous unity with the world and its alterity from it—its “difference-within-identity.’

Any study of electronic music culture, especially with relation to the sense of community, abandonment, and transcendence occasioned on the dance floor, would be incomplete without attention to the significance of psychoactive substances or ‘entheogens’—a non-pejorative, non-ethnocentric term recommended by Ott (1993) to indicate shamanistic substances. While Landau laudably avoids a ‘neurodeterministic reduction of ecstasy to MDMA,’ we cannot ignore the role of substances like MDMA, LSD, or other entheogens in dance.

In ‘Entheogenic dance ecstasis: cross-cultural contexts’ (Chapter 6), Des Tramacchi explores the broad parallels existing between non-Western community-oriented entheogenic rituals and psychedelic dance parties. Drawing on ethnographic descriptions of peyote use among the Mexican Huichol, yajé (ayahuasca) sessions among the Barasana of Colombia, and eboka by Bwiti cult members among the Fang and Metsogo of Gabon, Tramacchi discerns that their common structural elements are also prominent features of ‘bush parties’, or ‘doofs’, found flourishing in northern New South Wales and southeast Queensland, Australia. Though LSD may be the most common psychoactive at doofs, MDMA or ‘E’ is clearly the most prevalent dance drug.

Yet, while this may be the case, in Chapter 7, “The ‘natural high’: altered states, flashbacks, and neural tuning at raves,” Melanie Takahashi indicates that most participants in her central Canadian research emphasized that, contrary to much of the literature, substance use is not as central to their experience. While the limitation or discontinuance of psychoactive consumption is reported among ‘a growing category of rave participants,’ psychoactives remain significant since, as Takahashi observes, initial exposure to MDMA in particular can stimulate permanent changes in the central nervous system (‘neural tuning’), enabling the ‘natural’ approximation of alternative states of consciousness at subsequent raves given the presence of specific triggering devices within the dance environment.

The discussion of neural tuning propels us toward the role of music in dance cultures and its purported transformative function, and thus towards Part III, “Music: the techniques of sound and ecstasy.” While practitioners and scholars of dance culture wax lyrical about the ‘ritual’ or ‘shamanic’ character of rave, as Morgan Gerard points out, there has generally been a dearth of analysis explaining such ritual. Drawing on his ethnography of Toronto’s Turbo Niteclub, in Chapter 8, ‘Selecting ritual: DJs, dancers, and liminality in underground dance music,’ Gerard offers a meta-processual interpretation of the rave/club experience, which in the totality of the electronic music performance, dancing participants, and their ongoing interaction is a complex liminal environment. Heavily indebted to Victor Turner, Gerard thus understands the complicated interactive performance context of the underground rave/club as something of a unique ‘ritual process.’ Departing from the lack of interest in the music and dance of youth ritual displayed by earlier theorists of youth culture, the rave/club is described as an arena of youth transformation made possible by the spatialization and performance of music, and thought dependent upon the way participants 'negotiate liminality' throughout the INTRODUCTION 11 course of events. Depending on their 'ritual knowledge', for dancers each DJ mix may replay, and eventually accelerate, the phases of van Gennep's rites of passage, effecting belonging in a dance-floor community From Canadian tech-house and techno to UK garage.

In Chapter 9, 'Sounds of the London Underground: gospel music and Baptist worship in the UK garage scene', Ciaran O'Hagan traces the way African-American patterns of worship have influenced developments within UK garage. In a discussion of repressive legislation, south London's Sunday scene and pirate radio, O'Hagan indicates how gospel-inspired house music in the United States and procedures within the Baptist church have informed the musical structure and style of delivery particular to this scene. Indeed, the tactics and role of the UK garage MC possess an apparent equivalence to that of the Baptist preacher—employing call-response techniques and fostering belonging and communion.

If, as Gerard suspects (echoing Turner), 'retribalisation is well underway', it has been arguably most visible in San Francisco. Through discussion of the performances of a Santa Cruz-based Balinese gamelan group (Gamelan Anak Swarasanti) at raves within the Bay Area, in Chapter 10, 'Gamelan, techno-primitivism and the San Francisco rave scene', Gina Andrea Fatone indicates two significant features of this development: first, that it highlights parallels in the trance-inducing structure of techno and traditional gamelan music—though, as Fatone infers, research on the character of altered states of consciousness in electronic music culture requires further exploration; and, second, in furtherance to a discussion initiated in this volume by St John (on re-enchantment, Chapter 1) and Gerard (the perceived 'primitive numinosity' of dance), the appropriation of gamelan evidences rave's nostalgia for the 'primitive' and reverence for hi-technology, a juxtaposition revealing a 'techno-primitivism' whereby the gamelan ensemble, not unlike the didjeridu and other homogenized 'ethnic' and exotic instruments, becomes 'a tool of authentication' for youth facing 'the threat of ever increasing mechanization'.

The subsumption of the 'primitive' in events transpiring in the 'technocultural present' enables our negotiation to the final part, 'Global tribes: the technomadic counterculture', which covers the countercultural proclivities of a globalized psychedelic trance culture: its neotribalism, ecologism, revivalism, principle sites of pilgrimage, and its role in the formation of a digital art religion in possession of an idealistic, utopic and 'resistant' character open to challenge. In Chapter 11, "Techno millennium: dance, ecology and future primitives', the editor documents the significance of ecologism for an emergent dance movement. The chapter documents the patterns by which awareness of an accelerating environmental crisis has shaped neo-tribes and new rituals forming in global centres. It documents how, throughout the 1990s, a creative synthesis of new technologies and reconstructed pre-industrial religiosity characterized the interventions of several thinkers, artists and spokesmen whose millenarian ideas circulate within trance culture. From London to San Francisco, a “cyber-tribal” youth network—whose events are often claimed to occasion an ethical relationship, or reconciliation, with the Earth—emerged within a period of optimism and revitalization fed by cyber and digital developments. The Mediterranean island of Ibiza (Spain) and the former Portuguese colony of Goa (India) are principal exotic locations in the evolution of this global counterculture.

Based on ethnography undertaken at these sites, in Chapter 12, ‘Global nomads: techno and New Age as transnational countercultures in Ibiza and Goa’, Anthony D’Andrea explores the convergence of techno-culture and self-expressive (New Age) spirituality in the formation of ‘nomadic subjects’ whose technological adaptation, transpersonal rituals, ‘eroticoaesthetics’ and transgressions, whose ‘limit experiences’ (Foucault), are said to be composed within a ‘globalizing digital art-religion’. Investigating an emergent ‘techno’ movement possessing strong New Age influences, D’Andrea maps the new nomadic sites of self- and community experimentation—a global ‘utopian underground’ exiting the nation-state, transgressing major moralities and challenging the dominant institutions constitutive of the modern subject.

As D’Andrea conveys, nomads with post-national identities gravitated to Goa— which became the exotic beachhead of trance-dance and digital-tribalism. Something of the ‘post-sexual’ lifestyle of D’Andrea’s global freak is sighted in Chapter 13 by Erik Davis, whose “Hedonic tantra: golden Goa’s trance transmission’ circumscribes the significance of trance, an intrinsic component of the non-genital pleasures of ‘spiritual hedonism’. In a first-person journey into the psychedelic heart of Goan trance (based on a report from his visit there in 1993), Davis draws a parallel between Deleuze and Guattari’s BwO and Hindu tantric procedure, implying the continuity of psychedelic trance dance with the latter.

Effecting a transmutation of cosmic energy, or shakti, of sexual energy into ‘rarer and more potent elixirs’, trance harbours an ‘alchemical dynamic’ for the bohemian and psychedelic subcultures of rave. This at least approximates the received wisdom of those whose anti-authoritarian practices and techniques—mystical, provisional, cobbled together, ambivalent and often incoherent—have formed, in the ‘freak colony’ of Goa, something of an ‘anti-traditional tradition’ transmitted to current and future generations of post-Goa spiritualists.

Nevertheless, Davis became alarmed about the ‘superficiality’ of the Goan scene’s relationship with India, with the egotism of DJs and the presence of those bearing a resemblance to a ‘gnostic elite’. Such themes are taken up by Arun Saldanha, who argues in Chapter 14, ‘Goa trance and trance in Goa: smooth striations’, that mystical experiences and exclusionary politics are inter-dependent. Drawing on ethnography conducted on the practices of trance travellers in Anjuna, Goa, Saldanha illustrates the fiction of PLUR and challenges rave’s status as a site of resistance, thus renovating the postructuralism of Deleuze and Guattari.

Through a popular Deleuzo-Guattarian lens, the dance floor and its associated trance state are—by contrast to the ‘striated’, quantified and segregated spaces of capitalism, colonialism and the state—regarded as a ‘smooth space’ of non-subjectivity, of non-‘faciality’, a BwO. With the ethnographic revelation that ‘power and desire, domination and resistance, regulation and freedom, discipline and trance, habit and transcendence’ are not disentangled in the culture of rave, Saldanha concludes that raves do indeed reproduce the ‘striations’ of capitalism, state regulation, patri______ Thus, while not seeking to empty rave of its spiritual dimensions, he takes issue with the perception that raves are exclusively ‘smooth’ and opposed to ‘striation’. In isolating these shortcomings in the BwO, Saldanha effectively deals with the social consequences of the limitations in the BwO earlier noted by Landau—that its ‘smoothness’ does not account for the persistence of individual identity and distinctions. Of all the emergent sites for the global freak, Nevada’s annual Burning Man Festival—which, not unlike developments described in previous chapters (10 and 11), evolved from the countercultural hub of San Francisco—remains a most unique venue for the expression of New Age/techno religiosity.

In Chapter 15, ‘Dancing on common ground: exploring the sacred at Burning Man’, Robert V.Kozinets and John F.Sherry, Jr, draw on their ethnography to discuss how Burning Man shares commonalities with rave and a range of other contemporary alternative cultural and new spiritual events invoking primitivist symbolism in the manifestation of techno-pagan ritual. Echoing other techno trance events delineated in previous chapters and embodying the enchantment-retrieving character of the rave imaginary outlined in Chapter 1, Kozinets and Sherry’s ethnography of ‘the burn’ provides commentary on the conjoining of audio/cyber technologies and Neo- Pagan beliefs and sensibilities in the fashioning of postmodern ritual —therapeutic, ‘tribal’, transformative. The authors argue that the self-transformative capacity of such events is dependent upon the successful creation of sacred space, and the latter is achieved through temporary festive inversions manifesting in the in situ rules of no spectators, no authorities and no market.

The theme of dancing up the sacred in the contemporary period arises throughout this collection and goes to the heart of the rave phenomenon. Whether conceived as primal, futurist, tribal, global or some combination thereof, whether market-driven communitas or countercultural in orientation, new dance cultures are an important feature in the lives of contemporary youth. As the contributors to this collection demonstrate, electronic dance music culture contextualizes and fuels identity formation, inter-cultural understanding, resistance and belonging, despite evidence to the contrary. In a period of mass uncertainty and mounting crises, we cannot afford to underestimate the significance of this amorphous youth cultural presence.


The last decade of the 20th century witnessed the growth of non-traditional desires for 'religious experience', for liberation in the sense Heelas (1998:7) identified as the postmodern quest for personal freedoms, for difference, without seeking essential, or fundamental, difference. With a rich inheritance from earlier explorations, saturated with the tinctures of Eastern religion and Western psychotherapy, contemporary self-othering is textured by a farrago of beliefs and practices transparent in communications with the Otherworld, and in the transcendence devices of psychoactives, new technologies and consumer experiences agglomerated in public events—those 'privileged point[s] of penetration' (Handelman 1990:9) and theatres for the performance of 'ultimate' or 'implicit' concerns (Bailey 1997:9).

In recent times, a growing corpus of work has introduced sites accommodating alternative spiritualities, gathering places for those 'hypersyncretic' seekers of self and enchantment that Sutcliffe calls a 'virtuosic avant-garde' (2000:30). Mike Niman's People of the Rainbow (1997), Adrian Ivakhiv's Claiming Sacred Ground (2001) and Sarah Pike's Earthly Bodies, Magic Selves (2001a), for example, document the appearance of festivals and gatherings 'exemplifying the migration of religious meaning-making activities out of... temples and churches into otherspaces' (Pike 2001a:5). Here the proliferating culture of rave and its expressive otherspaces will receive such attention. Navigating a vast body of material and research, this chapter explores the significance of liberation and freedom in the rave imaginary, in the process offering signposts to the subsequent chapters.

Rave demonstrates signs of that which Bozeman calls a 'technological millenarianism' pervading popular culture which, in nations like the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan, Canada and Australia, boils down to a faith in technological innovation to 'bring forth a better future' (1997:155). Attending to the millennialist trope in post-rave, it is surmized that while commonly holding status as a portal to the utopic, as a means to the Millennium, it is hyper-millennial in character, possessing variant______ 

As a zone of outrageous difference, a difference engine, the dance party is found to be a substantial node of indeterminacy for its inhabitants—providing youth with an uncertain passage experience typical of contemporary life. The spiritual ‘rave-o-lution’ Rave is no mere event, a temporal gathering of ravers. We would be unwise to overlook the global parameters of ‘techno-tribalism’ and its accelerating culture industry if our intention is a comprehensive investigation of rave’s religiosity.

In digital art, screen-based animations and 3D projections, alongside computer-generated music itself; in the ‘conceptechnics’ of ‘sonic fiction’ (Eshun 1998) inscribed in voice samples, event themes, artist names and on flyers, CD covers and a labyrinth of websites; in proliferating CD-ROMS, novels, zines, street press, galleries, video texts and online discussion forums; in films and documentaries; in fashion accessories from streetwear to ultra-violet-reactive art tapestries; in figureheads like Fraser Clark, Terence McKenna and Ray Castle. The whole chain inflects a congruent imaginary which, as we shall see, hosts an alternative or ‘expressive spirituality’.

By contrast to Christianity (which divides creator from created), in what Heelas (2000:243) calls an expressive spirituality (typically manifest in “New Age’ and sometimes ‘Neo-Paganism’), the divine Self serves as the font of authority, wisdom and judgement. With expressive spirituality one is driven to: seek liberation from the contaminating effects of society and culture; seek genuine experience; seek to express all that one truly is—a spiritual being; and—for many—seek to experience and nurture all that is embedded within nature, beyond the reach of the artificial, the power games of the lower self, the destructive implementation of the technological. (Heelas 2000:243)

Yet, as technology is essential to the cultural business of rave, and is integral to the quest for “genuine experience’, for vitality, wholeness and connection, for love, our approach must disassociate from that which would dismiss or abandon technologies or, indeed, psychotechnologies, as ‘inauthentic’. Amplifying a sampladelic sensibility conveying a relativistic faith in the ‘truth’ of multiple paths, in options cut ‘n’ pasted in the ongoing process of identity formation, and in the conceptual architecture of events, digital and cyber technologies are accomplices to an expressive humanism.

And, as ravers circulate amongst a growing milieu of spiritual seekers who ‘select, synthesize and exchange amongst an increasing diversity of religious and secular options and perspectives’ (Sutcliffe 1997:105), rave becomes a provisional node in an emergent network of ‘seeking’. LIBERATION AND THE RAVE IMAGINARY 19 An unmistakable rapture resounds through rave’s cultural accretion—its technological assemblage long underwritten by an evidential gnostic drive. The rave ‘techgnosis’ manifests as a kind of ‘occult mechanics’ capable of liberating the self through esoteric gnosis: ‘a mystical breakthrough of total liberation, an influx of knowing oneself to be part of the genuine godhead, of knowing oneself to be free’ (Davis 1998:94). In his Techgnosis: Myth, Magic and Mysticism in the Age of Information (1998), Erik Davis documents how the techno-liberationist flame, reignited throughout Western history has conflagrated with the advent of the digital age. I suggest that the flame gutters yet glows in techno-rave, which is often felt to communicate, or potentiate______ With rave, this direct familiarity is associated with the collective experience of ecstatic dance. Ekstasis has often been considered to rupture gender-identity boundaries by liberating, or “disarticulating”, dominant feminine/masculine subjectivities (Gilbert and Pearson 1999:104–5; see also Pini 2001), or more broadly, attending to Deleuze and Guattari’s ‘micropolitics of desire’, through a sensuous intervention in the regulation of desire (Hemment 1996:26–7; Jordan 1995)—processes which can be tracked through house music’s gay underground (see Apollo 2001) to various post-rave trajectories. Yet, while rave licenses a carnal knowing evident in the night-long intimacy of the dance floor, the gnostic ‘knowing’ may be catalysed by an ekstasis which, as Hemment reminds us, citing Heidegger and not wanting to deny rave its ‘hermeneutic depth’, means ‘a difference or a standing out from the surface of life’s contingencies...[enabling] a more profound contemplation of being’ (Hemment 1996:23).

According to psychotherapist and rave proselytizer Richard Spurgeon, the ‘quickening has begun’. But ‘are you willing to become all you have the potential to be?’ The truth is’, he states, ‘YOU, like Neo in The Matrix, are the One. Your very self is the doorway to the Infinite and the eternal’. When Spurgeon moves on to postulate that rave is the space of ‘awakening’, that the edge of the dance floor is ‘the edge of a vast remembering’ upon which the physical earthly realm merges with the heavenly, and that to be a party to this experience amounts to rapture, he’s articulating a strong gnostic theme.

The theme of illumination is even stronger in a piece inspired by goings-on in the Arizona desert, and is worth quoting at length:

Remember 2001 A Space Odyssey? When a tribe of Neanderthals woke up to the giant monolith planted in their midst? Raves remind me a lot of that scene. When I watch a group of sweaty dancers rest their heads on the metallic grill of a giant, black speaker and attach their trembling chests to the gaping mouth of a pulsating woofer, I instantly remember the same ape, 2 million years ago, touching, sniffing and kissing the unfamiliar and fascinating dark object. Raves are about our future. They inspire us to become aware of our selves, our surroundings and our humanity. They are about how we will come together as a species and how we will treat each other. They are about how we will communicate and express our thoughts and emotions to one another. We only need to remember that raves are NOT a way of life. They are a ritual. An exercise for the soul as well as the body. We need to realize that the monolith we climbed the night before was only there to inspire us. We cannot take it to work with us for moral support and we cannot hide behind it to avoid life’s strict requirements. We also need to accept that not everyone can, or wishes, to be a part of our ritual. We need to respect others for choosing different paths and not be disappointed if we are not accepted by them. Despite the overwhelming strength we draw from raving, we have to be the first to admit that we’re no better than anyone else. If we are to promote peace, love, unity and respect we need to accept all others before we expect them to accept us. (Ramy 1999)

In this extraordinary statement, rave is made synonymous with the black stone, the ‘prima materia’ or Philosopher’s Stone which, in alchemical lore, is capable of transmuting humankind and which, according to interpretation (see Weidner 2000), inspired Stanley Kubrick’s black monolith in 2001. While Spurgeon’s rhetoric might be obscure, and Ramy’s statement relatively unknown, an awakening thesis reappears in the web-saturated ‘Raver’s Manifesto’, where it is stated that ‘in the heat, dampness, and darkness’ of the womb-like party, we came to accept that we are all equal. Not only to the darkness, and to ourselves, but to the very music slamming into us and passing through our souls: we are all equal. And somewhere around 35Hz we could feel the hand of God at our backs, pushing us forward, pushing us to push ourselves to strengthen our minds, our bodies, and our spirits. Pushing us to turn to the person beside us to join hands and uplift them by sharing the uncontrollable joy we felt from creating this magical bubble that can, for one evening, protect us from the horrors, atrocities, and pollution of the outside world. It is in that very instant, with these initial realizations that each of us was truly born.? A dawning, a new beginning, rebirth?

It seems pertinent to note at this juncture that the party is more than a pre-linguistic womb, that rave, as Pini (2001: 157) remarks, speaks, and that, while it is pregnant with possibility, what it communicates is not uniform or predictable, and that what is delivered may be mutant. It is also apparent that, if rave speaks, if it reveals information, then it often speaks in tongues evincing bricolage 4 la carte (Possamai 2002:203), an effusion consistent with its syncretic digestion of existing symbol systems, philosophies and theologies. Nevertheless, while its message may be scrambled, postures and micro- narratives can be read from the texts, praxis and detritus of techno-rave youth culture, the gnosis transparent in moods decidedly ascensionist and/or re-enchanting.

LIBERATION AND THE RAVE IMAGINARY 21
Rave ascension
Rave is redolent with anticipation and promise. An assemblage of electronic, computer and audio-visual technologies that has descended amidst contemporary youth, techno-rave anticipates a posthumanist awakening. Remastering the inward turn of expressive spirituality, post-rave is pitched to potentiate the evolution of the self and, more broadly, human consciousness. According to Adrian Ivakhiv, [the] evolutionary potential of humanity is often modeled on the motif of ‘ascension’ to higher levels or dimensions of existence, and ascensionist literature makes frequent use of quasi-scientific language to describe the ‘higher frequencies’, ‘vibrations’, ‘light quotients’ and “energy bodies’, energy shifts and DNA changes, that are said to be associated with this epochal shift. (Ivakhiv 2001:8)

From its emergence in the UK and subsequent export to North America and elsewhere, adopting out-of-body science futurisms like Fraser Clark’s Megatripolitans (see Chapter 11), ‘the Singularity’, or promising a digitized dawning, rave culture—its literature, films, flyers, websites, etc—is replete with ascensionism. Nineties confidence in a tech-triggered consciousness evolution had a champion in Douglas Rushkoff, whose pop-anthropology of denizens of the early 1990s “datasphere’, Cyberia: Life in the Trenches of Hyperspace (1994), possessed the cartological premise of charting new youth cultures whose appropriation of cyber, chemical and audio-visual technologies was enabling them to ‘explore unmapped realms of consciousness...to rechoose reality consciously and purposefully’ (Rushkoff 1994:19). In a gush of technophilia, Rushkoff observed that, in collusion with psychedelics, computers, chaos mathematics and feedback loops, the house/ rave was facilitating ‘the hardwiring of a global brain’, an interconnected virtualized Otherworld: ‘Cyberia’. Exemplifying the celebrated "posthuman lift-off from biology, gravity, and the twentieth century" (Dery, 1996:17), Cyberia is "the age upon us now" and "might take the form of categorical upscaling of the human experience onto uncharted, hyperdimensional turf" (Dery, 1996:18). As a strong cultural "meme," rave is heavily implicated in this "cyberian paradigm." With an enthusiasm for "designer reality," where humans "alter their consciousness intentionally through technology" (Rushkoff, 1994:289), Rushkoff combines Extropian teleology with New Age "Self-spirituality" (Heelas, 1996)—a fusion redolent in a great deal of rave discourse and practice.

Inheriting the idealism of the 1960s, the business acumen of the 1980s, and adopting the techno-perfectionism of the 1990s, those operating within post-rave culture industries have sought to catalyse individuation through the rave machine. Guiding initiates along new paths of self-discovery, DJs are often heralded, or self-identify, as shamanic (Hutson, 1999), a status earlier conferred upon disco and house legends like Larry Levan and Frankie Knuckles, or are perhaps more accurately master drummers who, as in Santeria, keep the beat for the dancers while always remaining sober, never possessed (Twist, 1999:107).

The contemporary technicians of the self (including VJs and multimedia installation artists) manipulate an assemblage of "psychotechnologies" (Ross, 1992:539-40), sampling art like that of visionary transformational artist Alex Grey, facilitating vision quests and self-revelations, opening crown chakras and portals to the transcendent, enabling collective consciousness.

To take one example, for self-styled "trancetheologian" Ray Castle, "it's like psychic surgery": the party raises "the kundalini serpent energy in the body's chakra system," and with the right setting and sonic progression "you reach a crown-chakra-type unfolding" (Castle, in ENRG, 2001:161-2). Breakbeat scientists and practitioners of the electronic healing arts apply the "science of sensory engineering" to harness the "mythillogical principles" of sound, rhythm, and vision technologies, repurposed to intensify sensations and abduct the Self to cosmic dimensions—propagating in a fashion "new sensory lifeforms" (Eshun, 1998:177, 185).

As post-ravers testify to their apparent achievement of Zen-like states, familiarity with the Cosmic Christ, the release of anxieties, the generation of "sympathetic resonance," and the channelling of energy to engender spiritual growth and healing (Hutson, 2000), discourses of consciousness expansion, self-empowerment, and metamorphosis pervade the rave imaginary. Castle again: "The dance cathexis—a group cathartic psychodrama—on tribal, techno, beats, offers a potent temenos (sacred space) for reintegration of disconnected parts of the Self, which becomes a therapeutic sonic homeopathy of sorts" (Castle, in ENRG, 2001:164). In such text, post-rave appears consanguineous with the esoteric and therapeutic proclivities of alternative spiritual paradigms, remastering and amplifying the individualistic ethos of the latter. According to Sutcliffe (1998:38), the inward turn of the New Age is a "hermeneutic turn" where the Millennium no longer awaits external catastrophe—the Apocalypse—for "the New Dispensation" follows the private apocalypse of self-realization.______ Post-rave may be one of many lifestyle options, workshops, spaces, and techniques sampled in the quest to maximize human potential. Indeed, psychedelic-oriented events themselves often possess the character of a spiritual supermarket or a festival of alternative religiosities. With its smorgasbord of modalities from West African drumming to Kinesiology and “Trance Dance', the global event Earthdance, for instance, reconfigures the methods and constituency of the Healing Arts Festival and esoteric showcases like the Festival for Mind-Body-Spirit. Other events are known to mine the Mayan calendar or Hopi prophecy for signals of our coming transition to a new world, the birth of our ‘higher selves’, or a momentous merging of disparate ‘tribes’. On a wider scale, programmed with a code of self-responsibility, and provided with a range of options, inhabitants of the global party sometimes referred to as ‘electro’ are incited to work their bodies, expand their minds, and free their spirit. Impelled to upgrade their ‘wetware’ consciousness through aggregating electronic and computer hardware, downloading all the latest patches, post-rave lies somewhere between extreme sports and a cargo cult for cyborgs. Post-ravers thus adopt electro-techniques of the Self, a slight variation of the ‘technologies of the self which Foucault identified as permitting individuals to effect ‘a number of operations on their bodies and souls, thought, conduct, and way of being, so as to transform themselves in order to attain a certain state of happiness, purity, wisdom, perfection, or immortality’ (Foucault 1988:18; cited in Pini 2001: 144). New techniques of self-perfection possess varied currency in the techno milieu. Events with a typically Eastern inflection such as Earthdance, where workshops on Chi Kung, Pranic healing, Wushu, and Reiki take place, seem to enable participants to Orient themselves. Other cultural products like the techno documentary Better Living Through Circuitry—an update on the LSD-referenced 1960s slogan Better Living Through Chemistry (filched by several removes from the original DuPont slogan)—illustrate the posthuman edge thought obtainable with the assistance of electronic machines, or the ‘futurhyth-machines’ which, Eshun (1998:104) explains, Detroit techno artists and other Afro-futurists have manipulated to ‘technofy’ themselves. The ‘techniques’ are transparent in documentaries like Ray Castle’s Japo-futurist Tokyo Techno Tribes (2002) and futurist digital art installed at events, such as the body of work created by Melbourne mixed-media artist Deja Voodoo (Phil Woodman), which constitutes, he explains, ‘a visual accelerator, an activation tool designed to trigger cellular memories... .reigniting the DNA blueprint of the light body enabling access to the higher vibration of the 5th dimension’. Since the ‘electronic enzymes’ of digital music and visual art are potent when combined with other technologies of transformation, especially LSD, earlier preferences for ‘better living’ endure. Comprised of the holistic body—mind—spirit, Self is, by itself, a ‘technology’ to be understood and harnessed. Those in the techno-rave milieu are reminded, as they are in Australia’s Tranc.ition’s Global Eyes Yearbook 2002, of their ‘self-metaprogramming’ capabilities, that they may empower themselves through gaining control of their ‘inner and outer biotechnologies’ (Phillips 2002:23). Self-formatting through ‘neurochemical prosthesis’ (Hill 1999:106) therefore remains critical to current chemical generations. In the early 1990s, London and San Francisco saw the rise of "smart bars" and "nutrient cafes" that dispensed cybertonics and nootropics (Rushkoff 1994:131-48). "Virtuali Tea" rooms offered brainwave synchronizers ("brain machines"). Musicians like System 7 created music to "manipulate brainwaves and entrain people," as portrayed in the trance documentary Liquid Crystal Vision. Organizations like Visionary Music Inc. implemented "Energy Enhancement Environments." These "consciousness technologies" (Dery 1996:57-8) were believed to improve memory and cognitive capabilities or assist conscious evolution.


With the MDMA "family tree" of compounds granted subcultural legitimacy through works like Alexander and Anne Shulgin's PIHKAL (or Phenethylamines I Have Known And Loved: A Chemical Love Story, 1991) or Nicholas Saunders' oeuvre (including E for Ecstasy and Ecstasy, Dance, Trance and Transformation), and with therapeutic folk-lines traced through psychotechnologies like yoga, isolation tanks, and meditation techniques, E is said to possess "a quality of gnosis, of access to a wonderful secret" (Reynolds 1998:410). Regarded by one therapist as "penicillin for the psyche" (in Beck and Rosenbaum 1994:89), MDMA is also thought comparable to Nepethe—the mythic drink of the ancient Greek Gods which induced a "state of transcendent ecstasy [which] temporarily dispels our psychic darkness, filling us with the light that heals" (Eisner 1994:137).

Satisfying contemporary desires for instant self-actualization, for discount enlightenment, MDMA accelerates the arrival of perfection, quickens the knowing, enables "neural tuning" (according to Takahashi, Chapter 7) and installs a dial-up connection to an advanced global consciousness which Rushkoff calls the "Gaian neural net" (1994:115). In this popular story, the techno-rave spiritual cyborg establishes contact with a neuro-digital network. Depending on your pill of choice, you might even crack the Matrix. Successful negotiation of the neo-network promises "E-volution", a path, a way, a groove, a circuit with more than passing resemblance to the inner alchemical journey which, through all of its pitfalls and perils, promises bliss for the lonely avatar.

Return to the source

This fantasy of merging with something greater than one's self is detectable in a further cluster of narratives which emphasize enchantment or more pointedly, reenchantment, through connection or reconnection to a source, to a sacred power. As the reconnection or remembering of the source implicit in such stories also catalyses self-perfection, the getting of wisdom, it is apparent that they too possess a gnostic trace. Yet, by comparison to the vectors of Cyberian techgnosis—replete with body-effacement and drives for self-immortality—the micro-narratives of "return" suggest processes that, while not at all technophobic, are congruent with the recognition of a chthonic heritage. Inevitable crossovers notwithstanding, while ascensionism inclines toward New Edge cargo cult, re-enchantment implies a Romantic revivalism, variously disillusioned with modernity patriarchy and institutional religion. It implies a pantheistic re-sacralization of the self and world. If there is a Millennium here, it appears more approximate to an Arcadian revival than an Extropian Golden Age. Those seeking the ‘return’ may be practitioners of magic, borrowers of traditional and indigenous iconographies, in possession of a desire to move closer to the sacred, to court the mysteries via clandestine dance and digital surrealism, to harmonize with the ‘source’. Nature (often construed as the inner self), the female, the body, tradition, the indigene are here all homologically authentic and accorded hierophanic value—that is, are expressions of the sacred. In expressing desires to reconnect with ‘forgotten tribal roots’, these narratives employ atavistic tropes. While this might explain the nostalgia manifested, for example, in the longing for earlier youth subcultural moments (hippy, punk, etc.) or earlier rave moments and locations (like the simulated Ibiza or Goa parties), raving is often promoted and perceived as a means of remembering a generalized heritage. The root source may be a long-lost vocabulary that has been stored in our bodies for millennia.

According to Cinnamon Twist, summoning ‘strange gestures, nonsensical mudras, twistings, kicks’, these events may function to open humanity up to the ‘bio-records of thousands of years of tribal and sacred dances, and untold aeons of primal animalic motion’ (1999:108). Reading French raves, Gaillot remarks on how they draw participants back to ancestral practices and customs, opening up a space to resonate with the echo of the bacchanalia and orgiastic delirium that have populated the margins of our history.

Dionysia of modern times [raves]...may in this sense be as old as man himself. (Gaillot 1999:23) While any rock concert, disco, or club scene might be identified amongst such perennialism, anathematic to a space of wanton consumption and debauched revelry, narratives articulate the intentional reclaiming of pre-modern and non-Western ritual for its perceived efficacy. And in the process of reclaiming functional ritual, we observe the reclamation of putative traditions.

Thee Temple ov Psychick Youth founder Genesis P-Orridge claimed that acid house was “going back to the roots of why music was invented: to reach ecstasy and visionary states, in a communal tribal celebration' (in Rietveld 1998a: 190). Such claims became the particular trademark of trance, or psychedelic trance, narratives, as evidenced by Goa trance veteran Goa Gil—whose goal was to redefine ‘ancient tribal ritual for the 21st century’ (in Cole and Hannan 1997:5; and see Davis, Chapter 13)—or Ray Castle, who advocates the ‘tribadelic...sound sorcery’ of ‘theosophical trance’ (ENRG 2001:168).

Chris Decker, who founded both London club and trance label Return to the Source (RTTS) and Earthdance is responsible for a much-sampled Passage: The all-night dance ritual is a memory that runs deep within us all; a memory that takes us back to a time when people had respect for our great mother earth and each other. Dancing was our rite of passage, our shamanic journey into altered states of reality where we embodied the Great Spirit and the magic of life.... At Return to the Source, it is our vision to bring back the dance ritual. A ritual is a sacred act with focused intention. We aim to create a modern-day positive space, created with love where we can join as one tribe to journey deep into trance, just as our ancestors did. And this pagan sentiment was built under the roof of house—believed to be the principle conduit from Africa to rave. It has been suggested that venues like the Paradise Garage (New York) and the Warehouse (Chicago) occasioned the ‘rebirth’ of ‘ancient, natural traditions of ecstatic dance’ amongst a marginal African-American subculture, a ‘liberation of the loins and soul through music and dance’ (Apollo 2001: issue 34) later transmitted to rave and its progeny. In expressing the desire for a new relationship to the natural world, rites performed also articulate a post-Christian return to something likened to the Eleusinian Mysteries. Indeed, preference for hallucinogenic substances like LSD — similar to the consciousness-altering substances thought to have been used in the Eleusinian initiation rites (Hofmann 1997)—generates resonance.

For example, with each gathering including a ritual performance associated with a celebrated Oracle Card—like ‘the Gypsy’, ‘In the Garden’, ‘the Senses’ or ‘the Elements’—the Pacific Northwest's Oracle Gatherings are dedicated to ‘call[ing] upon new ritual experiences through dance based on the wisdom of our culture, creating: sacred space, transformational experiences, art with intent’. The strong revivalist sensibility in the rave imagination is consistent with the mood of cultural and spiritual recovery characteristic of Neo-Paganism. Inhabitants of post-rave are not so much heir to unchanged traditions, but are, as are many pagans and practitioners of Earthen spirituality, innovators, syncretists, sampling from existing traditions, cobbling together reinvented traditions and adopting new technologies in their veneration of nature.

While many techno-pagan commentators allude to a generalized mythos of the ‘tribal gathering’ (see Fritz 1999:171), some reconstructionists are informed by particular historical periods, cultural icons or regions, and others, more likely, work with a multiplicity of influences: e.g. Celticism, Druidry, Goddess Spirituality, Hinduism, the Mayan calendar, and perhaps fusing the ideas of Rupert Sheldrake, Buckminster Fuller and Terence McKenna. Ritual syncretism, for instance, is evident in RTTS, where ‘a crystal symbolizing cosmic energy is hung above [the dance floor]...spring water from Glastonbury is ritually sprinkled, and American Indian sage is burnt to cleanse the energy’ (Saunders et al. 2000: 170). And the popular practice of remixing religious iconography, such as statues of the Buddha, Aboriginal didjeridus, images of Hindu deities and subverted Christian motifs, sometimes raises the ire of cultural authorities. Techno-pagans mount varied strategies of re-enchantment and re-sacralization. Eschewing rational materialist worldviews, they harness and exploit psychedelic, audio and computer technologies in preparation for what McKenna called a ‘cosmic journey to the domain of Gaian Ideas’ to be retrieved and fashioned into art ‘in the struggle to save the world’. Participating in what Davis (Chapter 13) deems ‘spiritual hedonism’, they sometimes form discrete techno-tribal outfits like Spiral Tribe, Moontribe or Cosmic Kidz, which practice a dissolution of human and nature, performer and audience, creator and created (see Green 2001), are sometimes accomplices to ‘techno-primitivism’ of the kind Fatone (Chapter 10) identifies in her research on the appropriation of a gamalan orchestra by elements within the San Francisco rave scene, and sometimes enter the global circuits of Fraser Clark’s zippy ‘Shamanarchy’ (see Chapter 11), or that which D’Andrea (Chapter 12) calls a ‘freak ethnoscape’. With such dimensions in mind, rave’s fusion of 'ancestral wisdom and new science' has been manifested, for example, in the Australian-based Chaos Magick-informed Labyrinth installations developed by Orryelle Defenestrate-Bascule.1 Or even in new liturgical developments such as California’s deconstructionist Techno Cosmic Mass, which, according to Episcopalian priest and Mass founder Matthew Fox, integrates 'ecstatic live music, urban shamanism, multi-media imagery and eastern and indigenous spiritual elements' to build a new form of 'worship' and 'reawaken...the sacred'.2

The 'eternal return' of dance, of the 'Mass', supposes other layers of experience and narrative. As a return to 'the tacit cogito' from the Cartesian cogito, ecstasy is a flight to the foundation of consciousness (see Landau, Chapter 5). According to Castle, the reconnective therapy or 'psychodrama' of dance lies in its ability to revive 'a free-form play space, which we had as children' (ENRG 2001:159). For Fox, to dance is to return to our origins, 'since we all expressed ourselves...in the womb by stretching our limbs, i.e. by dancing'.3 In womb-like Warmth (the name of a San Francisco rave), where machine music predominates and low bass frequencies are said to resemble mother’s heartbeat, the dance space facilitates the re-enlivening of 'the mystical child'. In this collective age regression, a prelapsarian Land of Oz (London rave, 1989) or Toon Town (the early San Francisco rave) is built, where the sucking of Chubba-Chupps, the wearing of fluffy animal rucksacks and hair in pigtails, and the toting of super-soakers and bubble wands mark the intentional stripping away of worldly (adult) concerns and responsibilities. But Castle warns against squatting the womb, emphasizing the need to emerge at the light of a new day, to face the 'pain of having to become a separate entity' (ENRG 2001:163-4).

Here, in rave's quest to return, to remember that which is perceived to have been lost or forgotten (in either our collective heritage or personal development), we find the desire for ego-death, implying rebirth, a new awakening. Techno-communitas and the body electric

While such micro-narratives are accentuated within the rave imaginary, a meta-narrative of process, the possibility of psycho-cultural (re)production, wrought by sheer indeterminacy, becomes apparent. And the possibility engine is the rave itself —the party—which has been variously identified as: synchronistic 'phase-locking' (Rushkoff 1994:155-7); 'a desubjectified state of...rapture', a collective and singular body approximating Deleuze and Guattari's "Body-without-Organs' (Jordan 1995:129; see also Schiitze 2001); a feeling of 'an indissoluble bond, of being one with the external world as a whole', which Malbon, drawing on Freud, calls an 'oceanic experience' (Malbon 1999:107); a 'deconstructive jouissance' where the 'dissolution of certainty and identity is experienced as pleasure' (Gilbert and Pearson 1999:181); or a festive continuity resembling the Bataillian sacrifice of individuality (Tramacchi 2001:181; see also Chapters 2 and 3).4

Yet, drawing on the work of ritual and performance theorist Victor Turner, the immediate dancescape can perhaps be most likened to a techno-communitas. The present explanation of the party's significance, and indeed that of post-rave culture, will be grounded in a renovation of Turner. With recourse to Turner, the dance party______ In the pan-human modality of communitas, esoteric knowledge and understanding is shared between neophytes, cultists, communards, pilgrims, or tourists who experience a direct and immediate abandonment of socioculturally mediated divisions in "a place that is no place, and a time that is no time" (Turner 1983:103). The "communitas spirit" resonates with millenarian and revitalization movements as it "presses always to universality and ever-greater unity" (Turner 1983:202). With names like Come-Unity, Utopia, Tribedelic, Oracle, Exodus, etc., dance party organizations labor to replicate the liminal experience of the "tribal" neophyte, the "cult" member, the hippy communard, the pagan "ritual", the sacred pilgrimage, the epic quest or hunt. As subcultural "VIPs" conspire to forge "normative communitas" (see Chapter 8), the successful formulae for dancescapes from Earthdance to Tribal Gathering is enshrined.

In a parallel alluded to in Castle's Tokyo Techno Tribes, the party is something of an experiential equivalent to the Japanese matsuri—the Shinto festival of community renewal, purification, and blessing, where under anti-structural conditions participants make public transit to a sensational realm of experience in which the usual conventions, demands, and distinctions of daily life recede. In his inspired insider's account, Fritz accumulates rich evidence of the resonant experience: With the rave experience, intellectual processes are overridden as you surrender to the music and experience a sense of brotherhood and camaraderie and a feeling of unification. You become connected on a molecular level to everyone and everything. All is well with the world. (Jane of Art, in Fritz 1999:52)

Demonstrating that rave is not isolable as a Self-spirituality not exclusively a "cult of the individual", in such a zone dancers "experience deep feelings of unlimited compassion and love for everyone around them.... For a few hours they are able to leave behind a world full of contradiction, conflict, and confusion, and enter a universal realm where everyone is truly equal, a place where peace, love, unity, and respect are the laws of the land" (Fritz 1999:43, 172). The deep logic of such an experience is that it is simultaneously impermanent and perennial. While the party paroxysms are "fleeting moments of intense interconnectedness" (Pini 2001:167), they are recurrent in time and replicate in space. The cyclical, iterative, mutant reproduction of such ephemeral "hypercommunities" (Kozinets 2002) is indicative of the universal function of liminality, which in the case of rave possesses an extraordinarily indeterminate telos. Yet, while there are many possible outcomes, the idea of the rave-utopia is central to the imaginary. Commentators have highlighted the disappearance of a sense of "both 'the other' and 'the self' (Rietveld 1998a: 194) within the process of dance. As the party makes possible a kind of collective ego-loss, a sense of communal singularity—a sensation of at-one-ness—is potentiated. Hemment explains: The disappearance into the singular field of the music is articulated within a general becoming-unlimited, by which the identities and hierarchies of the ego are abandoned as the dancer confronts the limits of pure possibility At this point both self and others disappear together, releasing a profound sense of unity.... In this collective moment bodies become one with the rhythm, each distinct gesture the fractal-expression of the singular sonic algorithm. (Hemment 1996:28) For the raving habitué, nothing matters more than being together or, perhaps more accurately, being ‘alone together’ (Moore 1995:207). As a ‘seizure of presence’, the experience is in concert with Hakim Bey, whose ‘temporary autonomous zone’ (TAZ) became a universal archetype of liberation eagerly adopted by the rave massive: Are we who live in the present doomed never to experience autonomy, never to stand for one moment on a bit of land ruled only by freedom? Are we reduced either to nostalgia for the past or nostalgia for the future? Must we wait until the entire world is freed of political control before even one of us can claim to know freedom? (Bey 1991:98) Not representing any greater “Truth’, rave came to answer Bey’s call (and that of Blake, Fourier and Deleuze and Guattari, whose ideas he adapted) for the ‘total liberation’ of desire. In the rave, one cannot help being struck by the primacy of the demand for a shared present, as if...in it were a whole epoch, ours, expressing an imperative not to give in to the future, some ‘radiant future’, rather to somehow be caught up by and in the present, lived or experienced collectively...the being-together exists only in the actuality of the dancing bodies, and is not based on any community of fact or appearance except the fére being shared at the moment. (Gaillot 1999:24–5)

The rave is a synaesthetic community wherein ‘each dancer in the crowd becomes a medium transmitting sensory current’ (Eshun 1998:099). And it is organized through a Dionysian logic, which Maffesoli (1993, 1996) defines as a certain kind of sociality, sensuous, orgiastic and transgressive of imposed morality. Yet while young women, for instance, may feel like they are ‘flirting with the crowd’ (Jane, in Pini 2001:164), the experience is not organized around sexual gratification. With attention cast towards rave’s jowissance, recent commentators diverge markedly from 30 GRAHAM ST JOHN Turner's comparatively sanitary sociality. Thus, for Gilbert and Pearson raves contextualize waves of undifferentiated physical and emotional pleasure; a sense of immersion in a communal moment; wherein the parameters of one’s individuality are broken down by the shared throbbing of the bass drum; an acute awareness of music in all its sensuality—its shimmering arpeggios, soaring string-washes, abrasive squelches, crackles and pops; an incessant movement forward, in all directions, nowhere; the bodily irresistibility of funk; the inspirational smiles of strangers; the awesome familiarity of friends; the child-like feeling of perfect safety at the edge of oblivion; a delicious surrender to cliché. (Gilbert and Pearson 1999:64)

Furthermore, as the “community of feeling’ is mediated through that which Schiitze calls ‘the techniques of auditory, visual, kinetic and chemical amplification’ (2001: 162), Dionysus needs Prometheus (Gaillot 1999:33; emphasis mine). As Reynolds points out, while Nietzche opposed science and technical knowledge to ‘the orgiastic spirit of Dionysian art’, in the techno-orgiasm ‘the Dionysian paroxysm becomes part of the program, regularized, looped for infinity’ (1998: 199-200). Machines have developed a special role in the development of ‘body music’—which Eshun calls Afrodelic. When Gaillot suggests that “Technica and Africa...are the two essential poles of techno’ (1999:35), he acknowledges electro’s simultaneous rootedness in the synthetic soul of Kraftwerk and in traditions of performance (blues and jazz clubs, soul, funk, disco______ !° For Eshun, contrary to a critical tradition which laments technology’s disembodiment of the human, ‘sound machines make you feel more intensely, along a broader band of the emotional spectra than ever before in the 20th Century’. Accordingly, ‘the posthuman era is not one of disembodiment but the exact reverse: it’s a hyperembodiment (Eshun 1998: 1002). With Afrodelica, ‘[y]ou are willingly mutated by intimate machines, abducted by audio into the populations of your bodies. Sound machines throw you onto the shores of the skin you're in. The hypersensual cyborg experiences herself as a galaxy of audiotactile sensations’ (ibid.: 1001). Merging with a wider ‘mind/body/spirit/technology assemblage’ (Pini 2001: 169), ravers readily experience a ‘release...from the rigid limitations of their sexually marked selves’ (Pini 1997:124-5).'7 With the accelerated ‘erosion of the limits between the corporeal and the technological’ (ibid.:169), this is the eternal return of the cyborg, the return to the future, a journey into the transgressive space, pulsating sounds and immanent possibilities of the carnival. Yet, licensing digital miscegenation, post-rave constitutes a ‘technophagic’ upgrade on traditional carnivals which, like the Afro-Brazilian Bahian carnival, are deemed ‘anthropophagic’: an ‘open process of dynamic incorporation in which identity is LIBERATION AND THE RAVE IMAGINARY 31 never fixed but always open to transmutations’ (Schiitze 2001:160). A cyborgian context for Bakhtin’s grotesque realism, never distant from Afrodelic influences, the techno-orgiasm appropriates a range of instruments to modulate ‘normative modes of subjectivation and permit the experimentation of novel forms of subjectivity’ (ibid. 162). The post-rave carnival contextualizes a millennialist implosion of the past/ present/future—a collapse which opens up ‘the fissure from which dancing bodies issue forth’. This is, according to Hemment, ‘the moment of the present’s differentiation from itself, the fracture between past and future that is the condition of creativity and change’ (1996:28). Thus, whether ‘dancing like there’s no tomorrow’ or practising the art of ‘making now last longer’, there is a popular self-perception of the important role enacted, that the party is ‘an epicenter from which to spread the positive and powerful vibrations generated...out into society at large’ (Fritz 1999:206). As a ‘laboratory of the present’, post-rave thus ‘bears witness’ (Gaillot 1999:18-20) to that which, Fritz enthuses, is ‘the largest popular cultural movement of the 20th century’ (1999:262). Hyper-millennialism We have found that while narratives of ascension, enchantment and various intertextualized permutations hold currency within the rave imaginary, the significance of the party is such that it constitutes a non-linear celebration of presence in which future/past, self/other, mind/body, male/female and human/ technology distinctions undergo dissolution. Yet, while the immediate proclivities of rave potentiate spontaneous communitas, with raving we are remote from the kind of ‘primordial communion’ or ‘primitive communism’ often intended by the term ‘tribal’, which is commonly grifted on to denote the idyllic social relations associated with pre-modernity. Along with that which we might identify as the ‘normative’ domestic frameworks required by state authorities and corporate interests corralling youth into ‘pleasure prisons’ (Reynolds 1998:424) mainstreaming, commodifying and segmenting the culture (Collin 1997; St John 2______ 

Rave's performative context complicates matters further. While seen to manifest principles of the traditional rite of passage experience, which Turner saw refracted through 'the hall of mirrors' of contemporary culture (see Fatone 2001; and Chapter 8 in this volume), post-rave, as I have already indicated, is a journey possessing a performative quality perhaps more carnival than rite. As parties are carnivalesque stages for the performance of individual freedoms, for self-experimentation with the most intense sensations and most outrageous expressions of difference, from which a host of outcomes ensue, it may be wiser to suggest that, as theatres of expression, parties oscillate between difference and communion. As such, these sociocultural thresholds harbour an obdurate indeterminacy.

Though precipitating states that may be likened to Confucianism's 'fen' (‘love, goodness, benevolence, humaneness and man-to-man-ness’) or Zen Buddhism's 'prajna' (intuition)—which Turner (1974:283, 46) imagined might approximate the socio-liminal experience of communitas—with rave there is no collective Omega point, no guaranteed access to 'the Universal Mind'. While approximating that which Castle calls a 'chiros satori experience (time outside of regular time), where one can gain a bright light bulb-like...illumination and understanding' (in ENRG 2001:169), dance parties are a sea of sparkling and guttering flames.

While sometimes manifesting themselves as popular sympathetic magic—as in the 'critical mass'-like 'global prayer for peace' performed before live images of Gyoto monks at Earthdance, or in anti-fascist/racist celebrations like the World Peace Party in South Africa in 1991, or creative-resistance movements like Reclaim the Streets and Earthdream—it is not usual that post-rave events become 'platforms' for representation, or for 'resistance' as this is conventionally known. Nevertheless, while often cultural realms occasioning a 'politics of the moment' (Gilbert and Pearson 1999:172) or fields of 'playful vitality' (Malbon 1999:101), events dramatize ultimate concerns around which reveller-participants rally: freedom, self-growth, intercultural reconciliation, the environment, world peace. A party is no more a field of micro-politics than a carnival of narratives, no more utopia than a heterotopia, a concept which, in its application to large alternative gatherings and performance-art festivals like those at Stonehenge (Hetherington 2000), ConFest (St John 2001b) and Burning Man (Pike 2001b: 160), defines counterspatial 'laboratories' accommodating people, performances, language and objects, multitudinous and juxtaposed. This complex utopian model thus approximates the 'kaleidoscope conceptual space' of the TAZ, a project of 'indiscriminate syncretism', "“"broad-minded" enough to entertain more than two, or even six, impossible ideas "before breakfast" (Bey 1995). As sites where multiple narratives intersect and compete, the post-rave event is a maelstrom of significations, contextualizing a conflagration of meanings. Thus, as Pini (2001:54) argues, post-rave cannot be reduced to 'meaning structures' such as 'meaninglessness', a 'body-without-organs', 'escape' or 'autonomy'. 

Nor can it be adequately circumscribed through commitment to independent agenda or narrative: futurist, primitivist, pharmacological, gendered or otherwise. Thus, events indicate that while particular micro-narratives may rise to consciousness within the rave imaginary, they are intertextual. Especially in its larger festive manifestations, the techno-rave becomes a dynamic community featuring a conurbation of zones, ramified narratives and a diverse constituency—a carnivalesque acceleration of the difference engine.

Neither ‘religious festivals’ unifying ‘worshippers’ under divine Truth, nor indicative of a monolithic cultural movement, these are hyper-millenarian events where hybrid-utopias are (re)constructed from desirable futures and putative pasts, where multiple ‘truths’ may be accessed and performed, and from which many outcomes are possible.

Techno salvation

The title of Brewster and Broughton’s history of the disc jockey, Last Night a DJ Saved My Life, may not be an altogether flippant reference to the liberatory character of the dance experience. Can dancing save your soul? Rescue the damned? Provide release? For members of contemporary Christian rave groups such as Club Worship in Philadelphia and Planet Jesus, a collection of DJs from Pennsylvania, such may not be far from the truth. According to Christian DJ Frankie Vibe, ‘[w]e’re ministers on turntables... I can’t make you believe, but I can make you dance yourself closer to God’ (Sanders 2002).

The dance-floor objective stated at www.christianraves.com imparts a serious mission: ‘to come together and take back ground that Satan has stolen and perverted...[and] to win souls through the blood of Christ and give god praise and glory!’!? While many examples of radical Christian discipleship do not share this charismatic evangelism, at Club Worship kids wear glowing cross-shaped necklaces and DJ Jon Carlson was reported to have read aloud from Isaiah 40: ‘Even youths grow tired and weary/and young men stumble and fall/ but those who hope in the Lord/will renew their strength’ (Sanders 2002).

It is little wonder that Christian alt.worshippers are assimilating elements of the rave imaginary. After all, the rave space possesses an ecstatic evangelistic atmosphere—a theme taken up by Hutson (2000:39-40), who indicates that expressions of raw emotion, out-of-body experiences, hallucinations drawing the convert closer to God, and post-conversion healing characterize both rave and evangelical conversion in North America. Yet, the comparison can only be carried so far: PLUR is hardly theological scripture, evangelical Christians are not great exponents of cognitive liberty, and the separation of body and soul, so integral to the Judeo-Christian tradition, is anathema to rave.

While Hutson points out that with rave ‘eternal Salvation is not at stake’ (2000: 40), our attention should not, however, be diverted from observing the presence of salvific liberation, a profound sensation of being saved, of being released, within electronic dance music cultures. In his history of 1970s and 1980s dance clubs in New York City and Chicago (e.g. the Sanctuary—a converted Baptist church—the Paradise Garage and the Warehouse) Henry Kielarowski (a.k.a. Apollo) sheds light on dance culture’s salvation and release through soulful/sensual communality refracted through house into the sensuous deluge of post-rave techno culture. For the gay and African-American/Latino community living with the threat of AIDS in the 1980s, dancing to______ The music's essence can only be understood by telling the story of the creation of ecstasy out of agony. Most of the men I danced with in the seventies died terrible deaths. I was one of a handful of dancers from that dance who survived. And, further, house music was born from the souls of all those boy dancers of the seventies who left us with their energy and love of music.

In a period of deep uncertainty, self-loathing, guilt, and despair, house music lifted our souls above the ruin and made the sexuality and the spirituality positive life-giving forces for us. The house music came from people defiant in the face of death, determined to celebrate sex and spirit and create light in the darkness.

With influences ranging from gospel to Hi NRG, electronic dance music was born from the context of oppression, mortality connected to sexuality, and the need for redemption and release through communal dance. Post-rave is remote from the ecclesiastical grip of faith detected in millenarian movements promising an eternity of justice, bliss, and glory in the light of God following the Second Coming.

Nevertheless, as dancers often report being changed, converted, redeemed, born again, traces of millennialism, salvation, and a longing for release are detectable in the immediate and indeterminate party. Sometimes, such is over-determined by the imperatives of market forces, like huge commercial operations such as Resurrection, where the release of dollars for tickets is promoted to ensure ascension.

Other times, events resemble extreme-psychedelic-sports parks. Conjured as a theme park for your brain, such events may evidence the new narcissism, where the prevailing passion is to live for the ecstatic moment. In environments where young people encounter addiction to a cocktail of religious experiences amounting to little more than psychedelic novelty rides, the atmosphere approximates that of living the Apocalypse now, making the end of the world last longer.

And if burnout from excessive alterant use is risked at parties designed with the Psychedelic Apocalypse cookie-cutter, perhaps in them, we witness the possibility of psychological Armageddon. In other events, the power of dance is harnessed for the purpose of community development, as it is with spiritual dance communities such as San Francisco's Sacred Dance Society.

In others still, events possess a strong resonance of rapture, as with Spurgeon's neo-chiliastic faith that Heaven is a rave on Earth. Once, he states, we bridge the gap between that which is above and that which is below...the Party can really begin! Perhaps with its most infamous appearance in the annual Burning Man Festival, where the blazing and exploding Man sublimates the private apocalypse sought by a great many of the festival's population, the Party may thus effect a Rapture corresponding to the New Age eschatology of self-realization. 

Implying that raves, as extra-ordinary ‘scenes’, may be proto-religious sources of ‘salvation’ for participants, Corsten (1999) begins to distinguish between two types of salvation useful in the study of the global party: that raving may orchestrate a release from social routine or possess salvation values in itself. On the one hand, ‘these rituals liberate the individual from modern rational demands and provide salvation; on the other, they offer experiences that may be interpreted as values in themselves’ (Corsten 1999:27). On the one hand, they orchestrate a freedom from everyday anxieties and relations—the nuclear family, your boss, TV, quotidian subjectivity. On the other, they contextualize a freedom to experiment with and explore new social and psychological territory.

If we want to pursue extremes, the former mode of experience begins with the festal or party as release valve, paroxysms programmed to periodically revivify, wherein festival populations enjoy the state-sanctioned lifting of social taboos or the pleasures of corporate-sponsored utopia. At the other extreme, we have the party as crusade, staging the launch of proto-cultural ‘memes’ into the global system. Yet there is more than one way to elucidate these modes of ‘salvation’. Or at least they provide us with the opportunity to explain a range of experiences.

We might initially suggest that they are implicit in the design of event providers. Increasingly subject to management by the ‘new merchants of leisure’ (Hannigan 1998:7), clubs and large commercial raves are probable sites of the former experience. Literally getting ‘out of it’, “avin it large” on weekend vacation, patrons are delivered from the world of classrooms and toil, politics and parents, to a state of amnesia (inspiration for the famous club by the same name in Ibiza).

While it had been suggested that vacating day-to-day reality for the Living Dream where ‘everything starts with an E’ (Rietveld 1993:43–4) indicated a kind of tourism whereby youth ‘disaccumulate culture’ to ‘disappear’ into ‘the unculture of the hyperreal’ (Melechi 1993:37–8), today such disappearance can be carefully engineered within new ‘branded playscapes’ (Chatterton and Hollands 2002:112), from super-clubs like London’s Ministry of Sound to other night-time leisure corporations concentrated within the liminal zones of the post-industrial city (see Hobbs et al. 2000).

Momentarily absconding from the demands and contingencies of ‘growing up’, dancing to the rhythm of chart music, big-label DJs, under the watchful gaze of bouncers and alcohol niche marketers, the clubbed inhabit a sanitized world of administered pleasure, regulated ‘oceanic’ experiences and ‘E’-fuelled salvation, before ‘transportation’ home again—in Schechner’s (1985:125) sense of performers returning to their place of origin.

I do not want to suggest that the packaged and routinized communitas of club spaces are a priori remote from religiosity (for instance, see Chapters 5 and 8). But while large commercial raves and clubs may potentiate ‘religious experiences’, perhaps as they contextualize moments of ‘extreme flow’ (Malbon 1999:141–3), it nevertheless appears that smaller scale DIY parties are more likely conversion thresholds than refuelling depots—more likely liberatory (in the second sense) than 36 GRAHAM ST JOHN clubs. Such events may be primal sites, like the original London acid house parties; unlicensed operations in______ 

2; Hill 1999); independent ‘hardcore’ events such as the original trance parties in Goa and proto electro-hippy ‘drifter communities’ (Cohen 1973:97) at pre-crackdown Haad Rin on Koh Phangan, Thailand (Westerhausen 2002: ch. 9), Bahia Brazil, West Malaysia or Australian bush doofs in northeast New South Wales; intentional ritual gatherings like LA’s Gathering of the Tribes; guided interactive rituals like those facilitated in New Mexico by the Circle of Tribes; or proto-zones within larger festivals, intentionally remote from the festal parent culture. In environments where a psy-trance sensibility seems to predominate, the consumption of LSD and ‘teacher plants’ (e.g. psilocybin, DMT and Salvia divinorum) is not uncommon. Possessing a pharmacologically ‘progressive edge’ (Reynolds 1998:406), events like Exodus Cybertribal Arts Festival in northeast New South Wales—where chillout zones possess an ashramic ambience, and ‘healing’ areas, specialist ‘herbal’ stalls and panels on entheogens and zine libraries appear—are more likely ‘psychedelic communities’ (Tramacchi 2000), in which mystical states or primary religious experiences are not only enabled but perhaps more likely integrated. Many outdoor events are exalted as the ‘primal point of contact’ (Rawnsley, in Fritz 1999:47), even way stations en route to ‘the Eschaton’. They are contexts for the experience of trance, the loss of amnesia or anamnesis," and for the experience of the sacred, or, perhaps more accurately ‘sacred madness’ which, as D’Andrea claims (Chapter 12), possesses both rewards and dangers. It appears that a higher proportion of the population of such events are older and more widely travelled than that of metropolitan clubs/raves and less preoccupied by a ‘pleasure principled acquisitiveness’ said to characterize the latter (Reynolds 1998: 425). Having transformed life into ‘a work of the art of sensation gathering and sensation enhancement’, there are many among their number whom Bauman would deem ‘paragons and prophets’ of the ‘aristocracy of consumerism’ (1998:70). Yet what of the phenomenal quality of the ‘peak experiences’ in which Bauman is apparently uninterested? Participants at renegade parties like those mounted in the desert by Los Angeles’ Moontribe through the 1990s or Melbourne’s Green Ant are akin to pilgrims who have often sojourned from a great distance—gravitating toward communitas with fellow liminars, receptive to visions, metamorphoses and spiritual healing (Hutson 2000:44). Yet there is more to these events than the ‘peak experience’ or trance-state, as they sometimes require a high level of participation—the kind of personal sacrifice embodied in the rule of ‘no spectators’. The in situ sacrifice—of self to the party— generates a sense of fulfilment and fraternity, of reward, unlikely to be achieved simply by turning up and dropping an E. As Pini (2001: ch. 5) conveys, ravers ‘work’ hard for the freedom to ‘lose it’ on the dance floor, but such a ‘peak experience’ requires a different order of sacrificial commitment. The widely held view from those who contribute to the planning, websites, logistics, décor, altars, LIBERATION AND THE RAVE IMAGINARY 37 performances, community safety, first aid, clean-up and so on of free parties, such as those described by Collin (1997: ch. 6), Rietveld (1998b) Tramacchi (2000) and St John (2001a), is that such participation confers an experience differentiated markedly from the ‘consensus trance’ of event-______ Like Moontribe or Oracle Gatherings, such events are ‘the work of the people’. There is perhaps a sense that the gifting of time, skills, resources, ‘sacraments’, venue/property, domain-hosting, etc. procures mana. Community forged through mutual self-sacrifice is also a striking feature of fund- and consciousness-raising events where, for instance, compassion for the environment (St John 2001c), for people living with AIDS, the oppressed or, more widely ‘planetary peace’ and justice also confers redemption. Possessing an autonomous, immediate and ‘instituant’ character, potentiating the sacralization of self and event-space through sacrifice, they facilitate the transformation of performer-inhabitants. Yet, while we can locate variant salvation experiences within diverse venues and events, the reality is likely to be fuzzy and indeterminate—the boundaries obscure. Thus, in the fashion of the hyper-liminal party, a single event will occasion differential significance and outcomes for multiple participants, or even multiple effects and functions for an individual over an event’s duration. Participants at an event possess different motivations.

The interactional complexity of events has been addressed by Malbon (1999) in his ethnography of London clubbing. For many habitués, at least initially, the club or party constitutes an escape route from the ‘profane’, a temporary release from work routines or underemployment, an opportunity for clubbers/ravers to ‘resist’ ‘other aspects of their own lives’ (Malbon 1999:183). Yet ‘holiday’ or ‘escapade’ hardly exhausts the possibilities of such experiences, as they contextualize the realization of inner strength and effervescence. In such spaces, acts of ‘playful vitality’ enable freedom from old identities, while at the same time (or, more likely, over a period of years) cultivating alternative identities and identifications—catalysing new self and social fictions. If ravers are like tourists, it is necessary to point out that, as with tourists, it is likely that age, region, socio-economic, ethnic and educational background serve to pattern a diversity of experience. It seems useful to characterize the raver experience on a possibility continuum whereby tourist experience similar to that identified by Erik Cohen (1992) may modulate over the event’s duration. A dance party may thus provide a recreational interlude for rave-tourists whose experience approximates to Cohen’s ‘diversionary’ or ‘experiential’ modes. Yet over the course of the event, which could last for several hours or several days, inhabitants might rupture the spectacular surfaces of a venue/space, to ‘disrupt forever any pre-existing understanding of the organisation of nightlife pleasures’, ensuring that ‘nothing will be the same again’ (Atkin and Lowe 1999:155). Adopting ‘experimental’ or ‘existential’ modes, such foreigners may occupy the landscape (and go ‘local’), nomads may settle (at least temporarily) and ‘drifters’ may feel like they belong. As events from indoor clubs to outdoor doofs contextualize the taking up of ‘house’ music and its various derivatives, initiates may discover ‘a space in which to dwell... 38 GRAHAM ST JOHN turning this house into a home’ (Hemment 1996:26). With occupants inhabiting and reinscribing space with an embodied collective significance, raves and post-raves are notorious reclaiming practices. Rushing on an heroic dose of familiarity inhabitants join or reunite with ‘family’, recognizing their belonging, and identifying with place, in a fashion unparalleled in the lives of many young people. Conclusion: An exploration of the rave imaginary provides useful insights on developments in post-traditional religiosity, expressive spirituality, and global youth techno culture. The ungoverned dance floor is a topos charged with the possibility of becoming. Partly inspired by Davis's Techngnosis (1998), this chapter has tracked the gnostic becoming manifest in the micro-narrative threads of ascensionism and reenchantment. Within the prevailing circumstances of consumer-based identity production and the advent of new digital and body technologies, rave arrived as a super-sensory experience that offers insights on the possibility of postmodern religion and/or alternative spirituality.

While the accelerating global dance party commonly stakes a claim to the utopic, accommodating inhabitants, narratives, zones, and practices diverse and ramified, rave's space is no more utopian than /eterotopian, no more solid communitas than hyper-millennialist. Far from unifying the 'massive' under divine Truth, in the techno-carnival hybrid utopias are (re)configured from divined futures and putative pasts in the multitudinous present. As a difference engine, the post-rave party facilitates becoming, yet possesses little telos. While salvific modes are detected—they are modulated by the event-space and participant motivation. Licensing escape from day-to-day experience or permitting the exploration of new pathways, revitalizing routinized cultural patterns or catalyzing new self and social fictions, from metropolitan warehouse parties to international trance festivals, the hyper-liminal party contextualizes the contemporary youth riot of passage.

The amplified dance music carries me into another plane of experience; its regular beat comforting me while a world of musical textures, rhythms and visual impressions whirls around me. I forget about how I arrived here, about my usual daily life, myself. My body seems to have shed its burdens of human existence, its limitations reduced: free at last, free at last. Time is now and always, fragments of seconds, breaking to a blur of party weekends, then smoothing out into a transcendental sense of forever. Bodies of fellow dancers brushing, strangers have gone, we are all friends, in it together; we are as one.

Thinking in terms of differentiation eliminated, I am immersed. Stepping out of this sense of immersion, walking now around the periphery of the event, I notice the repetitive 4/4 beats of a house-music-related dance music that is pumped out of a rather oversized set of speakers, flanking a person wearing headphones, the DJ, playing recordings, mixing them seamlessly, taking control over the mood of the party. Meanwhile, lights and smoke are interfering with the visual field, making clear observations cumbersome. The dancing crowd of people looks like a unified mass, some people more individuated than others, swayed by musical manipulations, by visual fragmentation and enhanced by dance drugs.

The above descriptions could suit a range of post-disco and post-rave dance events, in a variety of geographical locations and adapted spaces. One could perceive them as contemporary rites of passage, rituals to mend and come to terms with identity gaps produced in a rapidly changing global urbanity, where one is part of a mass of a few hundred to a few thousand strangers, with a sprinkle of friends here and there, and where the abstract machine aesthetic of the music can somehow feel comforting.

The participant, the dancer on the dance floor, can temporarily shed a sense of alienated self, instead submerging into a world of electronically produced powerful tactile-acoustic and fragmented visual impressions, held together by an incessant bass drum, which seems to beat in close proximity to the speed of one's heartbeat. Bataille, almost casually, once defined the spirit as 'subject-object' (1989: 56), the merging of self with the other. This involves the destruction of the object, to release its spirit in death, but in the case of rave-styled events almost the opposite occurs:______ This other is either the object, such as presented in technological metaphors of techno, or other subjects, such as occur in a strong sense of community on the dancefloor. In this way, a contemporary sense of spirituality is achieved. Yet, despite the experience of the spiritual as universal, disembodied, and transcendental, this is an illusion. The subject never exists in a vacuum; it is embodied. The subject's relationship with the other is never the same; it changes through time, discursively. As such, a notion of spirit is unstable, depending on historical and material contexts.

An overwhelming soundscape can act as a spiritual re-energizer, part and parcel of what Pratt, in the context of Gospel music, has called 'a larger strategy of survival' (1990:49). For those who feel they have been dislocated in a political sense, made homeless in more ways than one, intense dance parties, such as raves, can provide a strong sense of community. At times, the cultural output of rave-styled events seems to take on a cultural logic, comparable to that of migrant and diasporic communities:

The syncretic popular musics cultivated by such communities often exhibit... contradictions with particular clarity, combining pre-modern folk elements with the latest mainstream pop styles in a self-conscious and often deliberately ironic sort of eclecticism. (Manuel, cited in Rietveld 1998a:260) There seems to be a need for a deeper, pre-modern, meaning, which is often invented and constructed to suit the present circumstances. Such understanding of the pre-historical could be conceived of as, in fact, being post-historical, not unlike contemporary popular imagery found in science fiction fantasy.

For example, in the context of an Australian setting for a trance-music-based rave, one of Cole and Hannan's interviewees remarked in 1995:

Like the aborigines, aeons ago, that contemplated the planetsphere, whilst hitting their sticks, blowing thru a hollowed out pipe [i.e. a didjeridu]. These open-air, wilderness, tribelic, pagan-like parties (rituals) are along the line of primordial communion. (Cole and Hannan 1997:5)

This longing for pre-modern roots can partially explain the adoption of a 'timeless' or seemingly transcendental shamanism in some of the more countercultural rave scenes. For example, Mark, from nomadic techno sound system Spiral Tribe, stated in the UK's rave days that 'you can call us techno-pagans, what ever', and that 'it is a shamanic thing' (Lowe and Shaw 1993:168—9). Shamanism exists in a variety of forms around the world, and seems to include the forging of a close sense of community and, more frequently, reaching a form of spiritual peak-experience which the shaman produces through ritual (Rouget 1985; Taylor 1985). Such ritual can include an experience of death-rebirth, similar to unselfconsciously losing a sense of self on the dance floor, by breaking the boundaries of the self through exhaustion, repetitive beats, and the use of dance drugs.

So, spirituality, like sexual joining, can be achieved ritually. However, the meaning of such experience is variable, depending on context. The encapsulation into a protocol of the formal aspects of spirituality (that sense of being part of something larger than one self) could be understood as a formation of religion. Made predictable, a formalized ritual can be used for political ends. The raver, in a spiritual moment of peak-experience, is vulnerable, as any person experiencing a religious ceremony or rite, during complete submission to a belief system. The vulnerability of a definable social group can enhance the sense of community, as seen in the powerful intensity of, for example, gay dance gatherings. Solidifying the rave into a formal predictable ritual, comparable to a religion, makes it easier to exploit the format for both commercial and countercultural ends. Regarding the nightclub as a secular type of night-time church and the free open-air party as a post-historic tribal rite, this discussion will focus on the spiritual peak-experience at raves and post-rave events. The embodied contexts and the machine aesthetic of techno and trance will also be examined.

The author has often wondered why people travel to beautifully quiet environments to unleash the pounding sounds of industrial work and war, and the sounds of urban bleeping office environments. The ecology of faraway beaches and deserts, which offer refuge from ever-increasing surveillance, is disrupted by noise pollution, while the starry sky purrs on in its own pulses and rhythms. The author will attempt to provide an understanding of the merging of human and machine, the spiritual rite of the post-industrial cyborg, by inquiring into techno as a spiritual man-machine interface and exploring its machine aesthetic.

The discussion will suggest that the experience of the relationship with new technologies may be different for men and women. There seems to be a self-annihilating urge amongst contemporary men, an identity crisis, which requires an intense and, for some, often repeated rite of passage, an experience of self-destruction and redefinition as sacrificial cyborg. This may not be strategically beneficial for those who are currently engaged in defining their embodied selves and who could gain more from a sense of communal soul.

Although seemingly calming and maturing in the UK, at the time of writing (2002), (post-)rave dance events have erupted in the USA, Europe, Israel, South Africa, Southeast Asia, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, South America, India, and China. These geographical locations are characterized as being in various stages of global urbanization and of (post)-industrial development. The notion of the post-industrial era is problematic, as it is based on the acceptance of an 'information revolution,' which Robins and Webster describe as a 'cocktail of scientific aspiration and commercial hype' (1999:89) that obscures historical and material power relations in a neo-conservative fashion (Kumar 1995). Ignoring complex social and historical analysis, in popular culture technology appears to acquire immanent agency. Information communication technology (ICT), especially in its digital form, seems occult in its mystery, perfect for inspiring techno-paganism (Davis 1998:183). The arrival of ICT seems like a divine deliverance from outer space, changing industrialized societies accordingly from manufacturing-industry to information-led economies. Yet the idea of the post-industrial era has inspired artists and policy-makers alike, since it is attractive in its apparent simplicity, making the hype a reality or, indeed, 'hyperreality' (Baudrillard 1987: 16). Techno trance, as a musical genre with a machine aesthetic, serves as an interface that bridges the gap between technology and humans. This interface allows for an active engagement with technology, particularly with Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). Techno trance, in this context, can be seen as a spiritual tool that facilitates the connection between humans and machines.

The concept of spirituality and its relation to technology is explored through the lens of post-industrial myths, specifically the idea of the "information revolution." This connection is further examined through the perspective of dance rituals found in rave-styled events. In Techgnosis, Davis distinguishes between spirit and soul, suggesting that spirit is akin to digital data, while the soul is linked to the body's emotions and desires. This distinction demonstrates a reworking of the mind/body split, moving towards a post-human subjectivity.

The idea of spirit and matterduality does not fully explain the spiritual experience that can be found in the act of dancing to a musical aesthetic. The aesthetic experience can be compared to orgasm or peak experiences found in techno and house-related dance parties. The melting of self and other, subject and subject, and human and thing, produces a sense of encompassing intimacy with the spirit of the other.

In conclusion, techno trance, as a musical genre with a machine aesthetic, serves as an interface that bridges the gap between technology and humans. This interface allows for an active engagement with technology, particularly with Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). Techno trance, in this context, can be seen as a spiritual tool that facilitates the connection between humans and machines. Toop suggests that techno “seems to mirror the feeling of non-specific dread that many people now feel when they think about life, the world, the future; yet it also expresses a feeling of bliss” (Toop 1995:89). Techno can be understood as both futuristic electronica and industrial nostalgia. Its speeds, rhythms, and structures can vary widely, from break and broken beat to chill out music. Techno is often fused with house music, which provides a ritual musical structure to a broad and inclusive “church.” Techno becomes a powerful physical and spiritual means of confirming a subjective relationship with technology.

The term “techno” was initially inspired by Toffler, who in 1980 popularized the idea of an information-based post-industrial society in The Third Wave. Toffler suggested that the “agents” of this new era were the “Techno Rebels” (cited in Savage 1996:315). As a genre, techno utilizes relatively accessible electronic music technologies, widening the use of ICT to a rebellious DIY underground resistance; music by the people for the people, in effect a type of electronic folk music (Rietveld 1998a).

In the 1980s, Detroit's car industry vanished, leaving the city to rethink its post-industrial future in terms of information technologies (Sicko 1999). New York's hip-hop spawned the electro genre, which left its mark on early forms of techno. In Chicago, the Warehouse, a black Latino gay club, lent its name to the musical selections of its resident DJ, Frankie Knuckles; this was music from “the house”—in other words, house music. In the UK, sound-system parties utilized disused industrial storage and factory spaces. At the end of the decade, similar events, much larger in scale, gained the tag of “rave” in the UK; these were increasingly organized in the countryside, signifying an urban disappearance from intensifying surveillance by police and press, enabled by ICT and fuelled by moral panic (Collin 1997). Subsequently, one could find similar uses of empty warehouses elsewhere and, increasingly during the 1990s, of non-urban spaces. At the same time, the UK's super-clubs developed during the mid-1990s as a result of the overwhelming success of this type of dance gathering. Since the middle of that decade, such clubs, like Ministry of Sound based in London, have attempted to gain a share of a potential global market. Detroit techno was a combination of European and African-American futurisms; as Derrick May famously put it: "It's like George Clinton and Kraftwerk are stuck in an elevator with only a sequencer to keep them company" (Barr 2000: vii). In Germany, back in the 1970s, Kraftwerk's 'Man-Machine' music had brought the electronic avant-garde, including its machine-aesthetic heritage, into the popular domain with tracks like 'Trans Europe Express' (1977). Meanwhile, in the same era, USA funk music articulated changes in industry and in black civil rights politics; funk made sense of the identity crisis experienced by black male blue-collar workers as they lost jobs in the failing manufacturing industry in the 1970s economic downturn (Ward 1998). An intense sense of rootlessness found expression in 'the discontinuum of Afro-Diasporic Futurism' (Eshun 1998: 003). In the case of George Clinton's Detroit-based spaced-out funk, Afro-centric imagery of Egypt's pyramid gods was combined with the idea that the black man came from outer space (Toop 1995). Hereby the Afro hair-do signified black pride, in a countercultural let-your-hair-grow manner, as well as the psychedelic antennae that reached out into the universe. More convulsive psychedelic sentiments were tried out in excessively raw form in early to mid-1980s Chicago, again in a mostly African-American context. In competition with Frankie Knuckles' smooth gay-friendly sessions, DJ Ron Hardy was well known for his legendary drug-fuelled marathon DJ sessions, playing a mixture of edgy danceable electronic weirdness, including industrial punk funk from the USA and Europe. These sessions enabled, in 1987, the birth of acid house, a deconstructed post-human form of house music. The best example is Phuture's seminal track 'Acid Trax' (1987), with its unanchored incessant psychedelic or 'acid' squelchy bass sequence placed on top of a relentless 4/4 bass heavy beat. It was a simple concept, a wonderful example of how creative moments can occur when one ignores the manual and makes wetware mistakes (Rietveld 1998b). Without batteries, the Roland 303 (analogue) bass sequencer had lost its memory and pumped out random notes, which foregrounded the texture of its sound that could be manipulated with filters. The producers, Phuture, were amazed by the effect and, rather than dismissing it as 'improper', they recorded this sound to a house beat (Rietveld 1998b). Acid house inspired a generation of producers, including the techno creators of Detroit, the rave generation in the UK and, importantly, a range of trance tribes around the globe. As a genre, trance can be described as an initially German abstracted marriage between techno and house music. Trance is favoured in the early 21st century at rave-styled events (often more 'psychedelic'), as well as by super-club DJs (favouring the 'epic' version). It exists in parallel fashion in a wide variety of geographical locations: Goa, Bangkok, Australia, Japan, Germany, the UK, South Africa, Israel, Greece; and in a diversity of spaces, from legislated clubs to squat and countryside parties. Alongside other forms of techno, during the late 1990s trance became a dominant genre at the Love Parade in Berlin. This yearly techno-driven political demonstration celebrates the reunification of Germany, attracting over a million young people in one day by the end of the 1990s. Another example can be found in the New Age realm: Earthdance is a yearly trance event, inspired by Tibetan Buddhist pacifism, taking place in 45 countries, from London to San Francisco to Melbourne, all venues linked by the internet, promoting world peace. Meanwhile, UK-based dominant dance music magazine D/ showed in its yearly poll of October 2002 that a significant number of non-English club DJs were applauded for their trance sets. Since it is extremely difficult for non-Anglo-American artists to break into the British music world, this shows the overwhelming effectiveness of trance across national borders. It could be seen as a global dominant for raves and post-rave events, even trickling into the corporate pop world, in stylistic terms.

Trance is extremely functional; it only makes sense within the specific ritual of DJ-led, rave-styled dance gatherings. In addition to a relentless industrial machine aesthetic (whether psychedelic or epic), the pulsating house beat and seamless disco mixing, it features a hypnotizing tonality. House's melodic content and groin-moving funk bass lines have been stripped and replaced by repetitive half-note shifts that leave the listener in a perpetual state of body-denying suspense, while, occasionally, a randomized sequence weaves its psychedelic squelches through the mass of electronic sound. Skilfully manipulated by the DJ at a dance event, the tracks glide into each other, deleting individual differences between them. Breaks from the bass-drum pulse are programmed, as a rest from the physical exhaustion, where dancers can ritually predict a build-up of suspense, and where a succession of chords elevates the spirit and the arms, while a euphoric catharsis is produced (every time!) when the pulse of the 4/4 bass kick drum, the mechanical heart, returns, literally producing a 'kick', an adrenaline rush. The effect is comparable to a roller-coaster ride, where the car is pulled to its highest point, people bursting with suspense, higher, higher...and then let loose to the forces of gravity with thundering abandon.

SACRIFICIAL CYBORG AND COMMUNAL SOUL
Sacrificial cyborg

This experience, artificial and machine-like as it may be, can be perceived as transparently natural and tribal, somehow acutely pre-historic. The very dancing to house music at dedicated dance gatherings is ritualistic, in open-air events as well as in urban settings. This ritual context revolves, in the case of techno, around the merging, psychedelic, sexual, spiritual relationship with technology, especially ICT, in a post-industrial society.

Bataille argues in Theory of Religion (1989) that humanity defines itself in separation from the non-human, from objects or things. He then proposes, inspired by the Aztec death cult of human sacrifice, that in death or in destruction of the object the thing/animal/body releases its spirit. Therefore, through sacrifice, the object-as-thing becomes intimate to the subject, the self, in a spiritual sense (Bataille 1989). An adaption of this idea, may be helpful to understand interface spirituality provided by techno on the dance floor. When we are conscious of the self, this is an imagined object of our observation. By suspending that particular object, the subject ceases to be. As the dancer 'gives up', as it is said, their body and soul to the rhythmical music, there is a temporary destruction of the imaginary self. As self-consciousness disappears, the dancer enters a spiritual world filled with impressions produced through music and visuals. For example, trance can induce psychedelic images before our eyes; techno can be like a forceful technological cyclone; in gabba, a masochistic serenity is produced when the pain of industrial pounding noise leads to comforting numbness; while deep house melts us into the dancing crowd. Roused by sensory over-stimulation, a dancer can be overcome by a state of trance, ranging from emotional/orgasmic ecstasy to a type of spirit possession. Although trance seems to be purposefully made for such effect, this can be achieved by any genre. This peak-experience is a trip into the void: time, space, and sensory input fragmenting and collapsing, yet held together by the repetitive beat; suspended, the spiritual hedonist is rendered speechless and unable to articulate; being everything and nothing; part of the all; complete, yet empty.

"Zero is immense," notes Land, in the context of Bataille's ideas. "The nihil of annihilation is the nothing from which creation brings forth the being" (Land 1992:101). The techno DJ could, in this context, function as a type of shaman, taking the congregation on a journey of speed, in some cases with peaks and lulls, but mostly faster and faster into the void and to the other side of the night. It is only before and after the nothingness of the peak-experience that this unbearably ungraspable gap is filled by normalizing discourse, like domesticating a divine monster.

In this case, I would like to suggest that techno and its subgenres, such as trance, act out, or metaphorically articulate, the very ICT that affects and, for some, threatens to undermine everyday social identities. Dancers act out their becoming cyborg in their convulsive dance into the void, filling that void in turn with ways to connect and make sense of this experience. This can be a techno-pagan post-historic or a more refined spiritual feeling, abstract and indefinable, Zen-like.

In techno mutations of trance and gabba, the 4/4 beat of house and disco takes on a Teutonic "motorik" (Reynolds 2000:31), a metronome piston noise of industrial machines, reinstating a nostalgic masculinity of an imagined industrial modernity. This rigid machine beat was developed, according to Reynolds, by German bands like Neu! in the 1970s. The industrial rock aesthetic, arguably underlying the first industrial revolution, is translated into music and leisure. At dance events featuring trance, techno-house, and rave-inspired dance gatherings, one sees this hard work taken to an extreme, in order to reach a peak-experience: the complex demanding logistics of a night out, the pushing of the body beyond endurance in physical exercise, sleep deprivation, and drug use. Malbon (1999) and especially Pini (2001) provide detailed descriptions of how their interviewees work hard to reach a drug-induced peak-experience and to maintain that experience. Various dance scenes seem to display a ‘macho’ atmosphere around drug use, where it can be important to show off how much battering the (imagined once-warrior) body can endure. Dance drugs aid a dancing cyborg identity, as the chemicals enhance the ability of the nervous system to mesh with the technological sensibilities that techno offers. Dance drugs are body technologies, with a profound effect on the mind, on subjectivity. Yet, the body is disregarded in this process, just as ‘[t]he denial of the body...is but symptomatic of the lack of mind-body integration within society at large’ (McNiff, in Barrett 2002:119). Like legal drugs in our post-industrial society, dance drugs work to abolish an awareness of the body, or, rather, to unmake an awareness of its limitations. Mind-altering drugs temporarily enhance required mental faculties, at the cost of the organism that supports them. Not only is the self tampered with subjectively; in some social environments (such as the post-industrial North of the UK) one can also see a tendency towards (an almost) physical self-annihilation. As body technologies, dance drugs help the user to plug in, jack into or merge with a matrix of aural, tactile and visual whilst losing self-consciousness. The experience of the matrix is ‘pre-historic’ on an individual level, a vaguely remembered feeling that came before the conscious formation of the subject.

Especially in enclosed environments, such as clubs, the warm, moist bodies of the crowd within a dark space or distorted visual field produce an environment akin to the womb, while the amplified pulse of the bass drum, inescapably entering and embracing the body in a tactile manner, acts like a mother’s heartbeat. In the context of popular music, Middleton calls this pulse the ‘primal metaphor’ (1990:288). This regularity, embracing heartbeat and ‘motorik’ at once, provides an androgynous ‘pre-Oedipal’ framework (Rietveld 1993), in which the dancer loses a sense of self, however temporarily, whilst feeling safe. Such a repetitive musical structure synchronizes the crowd, affecting the body’s own pulses, which can produce a profound experience of transcendental universality, where time seems suspended, a forever here and now (Bradley 2001). The continuous exercise, sometimes for hours on end, may stop an awareness of the limited body and self. This is combined with the ritualistic predictability of the DJ-led dance event. In the context of techno-paganism, Davis observes that ‘ritual passes the intellect and stimulates...on a more subliminal level’ (1998:183). This is a powerful cocktail, slotting perfectly together in its effect on a subjectivity similar to the one found in Baudrillard’s exploration of the disappearing dialectic of ‘alternative strategy’: “The sublime has passed into the subliminal’ (Baudrillard 1987: 54). As the crowd moves in unison, the individual could gain an experience of being absorbed and becoming part of a larger timeless organism, of bodies, music, machine aesthetic, clearly tactile and acoustic but blurry in the visual field. As techno music and post-rave dance gatherings foreground their techno-logical imagery as an abstraction, this metaphorical ‘womb’ has a machine-like quality, a matrix in terms of both womb and grid system, making the experience of self-annihilation and rebirth in the context of a machine aesthetic a deeply spiritual cyborgian suture. It is at the same time a sacrifice of the body as well as of a sense of the self. Hooked chemically and sensorially into the machine pulse of techno (Plant 1993), the post-industrial alienated individual sacrifices the self ritually to achieve a spiritual transition into a cyborg-like subjectivity. This is the peak-experience, one that does not always materialize, but one that is nevertheless profound and unspeakable when it occurs.

Man-machine

Although thousands of girls and women attend rave-related events (Pini 2001; Rajandran 2000), the ‘man’ in the techno-based man-machine relationship is quite male. A crisis in masculinity seems to have been produced due to a dread of the obsolete male body, no longer needed in heavy industries, while at the same time, arguably, a feminization of the labour force is occurring (Morley 1996; Springer 1996). Almost nostalgic for a futurist past, techno music channels this identity crisis. Men—black, white, Asian, straight, gay, teenage, middle-aged—energetically dance to a range of post-human techno versions on a mutated disco dance floor. This may seem a strange way to reconfirm one’s masculinity.

Unlike couple dancing, disco HILLEGONDA C.RIETVELD 55 group dancing is historically associated with the feminine, with women and gays. House music, providing the dominant structure for techno, developed in the 1980s from the underground disco that structured highly sexualized gay scenes (Fikentscher 2000; Thomas 1995). However, drug use has physically ‘loosened up’ the heterosexual masculine body, while at male-dominated gatherings the homo- social gaze is deflected away from fellow dancers towards the DJ. The profoundness of this situation becomes clear when one realizes that the DJ is not particularly exciting to watch (someone wearing headphones, usually too absorbed with the equipment and music selection to look up) and who is sometimes even invisible (because of smoke and visual effects, or because the DJ is too far away).

In techno, dancing can be regarded as a male bonding (Rajandran 2000), comparable to that of football matches (Verhagen 2001). In addition, it seems that the potentially threatening ICT is being fetishized (Springer 1996; Rietveld 1998b). The man-machine is a subject-object relationship, in which the machine plays a role in the game of (spiritual) seduction. Not only do dancers give themselves up to the machine metaphors of the music; there is also a self-absorbed masculine pleasure in taking control over this cyborg relationship, as DJs, producers and programmers. If ‘subject-object’ is spirit, it is also the experience of orgasm; this is what makes techno sexy to some.

Social and industrial relations are changing for women as well, as they too attempt to negotiate their relationship to the emerging ‘paradigm’ of ICT. Despite a male majority in the organization of techno events, there is an increasing involvement by women, as DJs and, sometimes, as producers. Since around 1997, up to 10 per cent of Top 100 DJs in the yearly UK-based D/ magazine poll have been female and the most successful ones play techno. Reactions from crowds are mixed, from male hecklers as well as supporters to friendly female admiration. However, there is a twist in the sexual politics of techno, exactly because the focus has moved from the people on the dance floor to the DJ. There have been reports of women on the dance floor who have displayed confusion when being led by a female DJ. Men, on the other hand, especially the dancers rather than the promoters, increasingly seem to welcome female DJs in the domain of techno. Huyssen (1986) has suggested that the "vamp in the machine" normalizes the male experience of new technology in Fritz Lang's 1926 film Metropolis. This idea positions the potentially spiritual experience of cyborgian merging in terms of a male-defined heterosexual sexuality. In the case of female techno DJs, the focus of male heterosexual energy on the female DJ powerfully deflects the idea of homo-eroticism in a homo-social environment, enabling both male bonding and a sexualized, as well as spiritual, man-machine bonding in a time of social transition.

The techno interface offers a precarious liberation to women, it seems, in the form either of androgyny or of a sexual metaphor for technology. A cyborg subject position is a 'body-without-organs' (Deleuze and Guattari, 1983), as summarized by Potts (2001), who critiques Irigaray's idea that it 'amounts to the annihilation of female embodiment before a female-defined corporeality even exists' (ibid.:158).

Although there is an undeniable presence of female techno fans, they are outnumbered by male fans. It seems as though many women in the dance scene care less about techno as a musical aesthetic than about the scene itself: the people, the androgynizing dance drugs, a variety of subcultural attitudes (less the hooligan culture of gabba, more the countercultural ideas of trance), the dancing (especially the intricate techno footwork called 'Melbourne Shuffle' in Australia, a speeded-up mix of Irish and jazz dance steps) and the socially produced fashions. In short, women seem to engage in the human relational experience outside the masculine self-annihilating ritual of devotion to the machine aesthetic.

Irigaray (2002) has suggested on the basis of comparative European sociolinguistic research with boys and girls that the definition of human self in relationship between subject and object, as Bataille proposed, is quite masculine. Instead, she found that girls define themselves more in relationship with other subjects, rather than with objects or things; instead of a masculine subject-object relationship, a feminine subject-subject relationship was noted.

Similar findings are possible in contemporary dance culture. For example, it is striking that record-shop owners and promoters alike have noticed that, even in now, most women prefer more melodious and embodied forms of dance music. Such music sets up a relationship with the human world, rather than with the world of things. This includes soulful vocal club music and deep house music, which the techno fraternity often dismisses as 'handbag' music, referring to an accessory associated with the feminized realm.

Like soul music itself, the musical skills and attitudes of many African-American house singers and music-makers are rooted culturally in gospel music, where harmonies between the voices articulate an embracing community and where chord progressions 'lift up the spirit'. It is as if energy is channelled from the rhythmically moving lower part of the body into the cerebral, uniting all the seemingly disparate parts of body, mind, soul and spirit. In the case of old-school 1980s African-American and Latino house music, instead of directing one's devotion to Jesus, the gospel-inspired focus was to the community and to the sexual. This could mean that orgasm was occasionally bluntly celebrated, making the profane sacred in the process. This was a celebration of liberating the repressed, especially in the context of sexual politics. The sacred, according to Bataille, is ‘a privileged moment of communal unity, a moment of the convulsive communication of what is ordinarily stifled’ (1985:242). Although aimed at a gay crowd, the Chicago house scene also attracted heterosexuals, whereby it was ‘hip to be gay’ in order to gain access to the intense fun of the party (Rietveld 1998b:21). Kevin Saunderson, part of the seminal (heterosexual) brotherhood of Detroit techno producers, observed the following about DJ Knuckles’ early 1980s sessions at the Warehouse, where the sound system was allegedly fantastic:

I’m sixteen years old, don’t know anything about gay people, so I’m sitting on the wall the whole night, you know, guarding my butt and everything, right. And anyway, after a while... you start to see the people having fun and getting into the music and these people [are] just so free. I mean, just animated, arms all over the place, jumping on top of speakers, dancing with this person, prancing over this side, on the wall, climbing the walls on top, above 'em. (Bidder 2001:18-19)

This quote illustrates the uneasy, yet curious, relationship between gay club culture and heterosexual masculinity. The dance style described was called 'jacking', a dance-floor variant of copulating movements. The term itself is a mechanistic metaphor, creeping into the early house imagination preparing for a discursive development towards techno. People jacked with each other to the music, with walls and with the speakers (Bidder 2001; Rietveld 1998b).

Deep house is tantalizingly tactile in its deep penetration and full embrace of the body through its loudly amplified low-frequency bass lines. The 4/4 'foot' of the bass drum, mostly an analogue sound, has a warm 'feel', while its African-American and Latino syncopations move the body in a variety of directions, in contrast to the unidirectional macho 'motorik' of trance. In the dark space of the dance floor, the dancer gives in to the musical soul of communal intimacy, a 'subject-subject' spirituality. There are some forms of techno which manage to achieve this as well, mostly African-American and mostly a crossover with deep house's bass lines and soulful analogue feel.

In current deep house, deep in its emotional response, the sexual is often less explicit. While the 'motorik' accompanies a possession trance, with the machine as its imagined 'animal' (Rouget 1985), deep house's orgasmic ecstasy articulates a relationship with a communal soul. In both cases, however, such rituals strengthen vulnerable identities in times of change. Gay club cultures and African-American forms of dance music have pioneered in this, as subjectivities which have been under siege so long that powerful forms of dance music and partying have been produced to heal this sense of unease, this continuous need for a rite of passage.

Conclusion
Despite its transcendental and universal appearance, the spirit is produced in and by the material and historical context of the self's relationship to the 'other'; spirituality is thereby always embodied. In the case of raves, the favoured musical form is a marriage between techno (functioning as a man—machine spiritual interface) and house music (producing a powerful ritual framework). In the early 21st century, trance comes out on top in terms of global popularity, stripping house of its African-American and Latino syncopated rhythms and replacing these with a Germanic 'motorik' pulse. One could, perhaps, conclude that techno and trance are genres which help to make sense of a troublesome post-industrial relationship between human and ICT. The relationship seems particularly significant in terms of a vulnerable sense of masculinity which is worked out at homo-social rave-styled events; by destroying a sense of self, the merging with technology becomes a cyborgian rite of passage which needs to be repeated for as long as the identity crisis prevails. More men than women seem to be actively engaged with techno, either on the dance floor or in the production process. Meanwhile, women at rave-related events seem to embrace androgyny as a perceived liberation from femininity, an experience that may be found in the abstract spirituality of techno’s machine aesthetic.

In this sense, the experience of the spirit, which instead of Bataille’s ‘subject—object’ would be more usefully regarded as the ‘self—other’, varies, according to subject position affecting the choice of spiritual interface. For example, those who are more occupied by defining their embodied self also embrace a more metaphorically embodied form of dance music. This shows an affirming spirituality which connects subjects with subjects instead of a sacrificial annihilation of the self to merge with the machine-as-object. Rather than losing the self in a (metaphorical) cyborgian merging with technology, we could, perhaps, find ourselves in an embrace towards a sense of communal soul.

Dance, rapture and communion
Rapturous ruptures
The ‘instituant’ religious experience of rave
François Gauthier

My personal opinion is that savage religion is not so much something that is thought as something that is danced. (R.R. Marett)

"What does the gathering of many thousands of youth on a regular basis foretell? Forcibly something." (Emmanuel Galland, 1997:8)

Defining evanescence

This chapter will focus mainly on that which has fuelled the formidable diffusion of rave and continues to draw non-initiates by the thousands, even today, into the humidity and heat of all-night techno parties: namely, the nature and characteristics of the singular and intense moment of release of the techno trance.

The hypothesis can seem uncanny or daring: that rave's ascension within Western youth subcultures is due to the religious nature of its experience. But it is also, as will be debated here, an insightful and fecund viewpoint for understanding the effervescence of rave in contemporary youth culture.

In order to address some questions raised by the intensity and otherness of the rave experience—questions which challenge the whole of contemporary social sciences and humanities—this discussion will call upon the works of two of the most original French thinkers of the 20th century: Roger Bastide (1898-1974) and Georges Bataille (1897-1962).

If Bastide first enables us better to grasp the dynamics of rave culture as a whole, Bataille can help approach the more intimate dimensions of the state of rave. It is under the sign of consumption, abandon and transgression that we are here to penetrate the rapturous world of rave.

In regard to method, this discussion pursues a certain ideal-type of rave that can be defined as instituant.

I am bidding that it is by grasping the more vivid aspects of such a phenomenon that one can hope to understand what some have called the more 'degraded', 'commercial' or 'institutionalized' forms of rave. If the following analysis can be held to be widely applicable to emergent and clandestine rave scenes, then the following must be stressed: first, that over a decade after the birth of raves in England, clandestine scenes still thrive in a number of cities; second, that these vivid and transforming experiences can occur unexpectedly—for instance, at large commercial raves.

In the course of my own research I have been astonished to hear young ravers holding little knowledge of rave history speak of their experiences in these large raves—the intensity of their experience, their commitment to the scene and the community forming around events—in virtually the same terms as those reported at the emergence of rave.

Religion: from disappearance to shifting

To tackle rave from a religious studies perspective, and thus grant it a full-fledged religious status, requires a few introductory comments. First of all, a distinction must be made between 'a' religion, from a theological, traditional, institutionalized perspective, and 'religion' as a fundamental cultural phenomenon.

Opposing the social studies secularization theory and other modern views holding religion to be doomed to history's burial ground, the idea that religion and the religious experience do not end with the dwindling of traditional forms of instituted religion is becoming widespread. The French anthropologist Roger Bastide can be considered one of the most stimulating thinkers on the topic of contemporary religious phenomena, as he kept an eye on the cultural shifts in Western culture while concentrating the body of his work on Brazilian and African rituals. Late in his life, Bastide acknowledged that religion 'shifted' more than it disappeared or 'reappeared'. He pointed to urbanization- and secularization-induced phenomena such as star and hero cults, and their ecstatic rituals as contemporary modulations of an experience of the sacred and, therefore, manifestations of religiosity. That religion transforms itself in less easily distinguished—or, as Edward Bailey (1997) would say, less explicit—cultural phenomena challenges classical definitions of religion. For Bastide, religion is not always 'in' what we are accustomed to call 'religions'.

Religions, in fact, are often conservative contractions of the religious, or even institutions which aim to defend against the religious, and are thus merely moralistic or sentimental annexes of, for example, 'bourgeois class rule' (Bastide 1995). If this position is startling at first, closer analysis demonstrates that Bastide's ideas on religion, like those of Georges Bataille, are incisive toolkits enabling a comprehensive grasp of phenomena which would be elusive were we to limit religion to its traditional, institutionalized forms. For Bastide, therefore, the 'death of God(s)' and the fall of traditional religious institutions (the instituted) by no means correlate to a disappearance of 'instituant' experiences of the sacred. In other words, the crisis affecting various Christian churches, for example, does not signify a crisis of the instituant: the desire and need for experimentation with the dynamics of the sacred, as can be found, for instance, in transgressive behavior or collective effervescence.

It is the dialectical movement between these two polarities that I would like to introduce in order to shed some light on the dynamics of the rave phenomenon in contemporary society. As a first rule of thumb, we can state that the institution is always instituted by an instituant, and that the instituant is always a primary moment in the process of institutionalization. Applying these categories to rituals, we can show how instituant and instituted are articulated. An instituted ritual, for example, can be the periodic re-enactment of a mythical foreground, aiming at maintaining a certain social order or structure. The ritual that seeks to be instituant, on the contrary, can be the source of major disorder, renewal and reorganization. Although these categories are set in opposition, they are not exclusive: an instituted ritual must possess a certain instituancy, or else its religiosity 'degrades' in a sense, becoming purely moral, its fervour dried up, unable to transcend the profane.

On the other end of the spectrum, the instituant must be wrapped in some amount of domestication and tied down by some sort of institutionalization to enable passage from the sacred back to the profane. In this articulation, when instituted forms no longer provide for the vividness of the instituant experience we witness the appearance of savage quests for the vivid fervour of the instituant that shun any regard for domestication. Calling upon his extensive knowledge of Brazilian and African trance rituals, Bastide, in his essential article Le Sacré sauvage (1997:209-29), shows how the contemporary rapport with the sacred differs from that in traditional and tribal religion. He argues that the traditional, ‘organic’ society is essentially geared towards restricting, controlling, and channelling the dangerous but necessary instituant experience of the sacred, in a sense domesticating it. Far from being a hysterical free-for-all, the tribal trance ritual is tuned to a T, as religious (mythical reference) and social control (behaviour codes) transform the spontaneous, instituant trance into an institutionalized, domesticated one. This general scenario, which also applies to larger social bodies, varies when two levels of social change occur. First, when the religious institution is weakened, its capacity to hold the experience of the sacred within its mythical frame proves largely handicapped. The instituant trance is then harder to transform and domesticate. Second, when community becomes eroded, this leads to feelings of solitude and helplessness. Synonymous with the erosion of instituted, conservative forms of religious experiences, these transformations induce an increased need for instituant experiences of the sacred—eventually through savage forms. Ferality and wildness are then expressed with increased intensity and periodicity in flourishing religious countercultures.®

Often shying away from institutionalization, this quest for instituancy reveals a tragic disparity between a society’s conservative superstructures and its more mobile social infrastructures. Such would be the situation in much of the Western world today, where all institutions—religious, social and political—have their legitimacy affected by widespread disillusionment (Boisvert 1995, 1998). As any discourse or representation will be regarded as essentially relativistic, no authority will be accepted as a definite bearer of Truth. Rather, and given a new pragmatic reality that some have argued to be constitutive of a postmodern ethos (Boisvert 1995), truth and meaning must come from and be judged on the scale of experience.

THE ‘INSTITUANT RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE OF RAVE 

Consequently, far from wanting institutions to domesticate and control a dangerous and savage type of experience, contemporaries can actually seek these outside instituted forms.? This echoes Bastide, who states that any eventual solution to the ‘problems’ of a transitional society can only be found in a space ‘beyond ideas’: not from abstractions above (myths, ideologies, institutions, discourses and other representations) but from the ‘immanence’ of sociality and its correlate of affect, imagination and social ‘heat’ (Bastide 1997:222).

The ‘accursed share’: Georges Bataille and the necessity of excess
Max Weber showed how Western culture was built on thoroughly rational foundations, an edifice in which nothing was to exceed the all-encompassing grip of Science, Progress and Reason. Here Bastide agrees with Bataille, for whom this enterprise is judged profoundly foolish since it ignores one of life’s essential dimensions—that which is uneconomic, gratuitous, violent and expensive. To illustrate this, Bastide calls up the mythological image of Prometheus’s Vulture, gnawing at his liver, a symbol of sapiens’ inextinguishable /ubris, or excessiveness (Bastide 1997:163-82). Bataille, for his part, mobilized a whole theoretical system around what he calls the ‘damned’, ‘blasted’ or ‘accursed share’!° of humanity. Bataille deems the principles of usefulness, propriety and productivity to be highly insufficient for understanding the foundations and workings of societies’ economics. 

These principles, although necessary, only account for one share of human activity: that which is submitted to an end, inscribed within reason and projected into duration. Another share, the accursed one, is that of excess, expenditure, un-usefulness, waste, luxury, mourning, cults, games, aesthetics, war, debauchery, drunkenness, (sacrificial and erotic) consumption, that which cannot be ‘accounted for’ and must be spent (as lovers are) outside any productive end (Bataille 1949:28). It is exuberance and violence, an unproductive necessity, which limit the human realm through the accursed share and which, ultimately, open onto the possibility of a rapport with a radical otherness, the sacred: ‘that prodigious effervescence of life that, for the sake of duration, the order of things hold in check, and that this holding changes into a breaking loose, that is, into violence’ (Bataille 1989:42). Modernity, through a fantasy of total control and domination over the arbitrary (and notwithstanding its project of liberation), made usefulness itself, work, into a sacred value. In so doing, modernity has negated the accursed share by trying to integrate it in a consumerist economy, substituting leisure and reason for religion and ritual. Tumultuous expenses and collective effervescence, therefore, were deemed characteristic of premodern, archaic, bygone, uncivilized and therefore lesser societies. Some anthropologists had consequently noted that proper religious celebrations, effervescences and festivities such as bacchanals, carnivals and orgies had virtually disappeared from the face of the (Western, and therefore civilized) earth (Duvignaud 1977; Caillois 1980). Rather, it seemed, luxury, expense and transgression had been emptied of their substance and anaesthetized, channelled into leisure activities or entertainment commodities. The brazenness with which techno-rave fired up so many local subcultures could have been caused in part by a certain longing, otherwise unfulfilled, for expense and communion (Epstein 2001a). Incidentally techno-rave could be defined as a hedonistic encounter of the technological and the archaic in which transient communities give voice to this accursed share. On a more general level, through excess and transgression raves participate in a cultural resurgence of the festive, providing new avenues for experiences of the sacred in an atomized society (Fontaine and Fontana 1996; Gaillot 1999, 2001). Rave as festive ritual I regard this radical experience of rave as a manifestation of the religious fête. The ‘festive’, a religious category different from that of ritual, is, for Georges Bataille specifically a human fusion in which this accursed share is given expression. Fuelled by desire, an instinct, a call for destruction, exhilaration, disorder, a motivation often understood as animalistic, the fête, in which the paradoxes of human and social life collide, is simultaneously harnessed and subordinated by a wisdom which enables the participants to come back from this confusional state with a feeling of replenishment, as if having received some kind of impetus from the ‘outside’ (Bataille 1989:54). Set in Bataille’s economy, the festive amounts to the sacrificial consumption of order, usefulness and productivity. Its constitution and effectiveness are reliant on its ability to set up a contrast with the profane order. Through its instinct of preservation, the festive is necessarily ritual, as it must provide return from the uncertainty of the margin; but it also differs from ritual as it allows for an unrivalled______ 

What also distinguishes the festive from the ritual is that the latter is disengaged from a telos: the celebration is not a re-enactment of an original myth, reporting meaning outside itself. Neither is it held to take after some sort of commemoration. The aim is in fact to escape time and duration and to elude all memory. If an occasion is given for celebrating, the celebration is only fully festive if what is celebrated is forgotten and recognized for what it really is—a pretext. The festive implicitly seeks forgetfulness, selflessness and oblivion. What this implies is that the prompted effervescence is sought after for itself and in itself. In other words, it is its own purpose and reason. By opening up to creativity, by staging an otherly, unlicensed temporary world, the festive need only contain itself.

Disengaging from temporality, the festive bursts into an “eternal”—or, to be more precise, ‘indefinite’—present, and opens onto an instituted factuality. This scenario is consistent with some of the characteristics of the rave-borne techno experience. Many interpreters, from within or on the edge of the rave scene, have likened rave to the festive (see Fontaine and Fontana 1996; Ben Saaddoune et al. 1997; Hampartzoumian 1999; Epstein 2001a; and Petiau 2001, for example), thus referring, more or less explicitly, to a symbolic mechanism making use of transgression (Bataille 1986, 1988, 1989). To understand how rave fits into this scheme and leads to abandon and rapture in the techno trance, the festive can be decomposed into three sacrificial stages: rupture (with the profane), consumption and communion in abandonment.

Ruptures and transgressions: hastening otherness

If a fundamental characteristic of the festive is to set up contrast with the profane, the efficiency with which a rave can lead to an instituant religious experience depends to a great extent on how much it can depart from normal consciousness. As I will try to demonstrate, rave seeks this rupture by all means: temporal, spatial, corporeal and symbolic. These efficient ruptures can be first divided into two levels: cultural (collective, social) and intimate (individual-with-others).

Cultural ruptures

An analysis of the cultural (or sociohistorical)—which may affect individual consciousnesses indirectly—provides us with an initial interpretative key to understanding rave’s radical and original stance while setting it in the perspective of recent cultural history. The first significant elements of rupture appear in techno music, rave’s sonic stage and canvas. As musicologist Philip Tagg (1994) put it, techno could well represent the most significant shift in contemporary music since the advent of rock. He writes: ‘perhaps techno-rave puts an end to nearly four-hundred years of the great European bourgeois individual in music’ (ibid. :219). As far as the individual in rave and techno music is concerned, it could be interpreted as supporting the thesis of a certain ‘decline of individualism in Western societies’. In regard to ‘artistry’, the stereotypical techno music producer and DJ eludes the instituted star-system of popular music by resorting to identity-blurring tactics, anonymity, white labels, parallel distribution systems and technotribe ‘DJ-ing in the dark’—all strategies emphasizing that the dancing crowd of ravers (and not the DJs) are the stars. Could the simple fact of gathering be interpreted as transgression? In such an individualist and citizen-cum-consumer era, this could be so. "Only the fact of gathering is obviously not the sole privilege of raves. What is particular here is that rave’s gathering is set outside social institutions, namely stadiums, arenas, theatres and clubs, challenging established venues. Furthermore, as was noted in the case of Parisian raves (Epstein 2001b), while creative urban activities have always made good use of downtown centrality, raves use ‘deterritorialization’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1980) strategies by staging their “Temporary Autonomous Zones’ (Bey 1991) on the city’s periphery: derelict post-industrial landscapes, abandoned army bases, fields, forests, etc. As techno music makes use of sonic larceny and propriety rights baffling as sine qua non creation techniques (Reynolds 1999; Petiau 2001), raves blatantly (or else 68 FRANCOIS GAUTHIER symbolically) hijack buildings and spaces at the expense of ownership. Clandestine warehouse parties are the best example of this transgression of propriety rights. Even in the case of licensed raves, what is determining is the purpose for which the ravers use the space, by contrast to the usual “space-defines-use’ formula. By redirecting such symbols of culture towards both a playful and feral use, rave catalyses its festive effervescence. The deliciously unreasonable absurdity of this ephemeral takeover of locations adds to rave’s mythical construct and heightens the potential for subversive interpretation.

Another important and defining rupture in techno-rave is its rapport with technology. Until recently, technology was largely serving productive ends and the modern ideal of Progress. Techno culture thus marks a significant break from this handcuffed and stereotypical rapport with technology. In rave culture, technology is synonymous with possibility, and stands as a prerequisite for creation, gathering and effervescence. The characteristics of early techno culture—subversion, a newfound freedom of expression through use of ‘the technologies of pleasure’ (Collin 1998) and recycling of the past and the symbolic, a new openness to ritual, a new imperative for togetherness outside instituted forms and discourses—contribute to a general ambiance of exploration, experimentation and new possibilities. Consequently, when techno-rave reached the urban crucibles of the West, feelings were ignited as though some kind of Kingdom had come. Of course, this idealism and glistening didn’t last long, but the world, in a sense, had changed for youth, and post-rave culture carries this shift.

The point is that the ruptures at work in techno-rave, on a cultural level, create a determining narrative, a first disposition that must be taken into account if we are to understand how the rave experience pushes itself on the individual consciousness.

Going elsewhere: intimate ruptures in the festive sphere
Incessantly, rave brews up mythologies of an ‘elsewhere’. Representations are kept to a minimum in this subculture, blending the functional and pragmatic to the most effective and vivid expression of the symbolic. Party flyers (alongside posters and album covers) are virtually the only iconography in which this visual generation indulges. Flyer aesthetics exploit syncretism, covering a wide spectrum of cultural references in a given place at a given time. As Bernard Schiitze puts it, writing about the Montreal scene: Their [the flyers’) particularity is that they announce nothing more than a colour, a date, an endpoint, an element, a quantity of memory, a connection, a state, a unit, a dimension." The title of the flyer is not even a word anymore, it is a technical abbreviation and a symbol, so we are really left with a bare minimum of linguistic substance. (Schiitze 1997:17)

THE ‘INSTITUANT’ RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE OF RAVE 69

We have been transported to the edge of language, where its multipotentiality is fully exploited. Words here are only forms offered to symbolic enchantment. Umberto Eco’s ‘open work’ is wide open here, overstretched, fully aesthetic. Interestingly, the universes depicted by rave and techno iconography are entirely insignificant without their ritual enactment. As Schiitze writes, ‘the flyer bears a sense/non-sense that is only fully revealed if one participates in the event of which they are the advent’ (ibid.: 16). Here it is not the ritual that finds meaning through mythical re-enactment (as in the classical definition of ritual), but rather it is the mythological symbolism which acquires depth and significance through the ritual event. In other words, it is not the mythical framework that interprets the ritual gesture, but rather the experience that gives meaning to an imaginary mythological landscape.

What is common to this eclectic iconography is its portrayal and dream of an elsewhere: a nowhere that rave strives to realize in the margin of society. Simon Reynolds (1999:248) appropriately noted that this ‘no-where no-when elsewhere’ corresponds to the epistemology of ‘utopia’, an ideal world outside reality, virtually unattainable and definitely unsustainable. This desire for a significant and meaningful elsewhere finds resonance in the explicit or symbolic references to Eastern, shamanic and primitive mysticisms which proliferate in various rave scenes. '7 These and other references work on the imaginary, on the idea—the myth —of rave as travel and ecstatic initiation.

Raves do everything in their power to organize, stage, set up, provoke and condition a rupture. In this case, the popular expression ‘going out’ takes on a strong and full meaning: to extract oneself voluntarily and freely (in the double sense of liberty and gratuitousness) from regulated social life in order to experience ‘something else’ (Fontaine and Fontana 1996:14). If we were to concentrate mainly on the ritual aspect of rave, we could show how the threefold classical division of ritual is satisfied through segregation, marginalization and aggregation, which in the case of rave would translate as adventure, peak and plateau and, finally, comedown.

The first stage of this sequence basically corresponds to the preparation for the event, which preludes rupture. Especially true of the implantation and emergence periods of rave (but still to a certain extent in today’s post-rave culture, namely in the more underground currents), knowledge of a rave party requires energy and determination. It is essential to be ‘in the know—to know: where to access information and how to interpret it; where to buy tickets (if any); where to call for the event location (revealed hours before the actual party starts); how to get to the party; and where to get good drugs. In essence, then, and resembling other youth counter- or subcultures, rave thrives by feeding on a feeling of esotericism. For those who are already ‘in the know’, this builds identification and promotes commitment.'® For the non-initiates, accessing this underground world provides both a thrill and an anxiety that can easily be measured through stories and accounts. This esotericism sharpens the contrast with normal life. Consistent with what Maurice Boutin (1976) argued to be constitutive of the festive, a certain dose of exclusion is necessary for a rave to be a fully effective vehicle for sociality, effervescence, and community. The over-mediated event, on the other hand, consequently less marginal, is already a few steps further towards institutionalization and reduces the festive to spectacle or leisure. The degradation of a certain sense of esotericism 'commonalizes' the experience and makes for a cheaper thrill—and thus jeopardizes the rupture from commonality.

Festive manifestations such as carnivals are well known for promoting disguises and occasioning particular attention to vestments and corporeal ornaments. Ravers massively confide in looking to make their attire special, more so than when clubbing (Ben Saddoune et al 1997). Substantial effort and/or money is often invested in an event-specific vestment, to which may be added corporeal markings (tattoos) and piercings. This constitutes a first strategy at deconstructing and reconstructing subjectivity, which involves here, as a first gesture, the outer self: the frontier that makes communication with others possible. It is a first visible sign of a desire for otherness, for reconfiguration, for abandonment of part of ordinary subjectivity. It is a first outward licence, an expression of the usually contained and forbidden, and the paradoxical show of both affront and vulnerability.

Clandestine and emergent rave scenes have often been interpreted as 'initiatic journeys', partly because of the energy and craftiness required to make it to the party in the first place. Collin (1998), among others, has vividly portrayed such in the burgeoning London scene of the late 1980s. The story is well known: pirate radios and telephone info-lines with recorded messages giving out coded information, meeting places and car parks, caravans of cars and back alleys. Interestingly, knowingly or not, rave scenes emerged elsewhere using the same strategies. Furthermore, the info-line system and secrecy surrounding events are still the norm, although unnecessary from a strictly practical point of view. "This is not like going to a club', rave seems to say. "This isn't just going out, this is going way out."

Essentially, the greater the effort in preparing for and getting to an event, the greater commitment there is in being there with others and the more intensely the festive rupture will be felt—heightening its potentiality. Creating a sense of rupture is to act simultaneously on the corporeal, the imaginary, the symbolic, the spatial, and the temporal. There is a strong will in rave to camp outside the instituted club and leisure circuit, with their fixed venues and regulated timeframes. While other subcultures had already explored the excessive possibilities of the night (Silcott 1999), no other phenomenon had invested so massively in the all-night time slot. For this wasn't just an evening out clubbing, but a full-on all-night until noon (and sometimes beyond) extravaganza.

All of these considerations prepare ravers for the rave experience, instilling a sense of the extraordinary and gearing them towards an openness of both mind and body. The way from the door to the actual festive space enclosed by stacks of speakers often involves making it through various symbolic airlocks (such as the security, the ticket booth or the cloakroom) and tunnels, giving the impression of entering a secret world in which the heartbeat-like thumping of the bass drum shakes both air ducts and spines. Inside the rave, the experience can make for a brutal rupture. The ‘instituant’ religious experience of rave begins in the confusional space where references are blurred through indistinctiveness or sensorial overkill. The first thing to notice in the typical hangar or warehouse rave, for example, is the absence of chairs, tables, or any other objects which could define, structure, and condition space. Apart from the chillout room lined with sofas and mattresses, where one can take part in orgiastic and organic sprawling, the space is what the raving bodies make of it.

The rave environment stresses this disorganization of space and deters any attempt at resisting abandonment to the flow of bodies and sound. The vastness of the main rooms, the stroboscopic lighting, the color hazes, and smoke induce a confusional state, discouraging any attempt at seizing continuity or organizing information. Techno music, stretched across high-frequency oscillations, waves, bleeps, and low-end incessant thumping, also modulates consciousness in a specific fashion. Techno proves to be a truly efficient sculptor and architect of time, while space becomes thick or aerial in accordance.

Through its insistent and repetitive beat structure, techno constantly reiterates a present, a new foundation, a Nietzschean eternal differential return, a new event of meaning—as though it were some sort of relentless immediacy machine. As Jean-Ernest Joos writes: "Once the needle touches vinyl, there is no future—repetition has made it obsolete. The revolution of techno has been the creation of music that develops itself in its own interstices, the interstices of the present. The parasites of chronology narrative, beginning, middle, and end are all gone. Listening is pure, pure opening." (Joos 1997:11-12)

Finally, drugs are another—truly radical—means of heightening rupture. Consciousness-altering and energy-liberating substances such as ecstasy, LSD, and amphetamine (speed) are effective ways of catalyzing and inducing a response to all other ruptures. To be truly effective in this economy, the drug must be accompanied by a context and a disposition enabling ritual consumption: the substance must therefore be acknowledged—and this can prove no small task—as a ritual tool, and not an end in itself.¹⁰ Drugs induce a significant rupture by affecting the apprehension of reality. Although they are not necessary for the rave experience to be instituant, a variety of alterants are used in the rave context as in various traditional festive contexts, exacerbating a feeling of otherness. If the festive is an 'inflation' of both the individual and social body (Caillois 1980), then subjective expansion through ritual drug use is an effective catalyst. As reverting to carnivalesque vestments had displayed a first outer disposition for a new subjectivity, drugs like ecstasy enable this exploration on an inner—Bataille would say 'intimate'—level.

Rave's most important innovation is its break from the spectacle format of the rock show while blowing the club dance floor up to overwhelming proportions. In a way, the rock show is the result of an exacerbated individualism: the stage is the altar, where stands the deified figure of the band leader. Incidentally the sociality of a rock show differs radically from that of a rave. The spectacle is a transfer of the self towards an incarnated Ideal, a live representation permitting an ekstasis of the self through identification. In rave, the uniform orientation towards the stage is short-circuited, freeing ravers from dogmatic spatial determinations while opening new possibilities for interaction. The result, were we to view a snapshot of the dance floor from above, would be something between a laboratory for Maffesoli's (1988) soft-core open-edge 'tribal' sociality and a portrayal of the Brownian particle dance: many interconnected and ever-shifting circles of oscillating individuals. This sociality facilitates contact and abandon, as no focus or adoration is sought from a stage. In opposition to the more or less passive (but highly determined) reception involved in a spectacle, rave promotes participation. The investment required for rave differs significantly from that for leisure or spectacle, and even more so from the passive role of the consumer in the contemporary profane. Participation is creation and expression, and calls upon the whole of being. It is based on investment and commitment (on a more or less short-term basis in this case but in a highly intense manner), as well as on all the gratuitous, puerile and excessive behaviors that make up rave's experience. Following Bataille, ravers enter a world of ruptures in which they consume in excess, and where they do not merely 'border' on the religious, but are deeply and wildly religious. Thus we could say that a profane 'logic of consumerism' is transcended into a fuller, more vivid 'logic of sacrificial consumption.'

Through this consumption, rave recalls archaic and ecstatic manifestations of religion more than contemplative Christian piety. Of all the expensive and excessive behaviors in rave, dancing frenetically or in utter abandonment for hours on end is the most blatant and significant. In the rave context, with impressive stacks of speakers gushing out giga-levels of sound, techno comes into actual being (Boulé 2001), making it imperative to dance. Techno becomes a presence that cannot be ignored—more, it is a shock whose intensity is only matched by the body's urge to give in to it, an aggression made positive through the festive context (Métais 2001). Compared to rock and pop's 'sentimental' listening mode, techno music's 'sensitivity' bypasses verbal recognition and blurs subject/object division. Dancing also modifies one's consciousness of space, time and body, and is readily judged to be therapeutic (Fontaine and Fontana 1996; Schott-Bilmann 2001). Benefits from dance can also be understood as resulting from its gratuitousness, its essentially religious and erotic narrative, allowing for intimacy and contact with others outside usual social behavioral codes. This dance, various in styles, is an abstract, impulsive, desexualized body-in-motion that opens up to non-verbal communication. It is a dance in which gender and personality are transcended and the usual mode of negotiation and seduction yields to an orgiastic, confusional, indistinct openness, a state in which interconnectedness distils freedom. Added to the whole of rave's consumption, this becomes a means of opening subjectivity and prompting encounter in the festive interstice:

The meaning of this profound freedom is given in destruction, whose essence is to consume profitlessly whatever might remain in the progression of useful works. Sacrifice destroys that which it consecrates. This useless consumption is what suits me, once my concern for the morrow is removed. And if I thus consume immoderately, I reveal to my fellow beings that which I am intimately. Consumption is the way in which separate beings communicate. Everything shows through, everything is open and infinite between those who consume intensely. (Bataille 1988:58–9; italics in original)

Abandonment

Through a confusional environment and a musical landscape which continually eludes a defined narrative, rave discourages any attempt at resisting its sensorial assault. The ruptures and excesses uncovered to date can incidentally be understood as prompting abandon. To achieve this effectively, though, raves must also provide for a minimum of security. This is ensured by rave's ritual structure and group solidarity. Ravers have abundantly reported mutual aid and cooperation within the parties: an anthropological constant arising when a group transgresses into the margin. Raves are known to function widely on the basis of small 'tribes' (Maffesoli 1988), each individual taking some responsibility for the others.

Correlatively to this safety net, many observers have resorted to psychedelic guru Timothy Leary's use of the terms 'set and setting' to illustrate how the ecstasy trip, for instance, will be influenced and secured (Collin 1998; Reynolds 1999; Push and Silcott 2000). Although simplistic, this expression refers to two polarities which interrelate in sculpting the subject's experience of an altered consciousness. These are:

1. The subject's disposition, motivations, desires, expectations, anguishes, past experiences, etc.
2. The environment and social narrative (meaning its web of symbolic references) in which the subject is directly involved with others.

In the cases discussed here, these different ritual fragments combine and complete each other to provide a frame in which to consume and let go. Most ecstasy users know that the worst way to deal with this drug is to try to control it. This usually results in fear or insecurity and can lead to unpleasant experiences. 'E' (ecstasy), rave's most popular and prominent conscience-bender, requires it be worked. Supporting the participation thesis, ravers generally acknowledge that the ecstasy trip is not a passive thing: 'You have to dance to it, dance it until it's no longer an intruder, until it has become one with the flesh' (Joos 1997:11). Everything boils down to the acceptance of an altered state, which the raver must resist resisting.

The state of surrender to body, crowd, and sound that is typical of rave has widely been called a 'trance', although the expression is seldom given any definition or granted further analysis. A trance, understood in the wide anthropological sense, is simply an altered state of consciousness, a significantly differed rapport with the world, with the self and with others. In this respect, it is not thoroughly uncommon. The question arises then as to the specific nature of the rave-borne trance. This will be the focus of the remainder of this chapter.

In our culture, where trance states are often understood as sharing an acute proximity with folly, the only accepted state of trance is hypnosis. Rather than collective, the hypnotic trance is defined as being necessarily individual (Fontaine and Fontana 1996:23). Considering that other cultures recognize many different states of consciousness (Suissa 1997), the lack of subtlety here is disarming. Nonetheless, Joos translates this into the techno sphere: As such, the rave state is precisely one of hypnosis. Hypnosis occurs when, after one stares at a point until it becomes invisible, one's attention is decentralised. Joos 1997:12) The religious fête involves some sort of trance, a transgression of the self in a wider ensemble, an ekstasis (Duvignaud 1977). In normal life, individuality is understood as difference, and this difference, in turn, translates into divergence. In the midst of the festive consumption, this difference becomes a foundation for convergence: the presence of the self affirmed by the presence of others. It is, in other words, participating in an inflated social body and, both intimately and ultimately, the recognition of the need for others (Boutin 1976). This reveals that lying deep beneath the impulse to consume is the call for abandon. Letting go in the festive arena of rave further recalls the parallel drawn with sacrifice. For Bataille, sacrifice, widely held by scholars to be ‘the religious rite par excellence’, is defined as violence—meaning dis-order, rupture, and excess—consuming an offering. The most important gesture in sacrifice is the gift of the ritual offering (abandon), which fire or blade seals as definite and irretrievable (Mauss 1968; Bataille 1988, 1989). Through its destruction, its own consumption in the sacrificial scheme, the offering is irrevocably torn away from any use, any determined productive end or value. In a sacrificial scheme, abandon in the festive ritual of rave could be understood as holding subjectivity as an offering (and we can stress the radical vulnerability that this entails). Holding the self as an offering in a consumed moment of surrender, were we to pursue this logic, recalls in turn mysticism: another high-intensity area of religious experience. Sacrifice, when the violated offering becomes the self and is no longer symbolized by an outer object, opens on to the ultimate sacrifice, that of subjectivity, in utter renunciation and abandon of will. Here sacrifice bridges into mysticism, of which it can be argued to hold the seed (Gauthier 2001a).

We can now fall back on the problem of defining the techno-induced trance. In other words: where in the array of these differently orientated logics of consumption—outward or inward—does the rave experience lie? All analysts seem to have noted the intensity and particular nature of the rave experience, variously referred to as being ‘beyond words’, ‘iridescent’, ‘oceanic’, ‘empty’, ‘pure presence’, ‘a pure space of non-thinking’, ‘intense, more abundant life’, and even ‘mystical’, ‘comparable to a mystic’s trance’ or ‘peak of human experience’ (Collin 1998). What this reveals is that, essentially, for the protagonists normality is clearly transgressed and transcended. Furthermore, the fact that ‘re-entry’ from this state is known to be ‘notoriously difficult’ (ébid.:38) indicates that this experience is a savage, hardly domesticated quest for the énstituant. In essence, then, the rave experience amounts to losing oneself; preferably in bliss. Can we conclude that it is an experience of the sacred? First, it is important to reconfigure the debate on the sacred. If we want to be able to understand fully what is at stake here we must draw away from theorists such as Mircea Eliade and Rudolf Otto, for the sacred is not an essence, and even less a ‘thing’ even indefinable—that could by itself ‘erupt’ into the profane.?4 We must also put the axe to conceptions of religion and the sacred riven with obligations to such phantoms as divinities, gods, the supernatural or any unattainable transcendence—conceptions that are still, in many respects, hostages to Christian theology. "° Rather, the sacred is a fundamental anthropological category, since any social or cultural order has an exteriority, an otherness. Therefore, all societies, all cultures involve the sacred, which can be experienced—to varying degrees—by individuals as a structuring and/or dangerous force. The instituant rave experience, because of its intensity, otherness and singularity, then, is clearly one of the sacred. Yet there is no God here, nor 'spirits'. This is not a possession trance, unless perhaps possession by 'nothing'. But ravers do not feel 'something' (or indeed 'nothing') is overcoming them. On the contrary, it seems this overwhelming feeling originates from within, only they cannot say how or where.

To agree with Duvignaud (1977), the festive trance is one of destructuration, not possession. Through this ontological disorientation, the rave experience generates more pleasure than one can handle, and it is this overflow that ravers feel the need to share with others. By contrast with other ecstasies, such as those brought by seduction, the source and direction of this pleasure (Jouissance) remains unknown and consequently difficult to deal with (Joos 2001).

Compared with monastic mysticism, where trance and ecstasy are generally obtained through silence, isolation and immobility (all these being excesses, but of a 'negative', hypo nature), the techno trance is possible only because of the ephemeral social effervescence in which it takes place and the 'positive', hyper nature of its excesses. Yet it is not a collective trance (this could be the case in a homogenous society where the trance would be inserted into a common defined mythical frame), but rather an individual trance enabled by the presence of others. Sensitivity blushes to the surface of the skin and subjectivity opens indefinitely, as rubbing with the collective whole. Abandon is measured in openness, bringing meaning to being-together: The extreme moment of static pleasure...'the rift, when you are absolutely dispossessed of any goal, any expectation, any centre, is also the moment of greatest sociality, because at that moment the opening of the surface [of both skin and subjectivity] is as wide as possible. And it's precisely at that moment that you seek eye contact and recognition from the other in order not to be alone with your pleasure, and to say that because your bodies are one, you can open up indefinitely. (Joos 1997:12)

In mysticism, desire for the sacred is stretched as a teleology, even though it is the sacrifice of this very desire that leads to the ultimate levels of bliss. Here, inserted in the festive context of rave, the ecstatic state arrives, in a sense, 'out of the blue': out of the confusional scape of a rupture turned rapture. The experience is therefore unhinged from a defined and institutionalized—and therefore explicit—religious system that could explicate its meaning. By contrast to a mystical experience, the techno trance is sought in itself and for itself; detached from any defined meaning, aim or purpose. This parallels Roger Bastide's savage trance, applied to contemporary youth movements. He writes that today's savage, instituant-seeking trance, unlike that administered by religious institutions, is 'dysfunctional', as it does not seek any result. Pushed to its furthest limit, this quest can even become suicide. This trance is the desire for pure imstituancy, pure experimentation with an otherness that remains confused and diffuse—a purely gratuitous act, or a simple gesture of revolt." It is not release, compensation, or catharsis in violence and delirium, as psychiatrists would have it, for the trance would then be functional again, and would lose its revolutionary edge. But it is, paradoxically, both an insurgence against limits and a recognition of the anthropological necessity of limits (Bataille 1986) on two levels: on the social level by transgressing the forbidden; and on the individual level by 'raising from its depths the anarchic herd of censored desires' (Bastide 1997: 225), which are consumed in the non-desire of the techno trance. The savage, as a quest for purest instituancy, is above all decomposition, destructuring, the essence and aim of a counterculture that, paradoxically, desires not—a priori—to be instituted in a new definable, and therefore possibly recuperated and commodified, culture. A mystical experience is not reducible to intensity. If it does share some sort of kinship with the rave rift, folly, or other experiences that occur at the limits of human experience and language, mysticism, as a limit-case of the religious, requires the 'INSTITUANT' RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE OF RAVE 77 insertion in a way of life and a whole system of beliefs and meaning. Mysticism and the rave rift nevertheless share abandon in an indefinite present—except in rave this spending in immediateness is made possible by the presence of others. Bataille (1986) held that the individual body could not be kept indefinitely to the 'minuscule fold' of private life: it must be opened, shared, and delivered, made collective. Participating in the social body's need for the festive and the individual body's need for orgiastic sharing, rave's body-in-motion satisfies itself, thwarting the rules of the profane. The techno trance, therefore, is not mystical, although it perhaps contains the possibility of some kind of mysticism, if the potential for transformation is seized. The individual, then, as if partly domesticating this instituancy, becomes his or her own pontiff. If this scenario holds interesting potential for promoting personal responsibility, it is also tragic since it falls short of making it into a large-scale collective cosmology. If this experience is understood as festive in nature and thereby immediate and ephemeral, the rave experience can still become a manner of being-in-the-world by providing a differential point of view from which to construct meaning and identity. If it is interpreted as highly spiritual or explicitly religious by the individual (and possibly his or her surroundings), then, the rave experience and its rift-like peak might approximate 'savage mysticism', to keep with Bastide's terminology. On the other hand, the particularly fulfilling and fleeting nature of this trance-with-others can become an easy escape route in which communion and openness dissolve into autism—meaning essentially shunning the depths of its own religiosity.

In the instituant rave experience, rupture and excess lead to abandon. And in abandon's consumption, in this rapture brought by the heat of rupture, communion is found: the dissolution of the individual in sharing, the union of the separate. On the anthropological level, we find the recognition of the need for others in an altered environment as a structuring limit of human experience. On the sociological level, this 'rift' Deriving from the Latin ‘to bind’, ‘ligare’, the etymology of reliance pinpoints an essential function of religion, and demonstrates how sociology bridges into—and could even be said to stem from—religiology. Far from dying out, religion can be found thriving in contemporary quests for meaning and ritual, although in a more instituant and fragmented manner (and thus shunning dogmas, credos and institutions). Hence the importance of challenging our traditional understanding of religion (and its science) in order to better—and more fully—apprehend the effervescence of contemporary youth phenomena such as rave.


Notes: The Threshold of Religion, p. xxxi; quoted in Kerr (1991:249). A draft of this ideal-type as well as further outlooks highlighting the religiosity of rave can be found in Gauthier and Ménard (2001). The ideal-type was drawn from personal observation and from printed material on rave, most of which can be found cited in the bibliography. For a more thorough discussion on the odds and ends of this distinction as a basis for a comprehensive understanding of religion today, see Ménard (1999). Even Peter Berger (1999) is acknowledging today the mistake social sciences and humanities made by ruling out the religious component from cultural and political analysis. Berger's understanding of the religious, meanwhile, remains more restricted than the views presented here.

As far as I know, there has yet to be any translation of Roger Bastide’s text Le Sacré sauvage (Bastide 1997:209-29); nor do I know of any use made of his categories ‘institue/‘instituant’ and ‘sauvage /‘domestique. The difficult task of introducing this terminology in English therefore falls upon my shoulders and I hope that the liberty and responsibility this involves will be greeted with some leniency. While ‘instituted’ religion is easily translated from the French ‘institué, the case of instituant religion is somewhat problematic. ‘Instituant’, in French, is the present participle of the verb ‘instituer’ (to institute), and could therefore warrant the use of the English equivalent ‘instituting’. However, the present participle in French is more restricted in its use, rarer, almost specialized, compared to its relatively common use in English (Morton 1979:42). Therefore, calling on a certain tradition of translating concepts verbatim while aiming to maintain the specific meaning and depth of Bastide’s theory, I will plead for the introduction of the term ‘instituant’.

It is the aim of the Christian mass, for example, to help relive the instituant experience of Christ. When the mass no longer purports instituancy and is unable to renew itself, the ritual dies out and new ones emerge. The Protestant Reformation, for this matter, is an excellent example of the instituted ritual of mass renewing with the énstituant fervour that drives the Christian faith. Bastide gives the Brazilian macumba, a highly syncretistic and feral version of African religion, as an example of this (1997:209-29). The profusion of anything and everything ‘extreme’ (either lived or mediated) is an example of this. The French anthropologist David Le Breton has written substantially on this phenomenon (see Le Breton 2000).

As Robert Hurley translates (Bataille 1989), from the French ‘part maudite’. This is not the place to discuss such things at length, and so I will stick to Hurley’s English terminology for the remainder of this contribution. Personally, though, I think ‘damned’ or even ‘blasted’ has a somewhat punkish and provocative feel that could better serve Bataille’s radical ideas than the priestly ‘accursed’. The original version of La Part maudite (Bataille 1949) was prefaced by La Notion de dépense, which is close to essential for understanding the latter and which is unfortunately absent in Hurley’s translation. Bataille understands violence as being essentially a rupture or transgression of an order.


Hurley (Bataille 1989:52) translates the French ere’ as ‘festival’. While ‘festive’ (or even ‘celebration’) refers to some extent to the semantics of Bataille’s ‘féte’, ‘festival’ is, I find, too mellow and too highly determined to express thoroughly what is meant here: images of summer festivals, for example, can spring to mind, hinting more towards light-hearted entertainment than sacrificial consumption and orgiastic behavior. I will therefore retain féte’ or the more versatile ‘festive’. This scheme, which I have explored briefly elsewhere (Gauthier 2001a), has also been noted by Petiau (1999). ‘Postmodernity’ is still synonymous with an individualistic culture (Lipovetsky 1983: 2002), only more inclined towards what Maffesoli (1998) calls an affective tribal behavior. The institutionalization and normalization of raves have struck a serious blow to this ideal, but more clandestine scenes still hold this to be a fundamental characteristic of their events. As is abundantly illustrated in Collin (1998) and Reynolds (1999), for example, in the case of the UK. See Gauthier (2001a) for a hypothesis as to the reasons for the resort to so many of these often highly religious symbolisms.

It is important to note, as further support to a religious studies reading of rave, that commitment is one of the defining axioms of Edward Bailey’s (1997) ‘implicit religion’. Consider the pride and/or shame that is felt when passing ‘normal’ people on the street on the way to the party, for example. For the sake of this discussion, we can recognize the delicate nature of the question of drugs and keep to the best-case scenario (which is not so rare an instance) in which drug intake supports rave’s total experience. For further discussion on the question of drugs and ritual intake, see Gauthier (2001a). (See also Peterson 1996; Saunders and Doblin 1996; Fontaine and Fontana 1996; Collin 1998; Reynolds 1999; Fallu 2001).

The French language opposes the verb ‘consumer’ (to burn: excessive consumption in the sense of Bataille) to ‘consommer’ (to ingest: consumerist consumption), making this articulation somewhat clearer. See Gauthier (2001a) for more on this ‘consumption logic’ as opposed to a consumerist conservative order. Following the scheme given by Fontaine and Fontana (1996), the first phase of consciousness altering is fear, felt during the temporary (but, especially in the case of ecstasy, extremely intense) transition between states. This is where letting go is most difficult but also most important. The second phase involves maintaining the rupture and restructuring this new consciousness. A third phase could be added, this being the (sometimes very difficult) comedown from the altered state. Ecstasy and other drugs thus enable individual de-conditioning, making it possible to see and feel the world otherly. It can be noted that, following this definition, it need not be specified to what (super-natural being or suchlike) the offering is vowed, in the same way that the definition of religion can spare reference to the otherworldly.

The space here is obviously not suited for a detailed argumentation of this point, but the reader can refer to Bataille (1988, 1989) and Gauthier (2001b).______ Which is exactly what Eliade (1992) defines as a hierophany, central to his archetypal theory on the sacred. On the unnecessary status of these ‘phantoms’ in a comprehensive and functional theory of religion, see Ménard (1999).

This whole paragraph refers to Bastide (1997:225).

27 ‘Religiology’ (‘religiologie’) is a constituent term of the heuristic pledge of the Université du Québec & Montréal’s Religious Studies Department (Sciences des religions): as was argued in this chapter, that, despite secularization theories, the experience of religion does not die out but rather moves to other manifestations in culture. Refer to Ménard (2001). And as the intellectual itineraries of such prominent thinkers as Durkheim, Mauss, Lévi-Strauss and Turner, to name but a few, would suggest, there can be no... sociology nor anthropology without a profound questioning of the religious.

"Connectedness' and the rave experience Rave as new religious movement? Tim Olaveson
Is rave simply about the dissipation of utopian energies into the void, or does the idealism it catalyzes spill over into and transform ordinary life? (Reynolds 1999:10) As William Pickering published his second edition of Durkheim on Religion, he remarked upon the increased interest in the work of Emile Durkheim (Pickering 1994:2). The observation remains accurate today, partly through growth in the popularity of the social anthropologist Victor Turner, prominent in a tradition of scholars adapting Durkheim’s project. Regular contributors to journals like Durkheimian Studies and scholars publishing through the British Centre for Durkheimian Studies have launched reinterpretations of Durkheim’s thought on various subjects, and Turner’s work has been recast, reformulated and extended by scholars of the sociology/anthropology of religion, ritual and other social phenomena, including pilgrimage, performance, education and tourism.

For my own part, in another work (Olaveson 2001) I demonstrate the equivalence of Durkheim’s collective effervescence and Turner’s communitas, indicating that similar models of cultural creativity and revitalization underlay the work of both scholars, resembling more recent attempts to map new religious movements. In recent years, the concepts of effervescence and communitas have been employed in efforts to understand and map a range of youth social practices falling under the rubric rave or post-rave (Hutson 1999, 2000; Malbon 1999; St John 2001a; Tramacchi 2000). Scholars have begun to conceptualize raving as a transformational and spiritual practice, raising the possibility of viewing rave as a new religious movement (Tramacchi 2001) or, as Corsten suggests, ‘a symbolic and proto-religious practice of a modern urban youth scene’ (1999:91). Addressing various criticisms, this chapter illustrates how collective effervescence/communitas (often viewed as separate entities) is useful for investigating the most often reported experience in rave literature around the world—connectedness. The evidence I use consists primarily of a review of______ 

I then delineate how the model of cultural revitalization latent in the work of Durkheim and Turner has been adapted by 84 TIM OLAVESON scholars of religious movements. Finally, I suggest that rave cultures do in fact exhibit many features of new religious movements and, while that phrase may lack precision here, the dance culture phenomenon of the past 15 years demonstrates sociocultural revitalization on a massive scale. Raves as contemporary techniques of syncretic ritualizing

A recent collaborative ethnography of the rave scene in central Canada in which the author participated (Takahashi and Olaveson 2003) demonstrated that, contrary to the majority of academic analyses of rave culture, raving is a highly meaningful and spiritual practice for many ravers (see also Fritz 1999; Reynolds 1999; Silcott 1999 for popular sources on rave as spirituality). By contrast to medical health research largely focusing on harm reduction and the demographics of drug use at raves, and cultural studies and postmodern analyses tending to examine rave’s politics and gender dynamics or critique its ‘meaningless glittering surfaces’ (Melechi 1993; Pini 1997; Rietveld 1993), other researchers have arrived at conclusions congruent with our findings—that dance events are meaningful and transformative. These studies tend to be based on direct ethnographic evidence, including discussions with ravers themselves.

Both Scott Hutson and Ben Malbon, two of the few researchers who have seriously solicited ravers’ views and performed fieldwork at rave events, discuss the shortcomings of some postmodern analyses of the rave (and, for Malbon, the clubbing) experience:

Though I find this ‘rave-as-empty-joy-of-disappearance’ thesis both plausible and informative, it is incomplete because it ignores the poignant and meaningful spiritual experiences that ravers say they get from raves. (Hutson 1999:54)

Far from being a mindless form of crass hedonism, as some commentators suggest, clubbing is for many both a source of extraordinary pleasure and a vital context for the development of personal and social identities. (Malbon 1999:5, see also 127)

Recent studies also tend to view the rave as a new rite of passage for Euro-American youth (Corsten 1999) or as an example of formal ritual (Becker and Woebs 1999; Gauthier and Ménard 2002; Tramacchi 2000). While raves unquestionably contain ritual elements, I am disinclined to apply the term ‘ritual’ to all raves and rave-derived events, due to the usual variation of the elements comprising them.

Rather, my approach approximates that proposed by Ronald Grimes in categorizing such phenomena. Grimes (1995) proposes conceptualizing practices experimenting with ritual techniques as instances of nascent or syncretic ritualizing rather than formal rituals. The advantage of framing raves in this way is that it captures their nascence, their self-conscious creativity and their definitive place on the (often stigmatized) margins of society—elements highlighted as characteristic of ritualizing phenomena.

This approach facilitates a theoretical engagement with the fluidity and creativity of raves and their socioculturally revitalizing effects. The experience of connectedness at raves

The catalyst for such revitalization appears to be the phenomenological experience most consistently reported by ravers of an intense sensation of interpersonal and sometimes universal connection between participants, often described as ‘connectedness’, ‘unity’ or ‘love’. Both popular and academic sources on rave and rave-derived cultures have discussed this at length. In the ritualized setting of a rave, participants often experience profound feelings of communality, equality, and basic humanity, as Fritz so poignantly notes: "Although ravers don't feel the need to give their superhuman power a name or personality, when a rave 'goes off, everyone has a shared experience of connectedness and hundreds or even thousands of people can feel like one being with a shared purpose and direction." (Fritz 1999:179) My own fieldwork on the rave experience in central Canada validated such statements, which pervade written descriptions and personal accounts of the rave experience. Not only did I witness and experience connectedness myself, but quantitative analyses conducted in the collaborative study confirmed its existence.

A content analysis was performed on 84 ravers' personal accounts of the rave experience, as posted on rave websites by participants from Canada, the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, France, and Australia. We also analyzed 121 completed surveys at more than 20 rave events in the cities of Toronto, Ottawa, Montreal, and Quebec. Of the seven central themes of the rave experience emerging from the data, connectedness was most frequently reported.

Other ethnographers of rave cultures have also written about the connectedness or unity experience, recognizing its affinity with Victor Turner's "communitas." For example, in research on raving as a spiritual/healing practice, Scott Hutson (1999, 2000) argues that the sense of unity and connection ravers claim to achieve resembles Turner's communitas and facilitates healing at raves. In his analysis of counter-cultures, Tramacchi states that "Turner's analysis of counter-cultures is highly applicable to the contemporary developments of rave and doof:...which use rituals of alterity, ecstasy, and community" (Tramacchi 2000: 210; see also Tramacchi 2001).

Without regarding rave as a single culture/subculture, as Hutson does, other commentators make similar claims. Writing about the Australian biannual alternative lifestyle event ConFest, a component of which is the rave-derived Tek Know Village', St John applies Turner's communitas, yet finds it lacking in respect of its homogeneity and non-corporeality (a critique he revisited with regard to rave in Chapter 1 of this volume). As St John notes, some authors have highlighted the problematical essentialism underlying Turner's communitas, which has become a reified and all-encompassing "primal unity" that fails to account for the underlying and backstage diversities, tensions, and multiplicity of competing voices in such phenomena. St John also notes that, despite a late theoretical interest, Turner was not an anthropologist of the body, and "the communions he had in mind tended to be clinically social, not somatic" (St John 2001a:60).

Ben Malbon's Clubbing: Dancing, Ecstasy, and Vitality (1999), thus far the longest academic publication seriously to treat the embodied experiential dimension of clubbing or raving, also draws on the concept of communitas, along with Maffesoli's (1996) concept of "unicity." While Malbon's book is a turning point in ethnographies/geographies of dance-based cultures, he neither understands nor adequately analyzes Turner's ideas, rejecting the heuristic value of communitas according to the unsubstantiated assumptions of other dance ethnographers rather than addressing Turner's work directly. 

On the other hand, St John's critique of the essential and disembodied communitas is a useful corrective, highlighting the need to heed the complexity and carnality of contemporary ritualized social movements and gatherings, such as rave and dance events. Acknowledging this critique, in the next section I further probe the early formulations made by Hutson and Tramacchi.

Connectedness and the rave experience as collective effervescence/communitas

Émile Durkheim's concept of 'collective effervescence' was given its fullest treatment in his last and greatest work, The Elementary Forms of Religious Life (Durkheim 1995). While it has recently experienced something of a revival in the social sciences in the works of such theorists as Michel Maffesoli, Chris Shilling, Philip Mellor and other 'neo-Durkheimians' who discuss the resurgence of sacred, communal social gatherings and collectives, it had originally received little attention —a circumstance likely due to the fact that Durkheim had never given it precise definition, often using it interchangeably with such terms as 'moral density', 'concentration', 'heat', 'sentiments', 'emotion' and 'delirium' (Jones 1986; Nielsen 1999; Ramp 1998). Nevertheless, it is important to note that Durkheim did not intend the term to be epiphenomenal. As I discuss below, he thought collective effervescence was a feature of certain types of social assemblies, especially religious rituals. Possessing several characteristics, it is: inherently communal and collective; energetic, electric, or ecstatic; an essentially non-rational affective state or experience; ephemeral or temporary in nature; and a possible source of great cultural creativity.

Victor Turner's widely cited concept of 'communitas' is central to his theories of ritual and social creativity. Like Durkheim, Turner often had difficulty precisely defining communitas, but cautioned that it was not a mere epiphenomenon, but an ontological reality: 'Just because the communitas concept is elusive, hard to pin down, it is not unimportant' (V.Turner 1969:29; see also 1974:231). Turner described it variously as: an unstructured or rudimentarily structured community of equal individuals (1967:99ff.; 1969:96; 1982:47); an essential and generic human bond (1969:97; 1985:233); a set of egalitarian, direct, non-rational bonds between concrete and historical individuals (1969:131, 177; 1974:47); and a deep, inherently emotional experience or state (1969:136ff.; 1974:46, 201, 205, 274). Also paralleling Durkheim's collective effervescence, Turner thought that communitas emerges in ritual and characterizes certain social gatherings. He distinguished three different types of communitas: spontaneous or existential communitas, which is characteristic of events such as counterculture 'happenings', rock concerts and pilgrimage phenomena; normative communitas, in which spontaneous communitas is translated into a set of moral and behavioural codes and doctrines in order to normalize and regulate social behaviour along the lines of the original experience; and ideological communitas, in which the ethos or ethic of the communitas experience is translated into an ideology or blueprint, such as in utopian societies or cults, or the 'hippie' communes of the American counterculture (V.Turner 1969:132; 1973:191—230; 1974:169; 1979:45-8; see also B.C.Alexander 1991). The ontological experience of connectedness ravers so often report as central to raving is the experience of existential collective effervescence/communit______ Electricity, exaltation, and enthusiasm: Both the scant treatment and lack of clarity attending to sociological discussions of effervescent rituals are partly due to their ethereal nature. Durkheim described such rituals as events infused by electricity, ecstasy, and enthusiasm:

"[Effervescence]...quickly launches [ritual participants] to an extraordinary height of exaltation. Every emotion expressed resonates without interference in consciousnesses that are wide open to external impressions, each one echoing the others. The initial impulse is thereby amplified each time it is echoed, like an avalanche that grows as it goes along. And since passions so heated and so free from all control cannot help but spill over, from every side there are nothing but wild movements, shouts, downright howls, and deafening noises of all kinds that further intensify the state they are expressing." (Durkheim 1995:217-18)

Turner echoed Durkheim's descriptions, and wrote that such rituals produce 'direct, immediate, and total confrontations of human identities' and 'for the hippies —as indeed for many millenarian and "enthusiastic" movements—the ecstasy of spontaneous communitas is seen as the end of human endeavour' (V Turner 1969: 132, 138-9). As St John (2001a) notes, these and other descriptions of communitas bear a decidedly clinical ring to them, despite the fact that, as I have pointed out elsewhere (Olaveson 2001), both scholars were writing about and Turner was actually observing—embodied and extraordinary physical feats and mental states during ritual performances.

Yet, despite their clinicality, these passages betray a resemblance to contemporary descriptions of the effervescent and ritualized atmosphere of raves and clubs, such as the following: "raving is 'frenzied behaviour, extreme enthusiasm, psychedelic delirium. ..instantaneous, high-impact, sensation- oriented'" (Reynolds 1999:77). The 'electricity' referred to by Durkheim is also captured in a phrase associated with the rave experience: the vibe. Ravers describe 'the vibe' as a kind of energy or pulse which cannot be expressed or understood in words, but as that which can only be physically experienced. As an amplified feeling or emotional state, the rave 'vibe' mirrors the 'exaltation' and 'enthusiasm' described by Durkheim:

"It's the feeling that makes 500 people cry when a certain tune is played. It's the feeling that you can trust everyone around you, that everyone is sharing in one experience that somehow touches them deep in their soul and that you all understand each other." (Orion, in McCall 2001:59)

Ravers are cognizant of the fact that, in addition to the music, it is the people and the sense of community and connectedness at raves that create and sustain 'the vibe'. Further evoking Durkheim's effervescence, 'vitality' is another term used to describe the energy, electricity, and ecstasy of the dance experience. In the concluding paragraph of Clubbing, Malbon describes vitality (which he derives from the work of Durkheim, Maffesoli, LeBon and Csikszentmihalyi®) as the experience, and raison d' étre, of clubbing:

"Playful vitality is...partly a celebration of the energy and euphoria that can be generated through being together, playing together and experiencing 'others' together. Yet playful vitality is also partly an escape attempt, a temporary relief from other facets and identifications of an individual clubber's own life —their work, their past, their future, their worries." Playful vitality is found within a temporary world of the clubber's own construction, where the everyday is disrupted, the mundane is forgotten, and the ecstatic becomes possible. (Malbon 1999:164)

A hallmark of the rave experience, and another quality of collective effervescence/communitas, is its quintessentially non-rational, embodied, and affectual nature. Simon Reynolds remarks that, at 'massive volume, knowledge [of rave's meaning] is visceral, something your body understands as it's seduced and ensnared by the paradoxes of the music' (1999:349). Ravers often indicate that they don't attend raves to listen to music, but rather to feel the music that 'communicates directly with the body' (Poschardt 1998:414). Sense-enhancing drugs such as MDMA further intensify the process, creating effects 'so that sounds seem to caress the listener's skin' (Reynolds 1999:84).

As rave's transgressive medium of embodied expression, the significance of dance (and especially new forms of dance) was early recognized by scholars of Trave culture. As McRobbie noted, while dance 'is where girls were always found in subcultures... [n]ow in rave it becomes the motivating force for the entire subculture' (1994:169). Pini (1997) also highlighted rave culture's creation of new socio-sexual spaces, in which women are free to explore new forms of identity and pleasure through dance.

Yet dance is not only a prime agent in the rave's remoulding or dissolution of gendered spaces; it catalyses the experience of connectedness. In This is Not a Rave (2001), Toronto raver Tara McCall repeatedly highlights connectedness or 'connection' as the essence of the rave experience, and specifically, connection through dance: 'This is what lies at the foundation of rave: everyone in tune with the same rhythm. Once you feel this connection you bare part of your soul by dancing your dance. Once you get inside the music it's like a heartbeat in a womb. It validates your existence with a constant reminder that you are quite literally connected. to all that encompasses you.' (McCall 2001:18)

Malbon too emphasizes the centrality of dance to club (rave) cultures, and of attending to 'embodied information' (1999:27) in studying them. Like McCall, he also directly links dance to the production of the 'unity experience' of clubbing. Along with being intractably embodied, the experience of unity in rave is also an intensely emotional one. Fuelled at least partially by ecstasy, raves are sites of intense outpourings of emotion, especially empathy and compassion.

Popular sources on rave culture are filled with countless testimonials by ravers of the experience of deep and powerful emotional states during events: '...deep feelings of unlimited compassion and love for everyone' (Fritz 1999: 43; see also Silcott 1999; Reynolds 1999; McCall 2001; Malbon 1999). As many have noted, the experience of unity with the crowd while raving or clubbing, paralleling other religious experiences, is intense and _ ineffable. Discussions with informants reinforced this:

MC (24-YEAR-OLD RAVER FROM TORONTO): If I could have a wish, and it would be coming from my experience with raves, I would give everybody what I have been able to experience. One night. And they could take that information and do whatever they want with it. But, I can't believe that it's possible to live life and, not, wow, not have experienced that. Like, I feel fortunate. Really, I feel like, especially, we didn't know what we were involved in in '92 [in the Toronto jungle scene], we didn't realize it. And now, I feel lucky to have tasted it even. Because, there are moments when the world stops.

TIM: Is it the most intense experience you've ever had in your life?
MC: Oh my gosh, I can't believe I'm going to say this, but yes. I knew right away, but I had to think about it just to make sure, because I kind of didn't believe it.

[Raving] makes me feel like being in tune with the eternal cosmic pulsation. For me, it is a kind of spiritual experience to be in a rave. (survey respondent, male, 20-24 years old; quoted in Takahashi and Olaveson 2003)

Communal and collective
One of the central characteristics of collective effervescence/communitas is its communal and collective nature, paralleling the 'unity' and 'love' experienced at countless rave and post-rave dance events, even without the aid of 'empathogenic' drugs like ecstasy.

Former New York rave promoter Dennis the Menace discusses such an intense communal and spiritual experience at a Storm Rave in 1993:

At the end of the party, we were winding down, the sun was out, everyone was feeling pure and alive, in that communal unity feeling. Then someone in the middle of the floor started holding hands and putting their hands up in a circle. Kids were jumping from the back to put their hands up to touch the centerpoint where all the hands interlocked. People had tears in their eyes. We were just looking at each other, so happy, so open to everything. ... Group energy, where one person triggers the next person who triggers the next person.... You could just feel it vibrating between everyone. You can't put that in a pill. There's kids I know that were totally straight, who never did drugs, and who were there dancing as hard as anyone 'cos they could feed off that energy (Dennis the Menace, in Reynolds 1999:149).

Based upon his own experiences at Australian psy-trance "doofs', Tramacchi also emphasizes the communal nature of the connectedness experience:

This collective consciousness is especially pronounced at parties where MDMA is a conspicuous element. During the plateau of MDMA effects, interpersonal differences appear to evaporate producing a condition of almost total identification of self with other. Within the psychedelic dance rapture, participants may lose or suspend subjective experience of themselves and merge into a kind of collective body, a place where desire and production meet in a state of flow. (Tramacchi 2001:174; see also 181)

Tramacchi's description of the 'melding of selves' during the connectedness experience recalls the same language used by Turner to describe the communitas attending the Ndembu rites of passage he observed in Zambia (then Northern Rhodesia), as well as the hippie happenings of the 1960s. Such an experience, he wrote, is an exchange between 'total and concrete persons, between "I" and "Thou". This relationship is always a "happening", something that arises in instant mutuality, when each person fully experiences the being of the other' (V.Turner 1969:136).

Transgressive, levelling and humanizing
As 'settings of intensely emotional assembly, association and, by implication, breakdown of established social barriers and structures' (Nielsen 1999:208), effervescent rituals evince 'a compulsion to dissolve limits, differentiation and particularity. 

Effervescent assemblies are in this light ambiguously dangerous arenas (Ramp 1998:144). Collective effervescence thus presents ‘a transgressive possibility fuelled by a de-differentiating impulse in moments of heightened emotional intensity’ (ibid.:146). It implies dissolution of regular social and normative structures, and is sometimes seen as a danger to these structures. This closely matches Turner’s well-known discussions of communitas as dialectically opposed to social structure. While social structure keeps people apart, defines their differences and constrains their actions (V.Turner 1974:47), communitas is a liberating, equalizing, humanizing and transgressive force and experience, a necessary counterbalance to the dehumanizing effects of social structure. It therefore represents an inherent threat to social and political structures.

The rave experience has also been universally recognized as a transgressive, levelling and humanizing experience. Although rave has become a middle-class phenomenon in North America, early acid house parties and raves teemed with and were in fact imported as a concept from Ibiza by working class British youth such as Danny and Jenni Rampling, the creators of the legendary club Shoom (Collin 1997: 47ff., 168; see also Critcher 2000; Reynolds 1999:59). Furthermore, as Reynolds notes, house music and its ethos were ‘born of a double exclusion’: the gay African-American club and party circuit of Chicago (Reynolds 1999:24). Therefore, for its progenitors and for many today, rave is perceived to be inclusive, a place where race, class and gender lines are dissolved, where people can just be themselves and be accepted (see Reynolds 1999; Silcott 1999; Fritz 1999), although theories of homogeneous and universal inclusion within rave and dance cultures must be moderated with analysis of the politics of particular dance spaces.

For example, Thornton (1995) points out that 1990s English club scenes did (and undoubtedly still do) possess tacit norms around notions of subcultural style and ‘coolness’ (and would-be patrons were sometimes denied access for violating them). At the time of writing, in the central Canadian rave scene such exclusionary practices as highlighted by Thornton appear to be largely absent, at least in the trance, jungle/drum ‘n’ bass and Goa communities. In fact, many informants in Toronto, Montreal, Quebec and Ottawa reported preferring rave events to clubs for this reason.

Although these divergent rave musical styles and event genres have emerged, and often cater to particular socio-economic groups and ethnic communities within metropolitan centres, many central Canadian raves still do attract diverse ethnicities, classes and social groups, especially in the city of Toronto. When I asked participants in Canadian metropolitan centres how they would characterize the social atmosphere at raves, the typical answer I received was that ‘rave is totally open to anyone’. Fritz’s informants, many of whom were from Canada’s west coast, expressed the same thing: The value of rave culture is an acceptance of everyone and everything. If you're black you can come to my party, if you’re gay you can come to my party, if you’re a beautiful woman you can come to my party. Everyone can come and be themselves and be welcome and be free. (Logan, a.k.a. ‘Beats Off, in Fritz 1999:268)

Raves are also renowned for their extremely low levels of violence. During the height of rave in late 1980s Britain, rival football gangs could even be found embracing each other at events while under the influence of ecstasy: they “were so loved-up on E they spent the night hugging each other rather than______ In addition to violence, sexual difference and sexual tension are also markedly reduced at raves. Women report feeling safer and less likely to be propositioned by men. Raves create a social space where difference, status, and inequalities are temporarily suspended. This makes them a potential threat to governing bodies, leading to regulatory measures similar to those imposed in the 1990s in the UK.

RAVE AS NEW RELIGIOUS MOVEMENT?

The rave experience as temporary and utopian

Durkheim ascribed both a re-creative (culturally conservative) and a creative (culturally revitalizing) function to ritual. "Effervescence créatrice" is a phenomenon that can spontaneously produce new moral codes and ideal conceptions of society. Nielsen (1999:208) reiterates that new collective representations (cultural symbols) may, and usually do, result from collective effervescences. Due to its volatile, destabilizing, and sacred nature, collective effervescence can only be temporary. It is a fundamentally transitory state.

Communitas is equated with movement and change, and with transient humility or modelessness. Regarded as a timeless condition, the eternal now, a moment in and out of time, communitas-like experiences depicted by members of religious, millenarian, or revivalist groups often portray an Edenic, paradisiacal, or utopian state.

Much has been written about the similarly temporary nature of raves—chronologically, spatially, and socially. For example, rave music, characterized by hyper-extended, repetitively rhythmed tracks and sets, creates a sense of timelessness echoing the eternal present of collective effervescence/communitas:

Timbre-saturated, repetitive but tilted always toward the next now, techno is an immediacy machine, stretching time into a continuous present—which is where the drug-technology interface comes into play. Not just because techno works well with substances like MDMA, marijuana, LSD, speed, etc., all of which amplify the sensory intensity of the present moment, but because the music itself drugs the listener, looping consciousness then derailing it, stranding it in a nowhere/nowhen, where there is only sensation, ‘where now lasts longer. 

(Reynolds 1999:55) Raves are timeless places, removed social spaces where utopias are both imagined and lived: “With its dazzling psychotropic lights, its sonic pulses, rave culture is arguably a form of collective autism. The rave is utopia in its original etymological sense: a nowhere/nowhen wonderland” (Reynolds 1999:248). The temporary and socially unstructured character of the rave has been likened to anarcho-mystic writer and philosopher Hakim Bey’s concept of the ‘temporary autonomous zone’ (TAZ) (Collin 1997:5; Gibson 1999:22–3; Luckman 2001; Reynolds 1999:169; St John 2001a; Tramacchi 2001). The TAZ, like the rave, is quintessentially liminal or marginal. It occupies the ‘cracks and vacancies’ left by the state, including abandoned industrial complexes—the detritus of Euro-American post-industrial society. As manifestations of the TAZ, raves are utopian social formations temporarily convened in Turner’s cracks, crevices and interstices of social structure—in the margins of society.

Moreover, the attribution of utopian urges and visions to rave cultures and the rave experience is not a casual one. As Reynolds and others note, rave scenes “in their early days buzz with creativity and we’re-gonna-change-the-world idealism” (Reynolds 1999:90; see also Fritz 1999; Silcott 1999). In Rave Culture, Fritz states that rave events are now being used as tools for political change: “It could be said that rave culture is essentially a revolutionary political movement in that it represents the will of a significant portion of society to organize and gather for the purposes of creating a new community model and that these activities are carried out despite fervent opposition from governing bodies...” (Fritz 1999:216–17)

One of the findings from our study of the central Canadian rave scene was that the urge for sociopolitical change and the drive toward utopian social models, as described by Fritz and others, is closely linked with personal transformation at rave events. For example, several informants made a causal connection between epiphanic experiences at rave events and new perspectives on wider social issues and their own culture. One 22-year-old Montreal raver’s description of his awakening was typical: “The first time you rave, you go in blind. You come out and you can see.... Everything’s fucked up. Nothing’s right. Why is the news always bad? Rave is just a generation of kids who don’t know what the future is. We're waiting for the Earth to explode.” (personal interview, 30 March 2002)

While the pessimism expressed in this passage has been critiqued by many as encapsulating commercialized rave culture’s failure to effect real political change, utopian and oppositional urges have had more success in some post-rave movements and collectives, and dance parties are being harnessed for political ends in various locations around the globe (for example, see Marlin-Curiel 2001). For them, such experiences as connectedness, in its ecstatic, non-rational, embodied, humanizing, and utopian dimensions, are fundamental to sociocultural revitalization. In fact, they saw all societies operating according to dialectics of structured, norm-governed states and ecstatic, effervescent experiences of connectedness. There is no question that they would not be surprised to witness the rave phenomenon were they alive today; nor would they wonder, as so many politicians, anxious parents, and even social scientists currently do, why the rave experience so strongly attracts contemporary youth. Durkheim and Turner were not the only writers to think about ritual, the connectedness experience, and sociocultural revitalization.

Anthony Wallace (1956, 1966), a psychological anthropologist who specialized in North American native cultures, formally developed the concept of the revitalization movement. Like the former theorists, Wallace saw religions and entire cultures following patterns of alternating states of religious and cultural intensity and innovation, and routinization and stagnation. He viewed revitalization movements as conscious and deliberate efforts to construct a more satisfying culture, and saw such objects of social scientific study as cargo cults, messianic movements, new religious sects, and revolutions as examples (Wallace 1956:265). Wallace argued that revitalization movements occur when a culture or religion no longer adequately meets the needs of its members, a phenomenon that could manifest itself as increased individual stress, decay or decrease in the efficacy of religious symbols and rituals, and a general cultural malaise such as that which Durkheim lamented was affecting France while he was writing The Elementary Forms. Without such revitalizing rituals, he wrote, a society is apt to disintegrate as a system (Wallace 1966:160).

Revitalization occurs with the formulation of a new, utopian or idealized vision of society (often embodied in a charismatic leader and fresh ecstatic experience), its dissemination and ritualization, and then its routinization into a formal code of behaviour. Once this code begins to lose its efficacy for the group, a new code will appear in a rash of ecstatic practices, and the process will begin again. Wallace thought that all societies follow this cycle. Wallace's ideas on revitalization movements were coloured and limited by his historical functionalism. However, the revitalization movement as a concept has received renewed interest lately, for example in the analysis of new religious movements such as Soka Gakkai and Shambhala (Dawson and Eldershaw 1998; Eldershaw and Dawson 1995; Shupe 1991), and within broader theoretical projects (Laughlin et al, 1990).

Wallace's ideas, along with those of Durkheim and Turner, have also found their way into new religious movement (NRM) theory. For example, Eileen Barker states that one of the reasons why NRMs are significant is 'that they may occasionally function as a barometer of what at least some members 96 TIM OLAVESON of a society feel they need but is not being supplied by other means' (Barker 1999: 26). In other words, they show us the 'gaps' in cultures. This same point has been made by a number of other scholars of NRMs. George Chryssides, among others, notes that people who join NRMs are usually those who are 'disaffected' or 'alienated' from the generally accepted norms of their society (Chryssides 1999:5). Similarly, Rodney Stark and William Bainbridge's theory of NRMs and religion in general is based upon the premise that as religions and cultures begin to secularize and stagnate (a perennial, evolutionary process), individuals seek out or form sects and cults in the search for more vivid and consistent 'supernatural compensators' (Bainbridge 1997; Stark and Bainbridge 1985, 1987). And finally, in his explanation for the current explosion of NRMs, Lorne Dawson encapsulates Wallace’s and Durkheim’s sense of a ‘general cultural malaise’ and decline in meaningfulness as a precursor to the irruption of revitalization movements: In the private sphere, everything is seemingly now a matter of choice. There are no set and secure behaviors with regard to courtship, marriage, childrearing, sexuality, gender relations, consumption, vocation, and spirituality. Consequently, many individuals are left yearning for more guidance. In the public sphere, all are compelled to conform. Guidance is manifest, but in ways which belie the meaningfulness of participation. Institutions are guided increasingly by a strictly formal rationality geared to the satisfaction of the functional requirements of social systems, with little or no regard for the desires, needs, or even character of the individual members of these institutions. In the face of this social dissonance, the proliferating NRMs provide a more holistic sense of self; a sense of self that transcends the constellation of limited instrumental roles recognized by modern mass society and anchored in a greater sense of moral community and purpose. (Dawson 1998:582; see also Robbins 1988)

Thus, from the writings of Durkheim at the turn of the last century right up to current scholarship on NRMs, there has been a persisting recognition that religious and cultural innovation and revitalization constitute a perpetual and dialectical process in which intense, embodied, communal, ritualized experience plays a key role. Rave as NRM? Many would argue that Dawson’s description of both public and private life in Euro-American societies hits the mark. Modern consumer cultures are routinely critiqued for their alienating impact, their absence of meaning, and superficiality. It has also been argued that extreme levels of individual stress and adverse health result from these features, and are an effect of the relativization or outright deterioration of particular sociocultural contexts due to the process of globalization (Dawson 1998:587). The advance and proliferation of technology and communications media contribute to these effects, facilitating the processes of globalization and the destabilization of both individual subjects and communities (Baudrillard 1983; Giddens 1991; Lash and Urry 1994; Mellor and Shilling 1997; Strinati 1995). Acid House and Tave cultures themselves have been regarded as prime examples of this process. In an oft-cited passage in which he draws on the work of Jean Baudrillard, Antonio Melechi likens the rave to a giant void, a touristic ritual of individual and cultural disappearance: mediated, simulated, hyperreal (Melechi 1993:32). As scholars of NRMs have recognized, modern consumer cultures are therefore ideal hosts for the formation of sects, cults, and other NRMs. This is why we are currently witnessing cultural and religious diversity and experimentation perhaps unprecedented in human history, manifested in such developments as the New Age movement, alternative lifestyle movements, and mass importation of and experimentation with other religious traditions. What these experimental cultural exercises have in common is an attempt to make sense of life, an attempt to formulate efficacious cultures, an attempt at a re-sacralization or reenchantment of the world (Maffesoli 1996: xiv; Mellor and Shilling 1997). While, in a sense, Melechi is right in describing rave as symptomatic of the void of consumer cultures, what he fails to recognize is that it is simultaneously an adaptational strategy, conscious or otherwise, to the meaninglessness of existence within them. The ravers, doofers, and trance-dancers have reappropriated products from consumer capitalism to drive the recreation of community and meaningful modes of existence. Dance cultures are exemplary sociocultural revitalization and innovation within consumer cultures. Corsten (1999) and Tramacchi (2001) suggest that "youth techno scenes" and "doofs" should be included in the category of NRMs. They may be right.

Rave and dance cultures share several features with NRMs: cultural and social dissatisfaction and disaffection by potential members; occurrence within host cultures with decaying and declining religious symbols, rites, and institutions; occurrence within host cultures of religious and social pluralism and accelerated intercultural communications and technology; religious iconography appropriated syncretically from other traditions; hallucinatory, ecstatic, or altered consciousness experiences in embodied, visceral, and emotional states; radical personality transformation due to such experiences; the creation of "surrogate" family and community units and support mechanisms; the formation of ideal or utopian social visions and programs; charismatic leadership and the development of cultic formations in the form of the DJ and his/her followers; and opposition and resistance from existing authorities, social institutions, and power structures.

Features of rave cultures, such as the lack of formal social structures and the absence of central revelations or teachings, make it difficult to classify them as NRMs. Raving as a practice tends to de-emphasize verbal and linguistic communication, although individual communities have developed their own foci and symbolic codes. It is unlikely that dance cultures will congregate around a single charismatic leader with a unique message. The creation of NRMs with "closed" and tightly controlled belief systems and doctrines is becoming increasingly difficult due to global communications and the Internet. With regard to rave, this may be quite impossible due to the geographically diverse nature of rave communities and events, as well as to today’s accessible technologies used to make, share and reshape the ‘movement’s’ principle symbolic medium—electronic music; the idea of one prophet with one message seems an unlikely prospect, as compared with a diaspora of techno-disciples mixing their own gospels and revelling in their own private ecstasies.

Conclusion
Scholars of rave, post-rave and other dance cultures have recently suggested that these movements may be viewed as NRMs. My own research on the central Canadian rave scene supports these conclusions to a limited extent. While it may not be entirely accurate to call rave culture(s) NRMs, there is clearly something important happening at both individual and societal levels. In particular, one of the central features of the rave experience—the experience of connectedness—is often interpreted by ravers as a religious experience. Further, the experience of connectedness is a key element in ritual performances and religious and sociocultural revitalization as these have been modelled by Emile Durkheim, Victor Turner and other prominent scholars of religion. When viewed in this light, the development and primary characteristics of rave cultures should not surprise us. Rave is just the latest example in the process of sociocultural revitalization that underlies the development of all religions and the health and regeneration of cultures throughout human history.

The flesh of raving: Merleau-Ponty and the 'experience' of ecstasy! James Landau

The ecstasy of raving is problematic. Often characterized in the same manner as its more 'traditional' cousins—as ineffable, numinous and overwhelming—it is said to have changed lives, and it is for many the draw, and perhaps even the raison d'être, of raving itself. Yet no real consensus exists about its shape, manner or form—its constitution, its 'essence' remains remarkably disputed. Caught within a web of contentious and proliferating discourses—medical, political, academic and subcultural—the ecstasy of raving is multiply situated and inordinately multi-layered, a veritable palimpsest of meaning. Making matters worse, ecstasy's hermeneutic ambiguity further complicates the picture: for, governed by immediacy and engagement, ecstasy obviates the analytic authority of detached observers even as its ineffability opens up an epistemological gap between the actual 'experience' and its subsequent embodiment in discourse. Beneath this interpretive minefield, though, lies a deeper, more fundamental concern, namely ecstasy's transgressive relationship to binary thought. For in dissolving the mind's organizational dualisms, including, most profoundly, that of the self/Other dichotomy, ecstatic raving is an 'experience' discursively dominated by recurring motifs of unity, holism and interconnectedness. In the crucible of the rave, barriers are said to dis______ The raver participates in an ecstatic collectivity, challenging Western thought by destabilizing oppositions like self/Other and mind/body. Ecstatic practitioners often conceptualize this collectivity in terms of antinomian spiritualities, known for their disavowal of mainstream religion and deployment of non-traditional concepts. One rave proselyte notes that the electronic music and dance scene has long flirted with the idea of spiritual connections, as evidenced by event names like "Spiritual Signals" and record companies like "Conscious Records."

Raves revolve around the "gnosis of drug-knowledge," described as a truth that cannot be mediated or explained in words. A practitioner describes ecstasy as "a feeling of overpowering, almost overwhelming joy" and a "religious experience." They mention the "awakening of the Gaian mind" and "ethereal energy" joining beautiful party people to form a greater collective consciousness.

The author agrees with Marghanita Laski, who argues that attaching religious "overbeliefs" to experiences of aesthetic or ecstatic intensity is gratuitous rather than essential. However, they disagree with Laski's sentiment that "ecstasy is more important than ideology." The author recognizes the political positioning and potency of ecstatic overbeliefs, which can have social and cultural repercussions, including demonization and illegalization.

The author opposes the reduction of ecstasy to neurological activity and medical and political agendas, which discounts individuals who have attained ecstasy without chemical intervention. They emphasize the importance of understanding the experience of ecstasy as a "transcendent" or "spiritual" moment occurring within the ritual context of the rave, which is itself often conceived as a contemporary religious practice with numerous historical and cross-cultural correlates. Similarly, an anonymous contributor to the Hyperreal web archives has contended that rave's religious influences include "Taoism (Tai Chi), Sufism, Hinduism (Yoga), Buddhism (Meditation), Cabalism (the tree of life), Shamanism (navigating consciousness), [as well as the] Mysticism of all religions and tribes of aboriginal people" (see Anonymous n.d.). Unfortunately, overshadowed by the media's prolific drug scare, this noteworthy bricolage has gone largely unnoticed by both mainstream and academic communities—its religious neomorphisms, when acknowledged, often being mocked, ridiculed, or dismissed in much the same manner as those of the New Age movement.

With this in mind, it is the purpose of this chapter to produce a theory of ecstatic raving that avoids spiritual formulations even as it maintains a high degree of respect for them. Drawing on first-person accounts that are frequently laced with religious motifs, I will be constructing an ecstatic "overbelief" grounded in contemporary philosophical and psychoanalytic theory. Myself a one-time practitioner of these "techniques of ecstasy" and "technologies of pleasure," I am writing this piece out of a desire to understand my own "experiences" without resorting to the disembodied articulations frequent to religious rhetoric, which tends to emphasize spirit and mind over body and perception.

Wary of the mind/body hierarchy inherent in conceptions of ecstasy where the self transcends its immanent reality in order to commune with an incorporeal godhead, supernatural reality, or spiritual energy, I will be beginning from the premise that ecstatic raving is first and foremost an embodied activity. Especially interested in what one raver describes as the "profound sense of connectedness with people" (Alissa 1995), I will be developing an approach that conceives of ecstatic raving, when fully achieved, as a momentary glimpse of ideological autonomy. It is my ultimate hope to show that the phenomenology of Maurice Merleau-Ponty can especially clarify and make sense of ecstasy's effects, including its disruption of binary thought, exactly because his philosophy—as epitomized in his "ontology of the flesh"—is already a non-dualistic framework.

Emphasizing the lived body, this framework actively undermines the series of mind/body lateral associations (e.g. masculine/feminine, active/passive, and reason/emotion) that have had far-reaching and often detrimental consequences for not only Western thought but also individuals of non-dominant race, gender, and sexuality. Resolving binary oppositions through a "thesis of reversibility" that emphasizes interconnectedness and ambiguity via a subtending logic of difference-within-identity, Merleau-Ponty contends that the perceived world not only predates consciousness but is also its foundation—a foundation to which we "return" during ecstatic raving. Yet these experiential accounts are all we have. Indicative of the available fictions about ecstasy circulating within our culture, they reveal not only the term’s dependency on religious and psychedelic themes, but also important information about the ideological placement of the authors themselves. Since ‘experience is not outside social, political, historical and cultural forces, and in this sense, cannot provide an outside position from which to establish a place for judgment’ (Grosz 1999:148), experiential accounts must be understood as overdetermined narratives of ideology that can be read in terms of a subject’s ‘making sense’ of the world through their particular cultural background.

Experiential accounts of ecstasy that make use of appropriated religious concepts must accordingly be recognized as more than just attempts to illustrate, defend and legitimize ecstatic raving to others; they must be seen as the very construction, in a sense, of ecstasy’s ‘reality’ through language usually reserved for traditional religiosity. It must not be forgotten, though, that this ‘reality’ is ever and always a ‘fiction’, a ‘text’ that comes about within a matrix of internal and external discourses inseparable from language, and thus, by extension, ideology, identity and culture.

® Born within the symbolic order, experience operates within—and is read through—a field of culturally situated narratives that can be deployed for political purposes— which is exactly what Maria Pini, for example, does in her groundbreaking feminist analyses of Tave. Conceiving of subjectivity, rightfully as a series of fictions, Pini contends that in rave ‘lies the potential for re-figurations of the here and now, the possibilities for creating alternative fictions or narratives of being, and the opportunities for the development of new (albeit temporary, incomplete and constituted partly in fantasy) “identities” ’ (Pini 2001:3).

While Pini’s project boasts an admirable aim, namely a revolution in feminine subjectivity, it is perhaps an irony that her interpretive framework is exactly what prevents her from fully recognizing ecstasy for what it is. For, overly concerned with opposing any conception of the raver ‘as a non-sexed, non-raced, and otherwise non-specific generality’ (sbid.:46), Pini fails, because of her interpretive model’s implicit fear of an ‘apolitical’ rave, to truly listen to the claims of ‘freedom’ made by her interviewees, subsequently foreclosing any possibility of finding an alternative conceptual model that could explain this apolitics without sacrificing sexual specificity—a model, it is my argument, that can be found in Merleau-Ponty’s ontology of the flesh.

THE FLESH OF RAVING

Before we can examine this ontology, though, we must follow the lead of Pini’s apt invocation of Angela McRobbie’s ‘call to lived experience’ (McRobbie 1997:170): we must attend to the actual experiences of ecstasy, ‘experiences’ that must be interrogated through the lens of subjectivity. Toward that end, ecstasy must be understood beyond the empiricist’s context of neurobiology; it must also be theorized in terms of the subject’s relationship to itself, its body and the world. As Pini notes, in concordance with most theorists of rave, one can see a radical reframing of the body within rave and, as a consequence, the emergence of experiences which many claim are entirely new to them [such that] participants often refer to rave as constituting a different ‘world’ [within which] the ‘self is no longer an individual, boundaried one. 

... [Here,] subjectivity is restated in terms which do not reproduce traditional distinctions between mind and body, self and other. (Pini 1997:118) Interestingly, while Pini both correlates the ‘emergence of new experiences’ to a refiguring of subjectivity and explicitly references ecstasy’s strange relationship to binary thought, she at the same time fails to mention, even implicitly, another significant characteristic of ecstasy: its ineffability. Strangely absent from Pini’s work, the widely documented ineffability of ecstatic raving echoes one of the major attributes of classic mystical experiences. As one rave apologist argues, the experiential nature of such spiritual moments transcends any beliefs that we might have...coming into the experience, i.e. what we believe the reasons/ explanations for what is happening are completely irrelevant. All that matters is that we can have these amazing, undefinable, shareable experiences— {ultimately,] they are real/valid/meaningful and the beliefs we construct to help us understand them are secondary and not even important compared to the experience itself. (Fogel 1994; italics mine) Echoing Laski, Lee Fogel highlights here the “‘undefinability’ of the ecstatic moment which, for him, supersedes its intellectual positioning: the experiences are ‘real’ and ‘valid’, while the beliefs constructed to explain them are ‘secondary’ in comparison. This ineffability, though, does not require a mystical explanation: it is my contention that the format of raves inherently yields indescribable ‘experiences’. Taking the phrase ‘It’s so loud I can’t even hear myself think’ to its logical extreme, the rave event's volume leaves little space for thought. Overwhelmed by the bass, ‘language’, Hillegonda Rietveld argues, is ‘unable to catch the event; participants...do not seem to be able to describe their experience as anything else than “it was wild, absolutely wild”, “unbelievable”, “there wasn’t anything like it”, or “great” (Rietveld 1993:63). With the visual field fracturing beneath the incisions 110 JAMES LANDAU of lasers, participants are transported to a perceptual realm of inconstancy, a place where words are swallowed whole by the darkness and the fog. Add to this the peculiar ‘meaninglessness’ of electronic music, which Reynolds attributes to the emphasis on percussion and timbre, ‘the two elements of music that are the hardest to remember...[i.e.] ineffable, untranscribable elements’ (Reynolds 1999:054), and you have an ‘experience’ that does not lend itself to memory or communication. A space where meaning fails, where representation collapses, the rave-assemblage deconstructs language through the deployment of its materiality. Yet Pini takes issue with this. Stemming directly from her political desire to reaffirm and protect the category of ‘woman’ against poststructuralist formulations of ecstasy that emphasize an ‘undoing of the constructed self within rave’ (Pini 2001: 46), Pini opposes analyses that see rave as mass ‘disappearance’ or postmodern meaninglessness. Emphatically, she declares that, although it is true that ravers may well experience a sense of ‘losing’ themselves within an event, this does not mean that identity has been ‘escaped’ from. Body-subjects within rave may well experience a merging into a larger ‘body’ (such as the ‘body’ of the dancing crowd) but as far as raving women go, this does not mean that femininity is ever fully ‘escaped’ from. (Pini 2001:46-7) Denying the classical conception of ecstasy as a ‘transcendental’ movement beyond the ego and its identities,______ Pini's model necessitates the immediate and contemporaneous constitution of every ecstatic moment as a meaningful, enlanguaged experience. Pini's ecstatics are forever the prisoners of ideology, forever the prisoners of their inscribed skins. Pini refuses to accept raving as a mute, afictional activity—as an ineffable. Instead, it must 'speak' (Pini 2001:157), and be active in its production of 'otherwheres'; it must exist dialogically in relation to oppressive structures. Pini cannot part with subjectivity, as she needs it to remain the nexus of fictions and the seat of activity and agency.

Pini conceives of ecstasy as resubjectification, not desubjectification. Understanding the subject as the result of subjectification into the Symbolic (and inherently political) order of language, Pini feels that all claims of desubjectification abnegate the political efficacy of rave. For if ecstasy is 'nothing more' than a desubjectification, a movement beyond language into a realm of ineffability, then the dancing body that was once a self becomes nothing more than an apolitical anonymity, a state of affairs Pini adamantly denies.

Pini argues that hierarchical and thus oppressive identity categories are at work within rave. However, her arguments suffer from an inadequate separation of the ecstatic moment from the cultures of clubbing and raving within which it is embedded. Examining raving as a continuum of experiential zones, with everyday life at one end and ecstasy at the other, we can find a gradient of 'experiences' whose trajectory involves a gradual unfixing and eventual dissolution of normative identity and its concomitant ideologies.

A night of raving can be read as the experiential progression from normal everyday life into the oppositional subculture of the rave, club, or doof itself, then the backdrop-liminality of the rave-as-carnival, and finally the embodied intensities of ecstasy itself. A state 'beyond' language, ecstasy opens up a breech, an epistemological gap, between itself and its subsequent discursive products.

All testimonials and other experiential accounts must be seen as retroactive renderings, attempts after the fact to make sense of and conceptualize what is inherently ineffable: a desubjectified cognitive state that can best be understood as a corporeal style of being, i.e. a non-reflective awareness autonomous in its 'freedom' from ideology, language, and culture. An 'experience' only after the fact, ecstasy is opposed to rationality and higher-order thought. Ultimately, it is the 'transcendence' of the thematic, Cartesian cogito, albeit in a manner distinct from the idealistic formulations of traditional religion. The only metaphysical 'void,' accordingly, into which the ecstatic escapes is the 'emptiness' of direct and unmediated perception. For while there's still neurological activity, cognition of some form, it's not that of the subject—the 'T heavy with preoccupied self-reflection—but rather that of the unbound body, suddenly weightless in its joyous exploration of itself and the world. The Body-without-Organs: Ecstasy and Its Pleasures

As discussed, ecstasy is like a mathematical limit: it is an idealization of an event not always reached. For not everyone at a party achieves pure ecstasy. Perhaps they only experience a playful liminality, or maybe just an intense physical pleasure. An escape from the trap of ecstasy/sobriety, the experiential gradient allows us to understand raving from a functionalist standpoint, i.e. in terms of efficiency—a standpoint well addressed by the analyses of Tim Jordan and Simon Reynolds.

Jordan, in employing the conceptual creativity of Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, explains that "raving's production, or what is desired by ravers through constituting a rave-event, is an ongoing inducement into a desubjectified state of something like rapture" (Jordan 1995:129). Seeing ecstasy as that which ravers desire, as the "purpose" of assembling such disparate material elements as music, bodies, drugs and lights—not to mention temporality and spatiality—Jordan frames the rave within the context of the Body-without-Organs (BwO).

The BwO, composed of all "the potentials in the human nervous system for pleasure and sensation without purpose: the sterile bliss of perverse sexuality, drug experiences, play dancing and so forth" (Reynolds 1999:246), is the body in abundance of its (biological, psychical, and signifying) organization and organs. The BwO refers indistinguishably to both individual and communal bodies, supporting the connections that the rave-machine makes between its different elements.

This undifferentiated state is a collective delirium produced by thousands of people jointly making the connections of drugs to dance, music to dance, drugs to time, time to music and so on, thereby gradually constructing the state of raving and the BwO of raving. The delirium is non-subjective and smooth, as all the connections and functions of the [rave-] machine give way to simple intensities of feeling.

Attempting to collapse the stratifications of subjectivity, ravers are trying to reconstruct themselves as Bodies-without-Organs, as "smooth" fiction-less spaces across which intensities and pleasures may flow unhindered. Matthew Collin's experience exemplifies Jordan's analysis, as he describes his body becoming free of "inhibiting rigidities" and being immersed in the rhythm, bass, and warmth of the atmosphere. Another raver, speaking specifically about the chemical component of the assemblage, explains that ecstasy "heightens all five senses to the point that the music becomes hypnotic and the sense of touch becomes so pleasurable that a crowd is comforting." It's sensory overload... It's totally sensual. Touching becomes so intense' (McPhee 2000). Frequently catalyzing synaesthesia with the help of MDMA, the rave-assemblage embodies a relationship where the greater the sensory intensities — whether tactile, aural or visual — the greater the degree of desubjectification. 'Measuring' these intensities through a 'physics' of efficiency, Deleuze and Guattari's functionalist approach subsequently asks not 'what does it mean?' but 'how does it work?' Sidestepping the neurodeterministic reduction of ecstasy to MDMA, this approach asks by what means, and to what degree, a particular assemblage of music, bodies, chemicals and lights induces desubjectification amongst its participants.

It is worth noting, however, that subjectivity in this model is nothing more than a surface effect. Emphasizing the tangible body over the untenable mind, Deleuze and Guattari envision the subject as nothing more than a series of cultural stratifications that transform a BwO into a codified body. Fitting well into postmodern agendas of superficiality, ephemerality and hyperreality, this model arises from a series of contemporary philosophies that see the body 'as a purely surface phenomenon, a complex, multifaceted surface...whose incision or inscription produces the (illusion or effects) of depth and interiority' (Grosz 1994: 116). In this view, individuality, consciousness and subjectivity, while experientially 'real', are nothing more than fictive illusions, dimensionless holograms on the surface of the body.

Significantly, while I feel much can be gained from philosophies such as this — and while I also feel that the Deleuze—Guattarian approach, with its intensities, connections and flows, speaks gracefully to the jouissant pleasures of ecstasy — I am hesitant to invest wholly in such an approach and would rather, for the purposes of this chapter, explore what traditional philosophies of depth, such as psychoanalysis and phenomenology, can reveal about the ecstatic 'experience'.

The disappearing ego: ecstasy and psychoanalysis

Examining the rave as a ritual of disappearance in which no meaning could be found other than pure escape, Rietveld (1993:54) approaches ecstatic subjectivity from a psychoanalytic viewpoint that presumes the body's interior to be private, depthful and libidinally cathected. Drawing on Freudian thought, she argues that E makes the user return to a pre-Oedipal stage in which libidinous pleasure is not centred in the genitals — a stage in which sexuality is polymorphous as sensuality engages the entire body (Rietveld 1993:54). Crucially, while she could have easily posited these sensations in terms of a Deleuze—Guattarian BwO, she instead conceived of ecstasy as a developmental retrogression, as an infantilization within the context of adulthood.

In this model, ecstasy 'rewinds' the individual backward into a pre-Oedipal period of inchoate sensations that play across the body free of patterning, grouping and organization. This process occurs through a dissolution of the ego, which in Freudian terms is something akin to a 'psychical map of the body's libidinal intensities..., a kind of bodily tracing, a cartography of the erotogenic intensities of the body, an internalized image' (Grosz 1994:33) that provides unity and a sense of bodily cohesion. With their body's libidinal impulses emancipated, ecstatics are awash with the pleasures inherent to sensation. Yet, for Rietveld, pleasure does not complete the analysis: ineffability must be addressed. Moving from Freud to his successor Lacan, she adds that ecstasy marks 114. JAMES LANDAU the “return” to a stage in psychological development which is before the acquisition of language, thereby undoing the self that is constituted in and by language.... A break is caused with the established order at a basic level, however temporary’ (Rietveld 1993:65). Emphasizing its alinguistic character, Rietveld’s argument implicitly correlates ecstasy to the Lacanian Real, a period of undifferentiated sensations chronologically prior to the development of the ego. To simplify grossly: children in this model are initially unaware of their physical distinctiveness and are thus ‘at one with the universe’. This phase ends only when they successfully identify and internalize their mirror-image, thus birthing the category of ‘self or T in opposition to the ‘other’ of everything else. Serving as the border between the chaos of the immanent interior and the provisional stability of the transcendent exterior, this body image, according to Lacan, is the primordial seed from which all language and identity emerge, inasmuch as the categories of ‘self and ‘other’ act as the foundational model from which all other linguistic oppositions evolve. Consequently, language and the self are so intertwined that, in the psychoanalytic view, ecstasy’s transgressive relationship to binary thought stems from the rave-assemblage propelling its participants into the Real, a cognitive space ‘beyond’ the ego and its organizational structures. Indeed, facilitated by the metronomic mandala of electronic music, whose repetitive beats reinscribe temporality as the dancing ecstatic ‘trances out’ (Reynolds 1999:203), the music-drug-dancing interface ‘sings to a very visceral, ancient part of us deep down inside. It draws us out, perhaps from the “reptilian” brain, past our egos, and beckons us to dance with abandon, to surrender ourselves to the beat’ (Casey 1993), a beat beyond language and subjectivity.

The Lacanian approach, though, useful as it is, must be understood within the context of its manifold difficulties. For, apart from Lacan’s rampant phallocentrism and mis/appropriation of women, his linguistic turn, the basis for so much of postmodern and contemporary thought, draws around human subjectivity an impenetrable linguistic immanence that forever taunts us with an unobtainable Real, an impossible, transcendent and unavoidably lost reality. What's more, Lacan’s approach cannot fully explicate intersubjectivity (Fielding 1999:186). Enmeshed in the Symbolic Order, and subsequently unable to bridge the epistemological and ontological gap between itself and the other, the Lacanian mind cannot escape itself.

Merleau-Ponty and the corporeal schema

A critical dilemma for Western philosophy, the problem of intersubjectivity and its shadow, solipsism, can be summated as follows: since ‘I cannot witness your cogito, I cannot know that you exist as a thinking thing. Consequently if one defines human beings as res cogitans, the only human being I can be certain is a human being is myself’ (Dillon 1997:112). A frequent philosophical enterprise, explorations of intersubjectivity have failed, according to M.C. Dillon, because of their inability to resolve the immanence/transcendence divide (ibid.:114-29). Inevitably rooting themselves in the neo-Cartesianisms of empiricism or intellectualism, no Western philosopher has truly escaped solipsism because they have all emphasized the mind, the cogito—with the exception, Dillon contends, of Merleau-Ponty. 

Resonating with the work of Lacan, Merleau-Ponty’s vision of psychogenesis depends on a mirror-stage through which the disordered perceptions of the infant’s body are unified into a coherent whole. In concordance with Lacan, that the period before the ego is a time of ‘indistinction of perspectives, [in] which the mine — alien or self—other distinction is absent’ (sbid.:119), Merleau-Ponty specifically understood this period, which he called syncretic sociability, as a ‘first phase, which we call pre-communication, in which there is not one individual over against another but rather an anonymous collectivity, an undifferentiated group life’ (Merleau-Ponty 1964:119). Agreeing as well that the thematic structures of consciousness arise out of this cognitive bedrock, Merleau-Ponty does depart from Lacan in that he emphasizes perception over language: to recognize his image in the mirror is for [the baby] to learn that there can be a viewpoint taken on him.... By means of the image in the mirror he becomes capable of being a spectator of himself. Through the acquisition of the specular image the child notices that he is visible, for himself and for others... The mirror image makes possible a contemplation of self. (Merleau-Ponty 1964:136)

‘Whereas Lacan emphasizes the specular image as a deceptive alienation that governs the child’s entire psychic development, Merleau-Ponty posits it in terms of visibility and the child’s emergent conceptualizations of space. For Merleau-Ponty, though, the body image, otherwise known as the corporeal schema, is more than just the barrier between the interior and exterior. It is the very ground of intersubjectivity. For since ‘we have no idea of a mind that would not be doubled with a body, that would not be established on this ground’ (Merleau-Ponty 1968:259), the corporeal schema itself, the body image, is representative of what it means to be a human being, thus resituating the search for other minds as a search for other bodies. Encrusted with libidinal and cultural inscriptions, with fictions of identity and power, the corporeal schema, according to Merleau-Ponty, determines the extent of the individual’s ‘I-can’, i.e. the range of their movements and actions as psychically and socially proscribed. Fluid and malleable, open to the incorporation of instruments, clothing and prostheses, the body image in its plasticity is conformative to the world, enabling us to develop a practical relationship to objects and situations.° Synaesthestic, it allows the possibility of voluntary action inasmuch as it ‘unifies and coordinates postural, tactile, kinaesthetic, and visual sensations so that these are experienced as the sensations of a subject coordinated into a single space’ (Grosz 1994:83). What is crucial here is that the body possesses inherent corporeal knowledges, awarenesses of its own kinaesthetic abilities and conformative relationships to the 116 JAMES LANDAU world that subsume self-reflective consciousness. It is ultimately these subconscious knowledges that are thematized to produce the corporeal schema, the interface between the mind and body. Therefore, if the self is delineated from the world by the corporeal schema, if the subject is indeed dependent on its body image for existence, then the dissolution of the self during ecstasy would require a concomitant transformation in the corporeal schema, which would seriously affect not only the raver’s sense of self and body, but also their mobility. For in removing the psychosocial limitations on movement and posture imposed by culture, ecstasy allows ravers to attain the oft-proclaimed state of ‘flow’ (Csikszentmihalyi 1990), in which liquid movements undulate across a body open to a much wider field of possibilities, of ‘I-cans’. Central to the ecstatic ‘experience’, dancing is reframed here as the release from routine movement. Cinnamon Twist iterates that: this kind of dance...is FREEING MOTION. Not just moving to the beat but letting the beat help you throw off all the restricted robotic movements that have been imprinted in your heart, your eyes, your ears, your arms, your ass, your dreams, by all the tricks, traumas, and seductions of society...dancing with the world, but dancing off the consensus-trance. (Twist 1992)

Significantly, the corporeal schema possesses one other bodily knowledge worth mentioning before finally turning to the ontology of flesh: that of perception’s reflexivity. Stemming from the body’s simultaneous immanence and transcendence, perception can only occur because the body exists in the world: ‘pure consciousness cannot touch anything. The body can touch things, but it can touch things only to the extent that it is touched by things’ (Dillon 1997:155). A necessarily reflexive act, perception occurs in what Merleau-Ponty originally called the tacit cogito, which is opposed to the thematic, or Cartesian, cogito. “The tacit cogito is silent: it sees the world and does not thematize its seeing. The [Cartesian] cogito speaks: it thematizes its relations with things and posits itself in the statement, “I think” ’ (bid. :108).

Reflecting Merleau-Ponty’s wish to return to ‘prediscursive experience, experience before the overlay of reflection, the imposition of a meta-experiential organization, [and] its codification by reason, language or knowledge’ (Grosz 1999:151), the tacit cogito is pure perception, an anonymous perceptual field antecedent to the thematic ego, the cognitive structure that inculcates the subject into an experiential matrix of language, culture and identity. Accordingly, if ecstatic raving is indeed an unravelling of the thematic, Cartesian cogito, then in phenomenological terms it can be read as a return to the tacit cogito, a prediscursive awareness ‘unaware of itself in its fascination with the world’ (Dillon 1997: 105). As Catherine explains: When I dance at a rave I feel very...close to, if not at, this non-thinking state. I hardly notice the passage of time and I am free of the tensions and worries of daily life.... I notice the things around me in a closer way: the lights, the people, the all-encompassing vibration of the bass, even the feel of the grainy dirt on my palms when I sit down on the floor for a rest. (Catherine 1998)

Perception: the hidden depth of flesh
An elaboration of the concept of the tacit cogito, the ontology of the flesh was developed in opposition to traditional ontologies that presuppose ‘a bifurcation of being into disjunct and mutually exclusive spheres of immanence (the sphere of consciousness, subjectivity...) and transcendence (the sphere of things, objectivity...)’ (Dillon 1997:154). Hovering ambiguously between dualism and monism, flesh is a phenomenological ontology that holds that all dichotomies are actually subtended by an encompassing unity that makes difference not only possible, but also necessarily interdependent. A fabric of ‘divergence and non- coincidence’ (Grosz 1994:100), the flesh interweaves subjects and objects, bodies and their world, into an unfolding and dynamic unity permeated with difference and alterity. All things, whether the "visibles" of bodies and objects or the "invisibles" of subjectivity and thought, interweave and intersect within a flesh that presents itself to us as the world's perceptible surface. Unifying perception and existence through its thesis of reversibility, the ontology of flesh states simply that nothing, no one, can perceive without first being perceptible: the flesh of the world perceives itself through our flesh, which is one with it. Just as the worldly thing must touch my body for my body to touch it, so, in general, must my perception of the world be correlated with my own perceptibility. (Dillon 1997:105)

Hinged on the critical and self-evident realization that perception requires distance —that there must be a gap between the perceiver and the perceived— the thesis of reversibility requires an inherent alterity within the flesh: subjects and objects must be distinct, separate; they cannot coincide. At the same time, though, for them to 'perceive' one another they must also exist within the same flesh, the same world. It is ultimately this distance, or chiasm, that allows us to recognize Merleau-Ponty's approach as a philosophy of depth: for while one might be likely to examine the ontology of flesh as a philosophy of exteriority, of surface phenomena, perception requires a distance through the depth of flesh's 'invisible' underside. Not a pure play of superficial phenomena, the flesh has depth: folding over itself to create 'hollows' and 'enclosures', the flesh creates 'invisibles' such as the mind, thought and language, fleshy interiorities that are irrevocably embodied.

118 JAMES LANDAU Difference-within-identity: the gnosis of ecstatic flesh Rave...allows us to access a space (within ourselves) completely outside the realm of subjective vs. objective. I think that space represents a state of being rather than thinking.... Suppose for a moment that I stopped 'thinking', that I just 'AM'.... I would just perceive...which leads to an awareness of being 'one' with everything. (Tanya 1994)

Speaking to 'the motif of communality [that] has been one of the more recurrent elements in discourses about psychedelic parties' (Tramacchi 2001:174), Tanya expresses above an 'experience' of 'being one with everything' that is often echoed by other practitioners. Eric Stiens, for example, recounts the tale of one participant who testified that 'for one night, I was one with the universe, I was one with my neighbor, and I was one with the music' (Stiens 1997:2). Frequently catalysed by the empathetic qualities of MDMA, this transpersonal blending of the self with the other has been one of the primary areas of inquiry throughout this chapter. Often linked to feelings of being 'connected to everyone around me, like we are one organism in synch with the music' (Fogel 1994), this sense of unity and interconnectedness has led to the invocation by many of a 'super-organism' composed of the crowd's ecstatic bodies. Flying in the face of modernity's rigid individualism, this sense of unity resonates, I feel, with one of the major goals of religion—namely the production of solidarity and community—thus partially explaining the discourse of ecstatic raving's frequent deployment of religious rhetoric. For example, incorporated into the full-moon rave rituals of the Moontribe, this transgressive unity occurs, according to Ralph Perring, when 'by by-passing the conscious mind and plugging into a deeper level of the psyche, the short-sighted understanding of ourselves as separate individuals is ruthlessly blown apart to make way for a higher consciousness (Perring 1997), a 'consciousness' intrinsic to the Moontribe's sense of spiritual interconnectedness. For some, though, this ‘consciousness’ is never quite complete. For running perpendicularly to the rhetoric of unity that permeates ecstatic discourses is a contrary thread of continued identity. Ravers, even as their egos melt, even as their bodies dissolve into a larger ‘organism’, still speak of something apart, of some undefinable ‘thing’ distinct from the crowd. Ask them if they completely disappear into this unity while ecstatic, and they will often vacillate, equivocally answering both ‘yes’ and ‘no’ as they search for the terminology to describe, to produce, their ‘experience’. While this alternation between unity and identity could be explained simply in terms of functionality, as a matter of the particular rave-assemblage’s efficiency or the individual’s psychological disposition, these answers shy away from confronting the matter head on. Therefore, having already elaborated various models of desubjectification that situate the raver’s apprehension of unity as the result of an unreflective perceptual awareness free of oppositional thought, and therefore of any thematized concept of ‘difference’, the task remains to explain this continued sense of separation and identity. Cognizant of Pini’s shortcomings, we must recognize as well that neither the Deleuzo—Guattarian BwO nor the Lacanian Real, with their smooth, undifferentiated terrains, can adequately address this tension. And neither, in truth, can a model based solely on Merleau-Ponty’s tacit cogito. If, though, we conceptualize the reversibility of the flesh as an innate bodily knowledge, as an aspect of what it means (in a non-thematic, subconscious way) to be a living organism, then we can begin to apprehend how the ontology of flesh can adequately address this tension within the heart of the ecstatic ‘experience’. For, no different than ‘knowing’ what it ‘means’ to blink an eye or to have weight, the body ‘knows’ in a pre-reflective manner that it is one entity, just as it ‘knows’ it is also a part of the world. Without being told, and in a non-linguistic manner, the body understands the thesis of reversibility and the difference-within-identity of flesh because it itself is of the flesh. Similarly, the body understands the ‘distance’ inherent to perception. Indeed, it is this gap that ultimately serves as the template for binary thought. For rooted in the inherent distances of perception, the self/Other dichotomy is the thematization of this bodily knowledge such that, during ecstasy, when all themes and conceptual models have disappeared, only the body’s subconscious, non-linguistic ‘knowledges’ remain. Destabilizing and eventually dissolving the boundaries between such fundamental oppositions as self/Other, mind/| body and here/there, ecstasy frees the body from its thematic veil so that it can become aware again, at a ‘deeper’ level, of identity and difference. Accordingly, we can now resolve the ambiguous yes/no response from above. For if the ecstatic raver is indeed an anonymous body of textless flesh, one that has shed its identity, ideology and language, one that has either divested or radically altered its culturally inscribed body image, then the thematic boundaries that normally delineate our edges are destabilized and perhaps even dissolved. Dancing amidst a crowd of ecstatic bodies, the raver is consumed not only by an immediate ‘experience’ of the phenomenal world, but also by his or her body’s subconscious knowledges of unity and alterity (not to mention genderless sexual specificity)— knowledges that are quite different from those of self-reflective thought. In this chapter, I have attempted to explore ecstasy and the rhetoric of unity that surrounds it through a variety of theoretical approaches. Most of these have understood ecstasy as desubjectification, an understanding with which I agree. My own situating of ecstatic raving within a phenomenological framework arises from a desire to ground it in perception, sensation, and the body, all of which, while eagerly praised by practitioners, are frequently ignored in these same practitioners' neo-mystical articulations. At the same time, I am fully cognizant that the problem inherent in adopting a phenomenological approach to ecstasy is its dependence on first-person accounts, which are ultimately linguistic artifices incapable of grasping what they are attempting to describe—ecstasy being antithetical, after all, to language. As I mentioned earlier, though, first-person accounts are all we have to work with. This epistemological gap, accordingly, must be acknowledged as not only inevitable but also central to the ecstatic 'experience'.

Finally, my situating of ecstasy within the ontology of the flesh must be recognized as only an introductory maneuver. In truth, much more can and should be said about this approach, including a further investigation of ecstasy's relationship to the 'sensory overload' of the rave-assemblage, as well as an exploration of emotion that might draw on, for example, the work of Susan Cataldi (1993). Similarly, I only briefly employed dance within this chapter, itself a topic that would benefit greatly from Merleau-Ponty's conceptions of flesh since dance is already understood by some as a means of non-dualistically restructuring subjectivity. Further investigations into the 'flesh of raving' might also explore gender, dis/ability and temporality, all of which could greatly benefit from being 'fleshed out'.

The ceremonial use of entheogens as catalysts for achieving states of communal ecstasis has a wide geographical spread. A broad survey of the world's entheogenic practices reveals that the majority of the more frequently used entheogenic sacraments contain substances that are pharmacological equivalents of the Western category of 'psychedelics' (Ott, 1996; Schultes and Hofmann, 1980). Entheogens are used in a number of different ritual contexts, including healing, divination, ensorcelment, rites de passage, and rituals of public celebration and social affirmation.

It is the socially affirming, collective rituals that are the focus of this chapter. The principal ethnographic sources to be analyzed are Stacy B. Schaefer's description of the ritual uses and meanings of peyote among the Mexican Huichol, focusing on the annual 'peyote pilgrimage' (Schaefer, 1996), supplemented with the observations of Barbara Myerhoff's (1974) description of the Huichol pilgrimage; G. Reichel-Dolmatoff's account of yajé (ayahuasca) sessions among the Barasana of Colombia (Reichel-Dolmatoff, 1975); and James W. Fernandez's monograph on the ritual use of eboka by members of the Bwiti cult among the Fang and Metsogo of Gabon, West Africa (Fernandez, 1982).

In selecting examples of rituals, I have been influenced by two factors. First, size restrictions prohibit an exhaustive treatment. Second, because I wish to present the rituals in some detail, I have chosen accounts that are representative and thorough. Together, the accounts range across three continents and three very different societies, and they are representative of the wide range of cultural approaches to the sacred generally and to entheogens in particular.

Also, to simplify the analysis, I have chosen accounts where the entheogen is ingested by the same route—orally—rather than as an ointment, enema, snuff, smoke, vapour or injection. I have selected just three examples of rituals, which I believe are exemplars of community-oriented entheogenic ritual as a class.

Peyote and Huichol Community

The Wixdrika or Huichol are an indigenous Mexican people who live in several independent, self-governing districts or comunidades indigenas with economies based on sedentary slash-and-burn agriculture supplemented by gathering and hunting (Schaefer and Furst, 1996). The animistic or panentheistic Huichol religious worldview maintains that all things in the environment are sensate and animate. The Huichol pantheon bustles with beings generically referred to by the obscure term 'Kakauyarite'—conceptualized as personae or faculties of nature, and addressed in kinship terms—who are revered and invoked for aid (zbid.). In Huichol religion, ecstatic states are greatly valued; consequently, peyote is greatly esteemed.

The Huichol ingest the visionary Aikuri or peyote cactus (Lophophora williamsii) as a religious sacrament and as a 'unifying force in ideology and society' (Schaefer, 1996:140-1). Peyote contains upwards of 57 alkaloids, alkaloidal amines, and amino acids (Anderson, 1996). The most psychoactive of these substances is the alkaloid mescaline (ibid.), one of the classic psychedelics (Peyton and Shulgin, 1994).

The Huichol employ Azkuri in a wide range of religious and ethnomedicinal contexts. Two of the major public rituals involving the ingestion of peyote are the peyote pilgrimage and the Hikuri Neixa, or 'Peyote dance'. Here I will focus primarily on the rituals associated with the pilgrimage. Every year a group of Huichol undertakes the lengthy pilgrimage to Wiriktita, a high desert where peyote grows abundantly (Lamaistre 1996). The Huichol peyote pilgrimage is interpreted by the pilgrims or hikuritdmete as a spiritual return to the mythic fons et origo (Myerhoff 1974). In the preparatory phases of the pilgrimage, participants—beautifully clothed in the highly ornate and colourful traditional dress so pleasing to their deities (Valadez and Valadez 1992)—express their solidarity and openness to one another through the public confession of sexual misconduct, after which the shaman ties knots in a special string, with each knot representing a pilgrim and the uniting of the souls of all participants. They are thus ...symbolically tied together for the entire pilgrimage, as well as afterwards, up to and including the completion of Hikuri Neixa, months later, when in one of the concluding rituals the knots are untied. (Schaefer 1996:163)

The journey to Wirikuta is lengthy—about 200 miles—and the pilgrims consume very little food (Schultes and Hofmann 1992). Barbara Myerhoff (1974) argues that confession, fasting and making pilgrimage are all techniques for reducing, concealing or escaping functions associated with mortality and that this assists the pilgrims to gradually shed their human identities. On arrival in Wirikuita the travellers ritually wash and pray. The shaman or mara ‘akdme who leads the expedition begins to sing as part of a ritual in which the pilgrims, now fully identified with divinities, make the transition back into the origin-world through a magical portal (ibid.).4

For people on their first pilgrimage, there is a complex rite of passage, replete with ritual blindfolding and the reciting of stories associated with Wirikuita and peyote. Eventually peyote—which is closely associated mythologically with both deer and maize—is found. The mara‘akdme shoots an arrow into the first ‘deer’ (Schaefer 1996). The Huichol present offerings to this first peyote. Later, large baskets of peyote are gathered, some to be consumed in Wirikuta, others to be stored or traded. Preparation and ingestion of peyote occur in a strictly ceremonial context.

The Huichol gather on the crest of a hill in Wirikuta: Everyone sat on the rocks crowning the summit, positioning themselves so as to face east.... The shaman purified everyone with his feather wand and sacred water and touched the peyote to their cheeks, throat and wrists. The white tufts on the peyote were removed and placed as offerings. Then the peyotéros peeled the tough skin at the base of the cactus and consumed small amounts of the first peyote of the pilgrimage. (Schaefer 1996:149)

The Huichol pilgrims next return to their encampment: the sacred fire was kindled and that night the shaman, with the help of his assistants, sang. Throughout the night all the pilgrims circled the area five times. Five is the sacred number for the Huichols and all the members consumed peyote five times during the night. At the first rays of dawn, they painted designs on the faces of their ritual companions, compaferos in Spanish, with the ground-up yellow root of a desert shrub known as uxa.... They also exchanged peyote they had selected especially each giving some to all the others and receiving some in turn from everyone else. (Schaefer 1996:149-50) The two most important ceremonial roles in the Huichol peyote pilgrimage are those of the Saulizika (the primary mara’akéme), who presides over ceremony, and the Nauxa, or ‘Keeper of the Peyote’ (ibid.). The person acting in the ceremonial capacity Nauxa is charged with the responsibility of ensuring that other participants are able to travel along the ‘road’ of the Saulizika’s song. The Nauxa blesses the peyote with a plumed wand, or muviéri, and then distributes the peyote to the pilgrims seated about the fire: Everyone eats his or her peyote and the mara’akame begins the chanting that will continue through the entire night. While the mara’akdéme carries the souls of the pilgrims along the journey of his song, Nauxa makes certain that the pilgrims are in the physical and mental states that facilitate their out-of-body travel along this path. Five times during the night, when the pilgrims circle the fire after a cycle is completed in the mara’akdme’s song, Nauxa places the same amount of peyote as originally consumed in front of each pilgrim. (Schaefer 1996:152) During the course of the night the peyote visions unfold. Initially these visions tend to consist of brilliantly coloured fast-moving geometric forms (ibid.). After a few hours the visions start to take the forms of more complex scenarios (zbid.; Valadez and Valadez 1992). Upon completing this ritual, and having spent the night consuming peyote at regular intervals, the pilgrims had reached the state in which they were journeying inwards, caught up in their own visions, their own communications with the divine Huichol entities.

(Schaefer 1996:149-50) Peyote visions are a culmination of a long process of de-differentiating the profane, flawed, time-conditioned self from the sacred, perfect, timeless Huichol divinities (Myerhoff 1974). The process of coming home to Wiriktita and dwelling there for a short time is a temporary repossession of ‘innocence, godhood, and prehuman bliss’ (ibid.: 244). The visions are engrossing and intensely personal, there is little verbal communication during the visions and attention is largely directed inwards (ibid.). Nonetheless, this is also a deeply shared undertaking: In Wirikuta, the Aikuritdmete are in a state of intense communion with each other, where the social self is shed and men stand beside each other as totalities, in spontaneous, joyous vulnerability, without the protection or requirements of social structure. This state of fusion of the individual with the group is antithetical to everyday life. Indeed, it is anathema to the allocation of roles and resources, the division of labor, the organizational, restrained, rational considerations which are the inevitable accompaniments of providing the daily dole of bread. This concern cannot be suspended for long. (Myerhoff 1974:246) Indeed, Victor Turner (1974) suggests that the climax of the Huichol pilgrimage is a kind of cosmic anti-structure and communitas. (Turner 1974:9) The pilgrims’ sojourn in Wirikiita is exceedingly brief. Having joyously ‘come home’ as divinities and having collected sufficient peyote for their community’s annual needs, the /ikuritdmete are ready to return to their previous mortal, structural condition. For while the experience of Wiriktita is the compass of Huichol spiritual life, it is also replete with the spiritual dangers associated with the mysterium tremendum: The special task of the Huichol mara’akame is to guide his people out of Wirikuta quickly and firmly, disregarding their desire to linger. His guardianship in escorting them back to reality, in persuading them to relinquish the longing for Paradise, is as important as leading them there in the first place. (Myerhoff 1974:248)

Yajé and Barasana community

The Barasana are one of several small Tukanoan subgroups who live in a section of the Vaupés? drained by the Pir4-parand river (Hugh-Jones 1979). Their economy is based on subsistence agriculture supplemented by gathering, hunting, and fishing (ibid.). Barasana live in large communal malocas or longhouses situated near running water and spaced in such a way that it often takes an hour or more to travel between them. The larger of these houses also function as ceremonial centers or basaria wi (dance-houses) (ibid.; Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975). The Barasana hold many communal ceremonies and dances. Barasana ethnographer Stephen Hugh-Jones reports that the relatively prestigious house in which he worked for 20 months held 12 communal rituals during that time, including seven ‘Fruit House’ rituals (in which fruit is ceremonially brought into the house to the accompaniment of the sound of He instruments), one ‘He House’ ritual (the major initiatory rite), three social dances, and one ritual exchange of food (Hugh-Jones 1979). The Barasana frequently make use of the vision-inducing potion yajé in their ceremonies.° The entheogenic properties of yajé are the result of a unique and sophisticated pharmacological synergy (Ott 1996). The basic ingredient is nearly always the stems of the vine Banisteriopsis caapi. Depending on the region, leaves of other plants, especially oco-yagé (Diplopterys cabrerana) and chacruna (Psychotria viridis), are added to intensify the enchanting properties of the drink (Schultes and Raffauf 1992). 128 DES TRAMACCHI These latter plants are rich in the N, N-dimethyltryptamine or DMT— another of the archetypal psychedelics (Peyton and Shulgin 1994). Substances (beta-carbolines) found in Banisteriopsis caapi have distinct psychoactive properties, but also facilitate the more spectacular visionary action of DMT (McKenna and Towers 1984).

Reichel-Dolmatoff (1975) provides an outstanding ethnographic description of his attendance at a social dance and yajé session among the Barasana Indians of the Pird-parana.’ Unlike the Huichol peyote pilgrimage, the yajé session described by Reichel-Dolmatoff was not part of a predetermined ritual cycle, but rather something that came together in a more spontaneous and informal way, requiring only a few days notice to prepare and send invitations to neighboring communities. The session itself, however, unfolded in a highly formalized way: It was becoming dark now and we entered the maloca. Just inside the door the men had arranged two rows of little wooden stools, and now they began to open the large boxes containing the feathercrowns, the rattles, and the painted loincloths. Béhpé, the oldest of the men present and the headman of the visiting party, opened a box lying before him on______ It was 6:20 P.M. He now took another feather-crown and handed it to his neighbor; then another and another. More boxes were brought, and all the men adorned themselves... It was about an hour before all the men were properly dressed. (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975:159)

After the men had adorned themselves, they sat in a semicircular formation facing the interior of the maloca: There were twelve men, who were now talking and laughing. It was dark now and one of them lit the suri, the large resin-covered torch standing near the center of the room, and it began to shed intense red light over the scene. (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975:160)

The men next tied rattles made from strings of tinkling seeds around their ankles. Béhpo shook his stick-rattle in a highly stylized series of gestures. There was a general playing of flutes, whistles, and turtle-shell instruments. Cashiré, a kind of beer, was ritually served. Béhpo then lifted an ornate ceramic horn which produced a long-drawn sound like a foghorn. The men now rose for the dance: The deafening sound of the rattles filled the room as the men took up their positions once more, facing the interior of the house, stamping the floor— once, twice, three times—‘Ho!’ they exclaimed. ‘H6-hé! Then they advanced and turned, singing and marking their steps with the hollow thud of the stamping tubes. The line advanced into the open space of the center. Turning around in a circle, each man with one hand on the shoulder of the one before him, they appeared again in the light, dancing slowly round after round. ENTHEOGENIC DANCE ECSTASIS = 129 The voices rose and fell, the thumping approached and receded, over and over, from light to darkness and back again into the red glow of the torch. (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975:163)

Shortly after 8 o’clock the painted ceramic vessel used to prepare and hold yajé was brought out and stirred with a rattling sound. The men returned to their seats. The yajé was distributed in small gourd cups and imbibed with much grimacing and spitting. Cashirt beer was again served. Having drunk the yajé the participants became more relaxed and boisterous. The women now joined the men in a slow solemn dance. At about 9.30 the men took another round of yajé. By 10 o'clock most of the men were having visions, talking to one another about them in drowsy voices. As the men began to enter deeply into the yajé trance their dancing became more animated and they became more synchronous in their movements: The general rhythm of the dance had become more and more coordinated as time went on. After the men had drunk three or four cups of yajé the steps, turns, and gestures had reached a precision that made the group appear to be one single organism moving in a highly controlled and precise way. The same was true for the songs; there was never a false note or an eccentric movement; song and dance had become completely fused. Moreover, the entire scene was far from being a frenetic orgy; it was extremely formalised and solemn. (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975:163)

Some of the men exchanged entheogenic vihé snuff. Participants avoided ‘facing others and looking into their eyes’ (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975:163). The quality of sociality oscillated mostly between private introspection and impersonal interaction as undifferentiated members of a group. The cycles of dancing and resting continued throughout the night and yajé was taken at regular intervals: At 2:10 A.M. the men took another round of yajé, and at 3:20 the eighth and last one. They were dancing in almost complete darkness. The music never stopped, and the croaking noise of the turtle shell continued hour after hour. Dawn was coming. Béhpé slowly took the feathercrown from his head and handed it to Muhipu, saying 'ma' take! in a loud voice. The other men followed his example. It was exactly 6:20 A.M.; the ceremony had lasted twelve hours to the minute. Muhipu handed the different ornaments to Bid, who carefully packed them away in their boxes. The men left the maloca and gathered in the chilly air in front of the house, yawning and stretching their limbs. There was but little conversation. The men looked tired but content. After a while, some of them put up their hammocks and went to sleep. (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975:167) 130 DES TRAMACCHI

The Barasana yajé ritual described by Reichel-Dolmatoff has a number of similarities to Huichol peyote ritualism. Ritual adornment, a ceremonial fire, chanting, music, dancing through the long night, and the synchrony and coordination of participants are elements common to both ceremonies. These elements also occur in the following account from tropical West Africa. Eboka and Bwiti community Bwiti is a new religious movement found among the Fang and Metsogo peoples of Gabon in equatorial West Africa. This ecstatic, syncretic cult, influenced by the Bieri ancestral cult and Christian evangelism, has been characterized as a reformative movement and as a dynamic form of resistance and response to colonialism (Fernandez 1982). The polymorphous Bwiti religion is spread throughout Fang territory, but chapels are relatively autonomous, and there is little organization beyond that found at the level of individual villages (Fernandez 1972).

The religion deals with the maintenance of satisfactory relationships with the dead, and also seeks to make available to its members experiential knowledge of the transition from the realm of the living to that of the dead. This experiential knowledge is arrived at primarily through the initiation rite in which the novice becomes a Banzie,® member. Bwiti incorporates a number of psychoactive plants, the most esteemed of which is eboka (prepared from the roots of the shrub Tabernanthe iboga). Eboka, or eboga, contains many alkaloids, including an unusual psychedelic drug, ibogaine (Pope 1969). Eboka is used in two distinct ways.

First, the powdered roots are taken in enormous, visionary doses to symbolically 'break open the head' in order for one to become experientially aware of the presence of the Ancestors during intensive, once-in-a-lifetime initiation rites. Subsequently, smaller quantities of eboka are taken by Banzie as ceremonial stimulants during periodic all-night rituals, accompanied by song, dance, and 'the insistent rhythms of the cult harp (ngombi) and the soft beat of the bamboo staves (obaka) (Fernandez 1972:240). or The lighter regular dosage of two to five teaspoons does not produce hallucinations, though adepts of Bwiti claim that once a man has 'met eboga' and been taken by 'him' to the 'other side', any subsequent amount will raise in his mind many of his former experiences. The regular dosage...is taken primarily to enable the adepts to engage in the arduous all-night ceremonies without fatigue. Members often say that eboga taken in this way also lightens their bodies so that they can float through their ritual dances. It enables them to mingle more effectively with the ancestors at the roof of the chapel. They do not report visions under the influence of such amounts, only modest changes in body perception and some dissociation. (Fernandez 1982:475)

Fernandez provides an account of a Metsogo Bwiti engosie—an all-night celebration ‘along the path of birth and death’—which was preceded in the mid-afternoon by a preliminary shared meal. Eboga was also eaten in the afternoon, a séance was performed, and a spirit curse was ‘lifted’ from an afflicted man through an elaborate ritual. The Bwiti engosie proper commenced around 9 o'clock in the evening, with a series of long shuffling entrance dances that commenced out in the forest and were designed to attract lingering spirits into the chapel. These were followed by songs arranged according to cosmological themes and dances ‘of superb quality and highly coordinated’ (ibid. :437).

The choreographic highlights of the evening were the ‘amazements’ or akyunge. Akyunge, sometimes translated as ‘miracles’, refer to things done with ‘such surpassing skill and subtlety as to amaze and be beyond ordinary understanding and imitation’ (ibid.:436). The akyunge consisted of highly competent performances of illusions, for example the appearance of levitating torches and even the ‘miraculous’ appearance of the local French District Administrator (skilfully impersonated by Bwiti members). These dramatic performances are designed to ‘confound the ordinary categories of experience... Things are confused, lose their categories— Metsogo “miracles” make things “amazingly ambiguous” (bid.: 468).

Soon after midnight, the energies of the engosie are channelled into an experience of satisfaction and communitas. After a brief circumambulation of the surrounding forests, the membership, following the nima na kombo, enter the chapel and, just before the central pillar, begin to weave a tighter and tighter circle until they are compressed, virtually, into one being around the nima na kombo. Raising their candles above their heads (ideally they should be able to make one flame out of all candles) they intone bz anté nlem mvére (now we become one heart). (Fernandez 1982:454)

One-heartedness is usually followed by a short, highly figurative sermon. The following five hours are dedicated to the recital of songs drawn from ‘the Path of the Harp’—a collection of 115 songs relating cosmological events, commencing with creation ex nihilo. Banzie one-heartedness is again enacted at first light: this time it does not occur within the chapel but rather before the ancestors’ welcoming hut (étunga). And the members, instead of raising the candles in their right hands, raise and bring together the yarn umbilical cords in their left hands.... They are reaffirming the ‘umbilical linkage’ that binds them to the departing ancestors. ‘One-heartedness’ may otherwise be celebrated by men and women in separate groups in the midst of nearby streams. But midnight and first light are the two occasions for this celebration in the process of the engosie. It is a climactic celebration in the engosie. (Fernandez 1982:454)

As the process of the engosie moves towards its conclusion, it becomes apparent that the membership has achieved an accentuation of aesthetic sensitivity, a renewed appreciation of life, and the satisfaction of communitas: ‘What seemed to me the most beautiful music is performed in the early morning hours, after the spirits of men and ancestors have mingled in the cult chapel and after the membership has achieved a state of ‘one-heartedness— nlem mvore. ... Dawn is faintly evident over the equatorial forest wall to the east. The first cock has crowed. All cult activities must be concluded before the sun rises, for Bwi Nyingwan Mebege, the Sister of God, who is the moon. There is deep satisfaction in the membership born of the fact that they have danced all night, achieved 'one-heartedness', and can look forward to the fellowship of the communal meal, which comes immediately after the cultic activities. It is an afterglow brought to them by eboka as well, for the drug is not usually associated with undesirable aftereffects. (Fernandez 1972:240-1)

Ceremonial constants
The entheogenic rituals discussed above share a number of structural elements. These can be organized under the rubrics preparation, ritual space and time, music and dance, pharmacological aspects and social relations. In this section I will discuss the similarities in each of these areas, as well as discussing how these same elements are also intrinsic to the dance-ecstasy of Western psychedelic parties. Such a 'side-by-side' comparison will accentuate the continuities between these rituals.

Preparation
All three rituals involve preliminary ritual modifications of the self. Fasting, special diets, sexual abstinence or libido-regulating practices, prayer, confession and the fulfillment of ritual or social obligations may be required for the participants to attain a ritually 'pure' condition. Such preparations are a common feature of ritual contact with the sacred and are not peculiar to entheogenic ritualism, although they may take on new physiological and psychological significance within the entheogenic context. Fasting can impact on the extent and rate of absorption of psychoactive substances, and minimize potentially unpleasant food/drug interactions. The physical strain induced by hunger may also lower the psychological threshold for visions, as might sexual abstinence. The practice of fasting prior to 'tripping' or 'e-ing' appears to be widespread among psychedelic drug users, and is based on sound pharmacological principles: drugs are absorbed more efficiently by the body when the stomach is empty and the possibility of nausea is reduced. Besides pharmacological considerations, fasting is also in and of itself a powerful ENTHEOGENIC DANCE ECSTASIS = 133 technique for altering consciousness—serving to radically disrupt both cultural and physiological habits.

The transformation of appearance through elaborate and beautiful ceremonial costume or cosmetic modifications also occurs in all three rituals. Practices such as beautification, fulfilling or releasing obligations, confession and prayer exert a strong influence on 'set—the mood and expectation factors that can impact on an individual's experience of entheogenic ritual. Many dance-party participants pay a great deal of attention to their appearance, and some don highly elaborate and beautiful costumes. Examples that I have observed at doofs include a Halloween witch costume; a rainbow-coloured, plumed headdress and a long white robe; Chaplinesque garb; bizarre, electronic, bleeping glove puppets; leonine prosthetic tails; and other childlike, colourful and interesting costumes composed of furry, shiny, luminescent or metallic-looking materials. For those who make use of psychoactive substances at dance parties, ritual preparations may commence some time before the actual dance party with a pilgrimage to procure taboo sacraments such as LSD or MDMA through informal and esoteric systems of exchange. 

Ritual space and time
Ritual space is established in all three rituals. In the case of the Huichol, all of Wirikuita is sacred space, the point of cosmic origin. The campfire provides a further sacred centre within this space, while the orbits of circling candles outline a sacred perimeter (Schaefer 1996). The Barasana ritual takes place in any of several large malocas. These communal houses are also modelled on the form of the sacred cosmos (Hugh-Jones 1979; Reichel-Dolmatoff 1971, 1975). The space is prepared for ritual by clearing the central area for dancing and by lighting special resin torches that emit intense red light (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975; Schultes and Raffauf 1992). The Bwiti rituals take place in and around chapels replete with esoteric meanings. The centre of the chapel is a pillar that serves as axis mundi, conceptualized as linking the living and the dead, above and below, in an enduring relationship (Fernandez 1982). The chapel also has a female and a male side, the setting up of polarities being an important preliminary to their synthesis—the Bwiti ‘one-heartedness’. The Bwiti chapel also represents an androgynous cruciform human figure (ibid.).

A further similarity between these rituals is their overnight duration and nocturnal setting. While the Huichol pilgrimage is lengthy, the actual time spent in the intense, visionary world of Wiriktita is relatively brief. The climax of the pilgrimage is a night-long ritual of music, circumambulation, and meditation. The Barasana yajé session lasts a single night, as does the Metsogo Bwiti ritual described by Fernandez. There is perhaps an endeavour here to preserve the integrity of routine patterns by temporally locating the majority of the ritual in the depths of night, beyond the regular realm of waking consciousness. In each instance, the rituals transport the participants through the undifferentiated amorphousness of night to emerge eventually into the pristine splendour of a new day. Here, the cosmic order of day and night are given human meaning through ritual.

The emphasis on ritual expression through space at doofs is quite distinctive and pervasive. Doof organizers aim to imbue the events with an atmosphere of sacrality and may perform ceremonial and magickal activities to consecrate their selected site. The remote places in which these outdoor psychedelic parties are held become transformed into vast countercultural cathedrals, in which various icons are arranged to create a sacred landscape in which humans are ‘naturalized’ and ‘nature’ is humanized.!* There is a precision also to the temporal trajectory of dance parties. The rituals generally last for the duration of one full night, and occasionally a few consecutive nights. DJs play different kinds of music at different stages of the night, and these stages may well correspond to different phases and moods associated with the process of ‘tripping’.

Music and dance
Another common feature of these rituals is their employment of music—especially sustained percussive sound and sonorous chanting. The Huichol mara ‘akdme is a ‘singing shaman’ whose chanting transports souls along a ‘journey’. The Huichol pilgrims circle the ceremonial fire in precisely determined patterns to the accompaniment of the mara‘akdme’. The voices of Barasana participants in a yajé ceremony rise and fall to the croaking of a turtle-shell instrument and to the thumping of dancing feet and stamping tubes, song and dance becoming ‘fused’. The Barasana dance becomes precise and highly coordinated. Similarly, the Bwiti ceremonial dances are ‘of superb quality and highly coordinated’ (Fernandez 1982: 437). Over many hours, the music of the various Bwiti instruments reaches a plateau of aesthetic sensitivity, echoing the attainment of deep solidarity and psychic interrelatedness.

A great many styles of electronic dance music are associated with psychedelic parties, including techno, trance, hard house, jungle, trip-hop, electro-funk, speed bass, and ambient. High volume is an essential element in all these musical genres. Loudspeakers are a source of such esoteric qualities as ‘vibes’, ‘power’, and ‘ambience’; they are not simply the utilitarian medium of transmission but an intrinsic instrument for sound production (Bull 1997). Ideally, the DJs direct the collective trance with insight and dexterity, pleasuring listeners by stretching out and sustaining enjoyable sonic moments, drawing from a well-honed palette of pleasurable frequencies, tones, and rhythms, but also moving the listener into more challenging and rewarding sound environments.

Because DJs select and present as well as create music, they have been described as ‘curators’ of ‘galleries of sound’ (Rietveld 1993). DJs also function as guides to an unfamiliar and powerfully charged synaesthetic realm and in this sense have been described as ‘electronic shamans’ (Bull 1997). Psychedelic dance music is imbued with certain para-religious qualities. The soundscapes of psychedelic dance music are frequently juxtaposed with surreal mantra-like ‘samples’ that reinforce decategorization and anti-structure.

Sometimes ENTHEOGENIC DANCE ECSTASIS 135 a ‘techno anthem’ may contain explicit instances of prayer, as for example, the track “Halleluja’ (Sash! 2000), which incorporates ecstatic gospel music sounds and themes, including exuberant choruses of “Hallelujah, Lord!” and ‘I wanna thank you!’ The content of the prayers in ‘Halleluja’ is, however, strongly oriented towards ebullient MDMA and dance-associated forms of consciousness, and thanks are given (perhaps ironically) for such seldom appreciated facets of life as mobile phones, shopping malls, perfect skin, faster food, pay TV, remote control, ‘quality time’, the Internet, and global warming.

The musical effluvium of gratitude continues:!? Thank you, for plastic surgery, thank you, for safer sex. Thank you for the World Cup finals, thank you, for radar control. And thank you for a brilliant future, in a peaceful world. (Sash! 2000)

Quite apart from the frequently religious or quasi-religious ideation of psychedelic dance music, the very form and structure of the music promote and support trance states. The repetitive, hypnotic, rapid beat of techno (generally 110-30 beats per minute) may induce a classic auditory driving scenario (Neher 1962). Percussion and tintinnabulation are frequently used to accent ritual ‘transformations’, possibly because these sonic bursts ‘overload’ the autonomic nervous system via the limbic system (which controls the hypothalamus), resulting in an inhibition of ‘rational thought’ and an increase in suggestibility (Needham 1967). Percussive sounds may also augment synaesthesia and the depersonalizing effects of entheogens (Johnston 1977), effects that may be further compounded by ‘photic’ driving from the kaleidoscopic lighting and animations present at many parties. It has been speculated that repetitious stimuli can induce a ‘collective tuning-in’ relationship among participants in ritual: the various ecstasy states, which can be produced. In fact, the oneness of all participants is the theme running through the myth of most human ritual... This state may vary in intensity, but it always has the effect of unifying the social group. (d'Aquili and Laughlin 1975:38) Prolonged, vigorous dancing can be sufficient in itself to induce mood-altering biochemical changes and altered states of consciousness. An important feature of psychedelic dance music is its great duration, and partygoers may find themselves dancing for extended periods of time in a state of blissful depersonalization (Bull 1997). Over time, the movements of bodies become aligned to the same rhythms, lighting patterns and economies of social circulation, so that the participants may develop a sense of merging in unison. This effect may be assisted by the use of LSD and MDMA, if we are to grant them the 'ego-dissolving' and 'heart-opening' properties frequently attributed to them.

Like the Barasana yajé rituals, the doof is far from being a frenetic orgy; the movements of dancers become an expression of unity. Participants may end up dancing synchronously, facing the same direction or feeling as if linked into a single, connected system. The doof ritual gains in intensity through the night, reaching a plateau of liminality and excitement after midnight, which continues through the early morning hours and gradually winds down after sunrise. The music generally becomes lighter and more melodic in the morning light; people recognize friends they had not known were present. Many people continue to dance; others wander about exploring the environment. Many don sunglasses! or seek out caffeinated beverages. the mornings are an incredible time at these parties, very different to the night, like the night's a more intense dance thing and then the morning, it's suddenly more like 'here's the community together, still playing around'. (‘K’, from tape-recorded interview)

Pharmacological aspects
The substances or combinations of substances used in dance rituals share a number of key pharmacological similarities. The major similarities are that they each produce a sense of dissociation or depersonalization, they all have a net stimulating effect, and they are all capable of producing visions or a sense of contact with transpersonal realities. Peyote produces wakefulness, depersonalization and visions. The entheogenic effects of peyote are largely referrable to its principal active constituent mescaline, although small amounts of related alkaloids are also present (Anderson 1996). Drinking yajé can also produce depersonalization and visions. Yajé visions are partly attributable to its DMT content. Yajé by itself is not an effective stimulant; indeed, it tends to produce an irresistible torpor. However, when yajé is used for ceremonial dances it is often taken in conjunction with large quantities of Amazonian coca (Erythroxylum coca var. ipadu), which helps to counter the yajé lassitude so that participants may easily remain awake through the night (Ott 1996). The effects of eboka are somewhat more difficult to classify. The most studied alkaloid of eboka, ibogaine, is a tryptamine derivative chemically related to DMT, psilocybin and LSD (Shulgin and Shulgin 1997). In large doses it produces visions and a 'depersonalizing' effect comparable to those produced by mescaline or DMT; however, it is generally taken at lower doses that function as a strong stimulant to increase 'ritual output' (Fernandez 1972). The use of psychedelics at doofs has been widespread, though not at all universal. By far the most common material taken at doofs seems to be LSD, colloquially known as ‘acid’ or ‘trips’. LSD is one of the classic psychedelics, with strong vision-inducing properties comparable to those of peyote or yajé (Peyton and Shulgin 1994), although it generally causes less nausea than either and is longer acting. LSD has some resemblance to eboka in that it has pronounced stimulating properties and its ingestion can give rise to dissociated states of consciousness. MDMA (Ecstasy) has also been very popular within Australia. The combination of MDMA and LSD, referred to by some doofers as ‘candy-flipping’, is widely esteemed. Underground psychedelic psychotherapists have also recommended pre-dosing with MDMA to enhance subsequent LSD experiences (Stolaroff 1994, 1997).

Social relations
The structural continuities found in these rituals are not arbitrary; rather, they are present in all the cited instances because they are effective in inducing ecstasy at the collective level. These ecstatic elements orient the participants toward a similar functional goal—renewed and intensified group identification at an immediate level. This is precisely the condition that Victor Turner (1969) referred to as communitas. Paradoxically, the collective entheogenic ceremonies also accentuate awareness of the individual self. Schaefer speaks of the “quest for the self, and Fernandez remarks on ‘greater possibilities of the self accessed by Banzie—but these excursions into selfhood occur in parallel to a reciprocal atonement (in the more archaic sense of that word) with the matrix of the communal self.

While visions also constitute a powerful form of experiential transcendence for the individual, it is as affirmative and shared signs of community that entheogenic ecstasies are primarily valued. Throughout the accounts, we find references to related ideas of one-heartedness, moving as one, or being as one, membership, and the ‘uniting of the souls’ based on shared, ecstatic experience of the numinous, and especially in the sublime mysterium fascinans facets of the numinous.

The motif of communality has been one of the more recurrent elements in discourses about raving (Hill 1999; Jordan 1995; Nolan 1998) and there exists a general consensus about the centrality of experiential transcendence—sometimes conceptualized as ‘dance-delirium’ or the ‘implosion’ or ‘disappearance’ of subjectivity among ravers (Hopkins 1996; Lyttle and Montagne 1992). Rave rituals may represent fascination not with forces but with metamorphosis. Metamorphosis occurs as the self is destabilized, disembodied, and ‘dispersed across social space’ (Hopkins 1996:15). Occasionally parties are described in terms of the Great Mother, Gaia, or womb, with the bass rhythm of the music being compared to the foetal heartbeat. When a party is likened to the womb, there is also the implication of a shared sibling status between ravers, which attenuates sexual tensions and replaces them with familiarity and friendliness. Images of infants and young children were a recurrent motif of early rave promotional fliers (Akland-Snow et al. 1996). These figures may signify the pre-sexual, hedonistic and polymorphic 138 DES TRAMACCHI perverse nature of psychedelic sociality. Sam Keen has suggested that ‘LSD, DMT, and mescaline’ may give rise to a ‘Dionysian consciousness...based upon a body ego of the polymorphously perverse body’, in which the self is transformed into a focused awareness of sensations (1969:182). Collective consciousness may be especially enhanced at parties where MDMA is a conspicuous element. During the plateau of MDMA effects interpersonal differences appear to evaporate, producing a condition of almost total identification of self with other. Participants in public MDMA agapae may form ‘puppy-piles—protracted and unconditional collective embraces. Dynamics of play and creativity are a prominent catalyst of social relations at both doofs and raves. Activities from which people can derive acute pleasure via a sensory modality are popular. In the mornings people may stroll about viewing the environment, art and one another, listening to the music or blowing bubbles. In the liminal arena of doofs, world elements are appropriated and juxtaposed in carnivalesque ways which serve to disrupt categories—not unlike the ‘amazements’ of Metsogo Bwiti. The ‘amazements’ of doofs include people in ‘freaky’ costumes, skilful acrobatic displays and fire-twirling, kaleidoscopic lightshows and elaborately constructed soundscapes and art spaces.

Conclusion
Psychedelic parties, like their non-Western counterparts, incorporate multiple trance techniques. Both rave and doof rituals can be seen as different but analogous kinds of ‘social machines’ which draw power from various Dionysian ‘engines’, including an ecstatic dance-delirium (Jordan 1995), ritual costume, substance-induced ‘ergotrophic stimulation’ (Fischer 1971) and rhythm-induced ‘tuning in’ (d’Aquili and Laughlin 1975). Psychedelic dance parties share many elements with other entheogenic dance rituals. These similarities are not superficial; rather they are functionally analogous; in all these instances social energy generated through ecstatic dance is harnessed and directed by ritual virtuosos in accord with the collective desires of the group to enhance the possibility of producing a definite product: spontaneous communitas.

The Vaupés is the largest of a number of states or comisartas in the Colombian Amazon. The Vaupés is home to a culturally diverse Indian population, comprising speakers of many different languages and dialects. One of the major language groups of this region is known as Tukanoan (Schultes and Raffauf 1992). The use of yajé—also known as ayahuasca, ddpa, mihi, kahi, natéma, caapi, and pindé—is widespread in the western parts of the Amazon Basin, including parts of Brazil, Colombia, and Peru (Luna and Amaringo 1991; Schultes and Hofmann 1980, 1992). Yajé is often taken in conjunction with tobacco, ipadi (Erythroxylum coca var. ipadu), and chicha (a mildly alcoholic beverage made from the fermented starchy tubers of Manihot esculenta) during all-night collective rituals, as well as for magical and healing purposes (Schultes and Raffauf 1992).

Reichel-Dolmatoff's ethnographic account not only includes the structures and processes of a yajé session, but is of the utmost interest to the phenomenologist of consciousness as it also furnishes a rare and almost microscopically detailed account of the visions and impressions that the author experienced during the acute phases of yajé inebriation. The members of Bwiti are known as 'Banzie', which means 'those of the chapel', but which has also come to be associated with the French term 'ange' or 'angels' (Fernandez 1982). Participants in Bwiti are also called ndzi-eboka or 'eaters of Iboga' (Schultes and Hofmann 1992). Akyunge are also the means by which supernaturals are thought to intervene in human affairs, and Bwiti 'amazes' its members by enabling them to 'surpass themselves and come to an understanding of the extraordinary, the unseen, the "death side" of things' (Fernandez 1982:436). The substance eboga is itself 'miraculous': 'It amazes by opening up both the initiate (once in a lifetime by massive doses) and all the Banzie (regularly by smaller doses) to greater possibilities of the self (ibid.:492). Nima na kombo is the title for the leader of a Bwiti chapel (ibid.).

Elsewhere (Tramacchi 2001), I have discussed discontinuities between the symbolic expression of Western psychedelic dance parties and non-Western entheogenic dance rituals. Essentially, the theme of 'sacrifice' is extremely significant in the mythology of the majority of entheogenic sacraments, but greatly downplayed in the Western psychedelic context.

Within the discourses of Australian 'edge-culture' nature as Earth/Gaia assumes an increasingly sacred ambience, perhaps reflecting a postcolonial quest for organic meaning and spiritual connectedness to place (Tacey 1995). One is reminded of Zaehner's (1972:95) bemusement at accounts of LSD-induced 'psychedelic love' experiences such as 'Love. Love. Love. Love. Big yellow chrysanthemums and the sun and pancakes and Disneyland and Vermont and cinnamon and Alexander the Great' etc.______ 

The donning of sunglasses in the morning following a rave or doof is quite ubiquitous. Glasses protect both the dilated pupils and the sometimes fragile psyches of ‘returning’ trippers. La Barre mentions that young Plains Indian men also ‘affect colored glasses’ to protect their eyes in the mornings following peyote meetings (1975: 20).

In 186 BC, the Roman Senate moved decisively against the orgiastic, nocturnal rites of Bacchanalia held ‘in the groves of Stimula’ and elsewhere. The Senate was primarily alarmed at the large, ungoverned crowds associated with the worship of Bacchus. Fire twirling was one of the elements in these excessive, ecstatic celebrations of the god of inebriation and madness, which led to its condemnation. The cult, according to Livy (1976), seduced women into running about with blazing torches while sporting untidy hair, a sight not unfamiliar to doof participants.

Accessories such as infant hair barrettes, 'kiddie' backpacks, teddy bears, and friendship bracelets have been correlated with MDMA's ability to stimulate an innocence reminiscent of childhood. The drug's ability to bring out one's 'inner child' led to its nickname 'Adam' in the late 1970s, when psychologists realized its potential in therapy sessions (Reynolds 1999:82). Even PLUR (peace, love, unity, and respect), the acronym that has been referred to as the principal philosophy of raving (Fritz 1999:203), an ideology that is intended to reflect the love and connectedness of the rave community, can be traced to the empathogenic effects of MDMA.

To date, the majority of publications on substance use at raves focus on the escalating presence of drugs at events and the associated health risks, the range and quantification of illicit substance use, polydrug use, and strategies for harm reduction. The subjects employed in these studies generally exhibit overrepresentation by habitual drug users, with the varying categories of rave participants overlooked. These studies fail to delineate the motivations, experiences, and attitudes of regular drug users, as well as those of occasional consumers and abstainers. Consequently, a wide range of data has been missed.

While MDMA's connection to the rave culture is undeniable, it should also be noted that a reactionary trend to the emphasis on drugs has begun to take place as an increasing number of participants choose to abstain or to reduce or limit their consumption of illicit drugs. Fieldwork in the central Canadian rave scene has suggested that ravers' attitudes toward drugs do appear to contradict their otherwise focal position as portrayed in the literature. Analysis of participants' views concerning drugs suggests that an underlying code of 'acceptable' behavior with respect to drug use has not only influenced participants' choice of drug but also fostered the development of an underreported class of rave participants—those who limit their consumption of drugs and those who discontinue use altogether.

Drawing on recent studies of the flashback phenomenon, in addition to Gellhorn and Kiely's work (1972) on autonomic nervous system tuning, I suggest that exposure to a psychoactive substance at a rave can produce neural tuning such that a similar state can later be reached 'naturally' while in the rave environment. Further, some participants are in fact aware of this, and it is the effect of this process which motivates this underreported pattern of drug use. 

), in addition to a small body of published literature (CAMH 2000; Adlaf and Smart 1997; Weir 2000), suggest that synthetic drug use is clearly on the rise in Canada. MDMA-related deaths have been the most prominent measuring stick used to gauge the influence and popularity of raves and dance drugs among Canadian youth; however, quantitative reliability is often confounded by the fact that ‘ecstasy’ pills may be combined or even replaced with other substances. Polydrug use, a common pattern of behaviour among Travers (see Adlaf and Smart 1997; Boys et al. 1997; Forsyth 1996; Pedersen and Skrondal 1999; Topp et al. 1999) presents another factor contributing to the inability to operationalize the content and dosage of substances ingested and the specific cause of drug-related deaths. These circumstances also fail to elucidate general patterns of use since the majority of serious cases demonstrate blood levels 40 times higher than the average recreational dose (Kalant 2001:924). Overheating and dehydration are additional factors that complicate the epidemiological data. Post-mortem analyses of ecstasy-attributed deaths suggest that many cases are the result of hyperthermia rather than the direct toxicity from MDMA (Measham et al. 1998:25).

Much of the literature in the Canadian context has also relied on data obtained from samples directed toward the secondary-school population (see Adlaf and Smart 1997). These patterns of use cannot be generalized to the rave population as a whole, however, since most rave attendees fall into the post-secondary age bracket. For example, our survey results revealed 62 per cent of ravers to be over the age of 20 (Takahashi and Olaveson 2003). Our study also found that psychoactive substance use was prevalent among those sampled: 81 per cent reported regular drug use at raves, 6 per cent reported occasional use and 13 per cent indicated that they abstain (bid.). While a variety of substances were reported, ecstasy was the most frequently reported substance, at 67 per cent, followed by cannabis and crystal methamphetamine (bid.). Ecstasy, LSD (Lysergic acid diethlamide) and the amphetamines appear to have the most consistent international presence.

A number of other studies illustrate that regional variation exists in the patterns of drug use at raves. For example, Power et al. (1996) cite MDMA, LSD and amphetamine sulphate as the drugs of choice among a group of London youths examined. Amphetamine and MDMA use are also cited as the drugs of choice by Forsyth (1996) in the Scottish dance scene. Forsyth lists nitrates or ‘poppers’ with amphetamines and ecstasy as the most prevalent drugs among London youths, whereas ‘poppers’ seem to have a very minor presence in the Canadian rave scene to date. In our own study, references to a homemade concoction referred to as ‘peach’ were reported only by survey respondents sampled in Quebec. Weir (2000) and Weber (1999) note that alcohol use at Canadian raves is low, attributing this to the fact that, while it loosens inhibitions, it can also generate aggression amongst participants. For this reason, the general view among ravers is that alcohol has no place in the scene. Our survey data also confirmed this. According to one 22-year-old male, ‘having alcohol there changes everything, I’ve seen a lot more people get sick and lose control from drinking—at raves there’______ THE ‘NATURAL HIGH’
Attitudes toward drugs: a ‘moral’ code of conduct?
Centrality of the music, dance, and people

The position of the rave community toward drugs tends to be an ambivalent and paradoxical one. Psychoactive substance use is undeniably widespread among the rave population; survey results suggested that the majority of individuals who attend raves use drugs in this context or have done so in the past. At the same time, however, respondents emphasized that the rave experience and culture is fundamentally about the music, the people, the dancing, and PLUR, rather than the drugs. Those who attend raves for the sole purpose of buying and ingesting psychoactive substances were perceived by some as ‘phony’ ravers who frequent events for the wrong reasons (see also Lenton and Davidson 1999; Weber 1999).

As one 18-year-old male states:
“I don’t use drugs, I don’t believe they are necessary. I think they make your night fake. Sadly it’s necessary for some people, but to each his own. I just don’t like people who don’t have a clue about music, just use the venue for drugs.” (18-year-old male)

Individuals who rave ‘clean’ were even admired for demonstrating a greater commitment to the music and the culture. According to one 18-year-old female informant:
“Even though I usually dose at raves, I really respect people who can rave without drugs because these people are really devoted to the music, I mean they can get high just from the music and the dancing and that’s pretty cool.” (18-year-old female)

Some ravers were aware of the shift in mental state that can result from prolonged dancing. As one 24-year-old male stated:
“I can have the same response whether taking the drug or not. In fact, even better, there are times when I will go and dance for 15 hours straight and feel like I'm brought to a state of consciousness on par if not greater than those who had popped 15 pills.” (24-year-old male)

The sentiment that these naturally induced altered states embody the core principles of the culture is illustrated in the following raver’s statement: “But there is the respect, the liberation, the space to simultaneously be an individual and part of a group. This natural high, not the chemical sort, is the true allure of a rave” (Park 2001).

These attitudes are consonant with the finding that only 8 per cent of the 148 MELANIE TAKAHASHI subjects we surveyed mentioned drug use as the primary reason for attending raves, compared with the 92 per cent who referred to either the people, the music, or dancing as the main attractants (Takahashi and Olaveson 2003). This finding is supported cross-culturally as two-thirds of Australian ravers surveyed by Lenton and Davidson deemed the music, lighting, and dancing to be the primary appeal of raves (1999:154). Similarly, van der Wijngaart et al. concluded that in The Netherlands psychoactive substances are only part of the larger rave context, with music and dancing having the dominant appeal (1999:701).

The philosophy of the rave subculture—peace, love, unity, and respect—is then thought to take precedence over drugs, with some ravers attributing what they refer to as the degradation of the scene and its vibe to the increased availability and consumption of drugs at raves (see also McCall 2001; Lenton and Davidson 1999; Reynolds 1998; Weber 1999). While some informants were troubled over the decreasing quality of psychoactive substances and the introduction of novel street drugs such as ‘special K' (ketamine) and GHB (Gamma-hydroxy-butyrate) into the scene, others expressed concern over the effects of drugs on young participants (see also Lenton and Davidson 1999;______ Some felt that young, inexperienced ravers are more susceptible to the dangers of polydrug use and overdose. As one raver observes: 'I see more and more irresponsible kids e-tarded out on the floor. You know it when you see it. Blatant drug use is starting to get out of hand' (cited in McCall 2001:121). For this reason, recent bylaws and safety regulations were welcomed by some as a positive step towards harm reduction. In reference to the presence of security and law enforcement at raves, one 22-year-old male stated: 'I'm all for it and I appreciate it, it's reassuring to know that there's people there to help you.' In Canada, the rave community has also taken measures to address these safety concerns, as harm-reduction organizations such as OATS (Ottawans Actively Teaching Safety) and TRIP (Toronto Rave Information Project) are managed by volunteer ravers, and the presence of these groups at raves is viewed as positive and non-threatening by most rave-goers. The appearance of 'Smart Bars' at raves offering fruit and natural energy-boosting drinks for sale further provide participants with natural alternatives for staying awake, compensating for some of the negative side-effects of dehydration and drug use.

Motivations for taking drugs: transformation as an intended outcome
An individual's motive and subsequent synthesis of the drug experience into his or her life were additional themes of concern voiced by subjects. It was suggested that adolescents will often lack the maturity to integrate their drug encounters for spiritual and psychological growth and in this way fail to respect, emulate and contribute to the PLUR edict. Underlying these sentiments is the suggestion of a code of acceptable conduct; there is a difference between individuals who attend raves to 'get high' and those who choose to integrate a psychoactive experience with personal development and transformation, the latter being consistent with the THE 'NATURAL HIGH' 149 philosophy of raving. Many emphasized that obtaining a level of maturity and self-awareness is key before entering the rave environment, particularly when ingesting a psychoactive:

Well you have to know yourself. You have to know exactly who you are when you go into a rave. The drugs, they can open up like ideas and possibilities in your head that you never knew you could possibly have. And for some people who have a hidden dark side like everybody does, it can be very traumatic if you're not ready for it. If you have some mental instability, weaknesses, it’s not the right time. (24-year-old male)

Not everybody can be a raver. Ecstasy will heighten who you are and that’s probably why some people snap, 'cause there are things that they try to hide or are not aware of themselves, and they’ll be shown. There’s going to be a big light projected on it so that’s why it’s not for everybody. You have to have a certain maturity. (23-year-old male)

It was also noted that this kind of maturity is lacking among adolescents, and for this reason young ravers should refrain from drug use: I don’t like seeing 15-year-old kids at raves, I just don’t. You have to have a reality base before you escape it. I believe that you need to know who you are, you need to have ground rules in your head before you take any drug. You need to have a footing of knowledge and I had no clue what the hell I was when I was 15...I don’t think you should be taking ecstasy when you're 15. (23-year-old male)

The following individual attributes his transition from taking drugs to 'get high' to taking drugs for personal growth as a combination of maturation and involvement in the rave scene: When we were young, we got high much less productively. I didn't grow really out of it. I had wonderful stories to talk about, weird stuff I saw in the sky, but I never really grew from my experiences with drugs. You learn something but you don't necessarily grow, and now I realize you do always like to keep something after a rave if you did it properly.... When you leave a rave you have to be more than you were when you came in. (22-year-old male)

This kind of division in terms of intended outcome of a drug experience was noted by Beck and Rosenbaum (1994), who discovered that MDMA users tend to be either spiritually/therapeutically focused in their pursuits or recreationally oriented. 150 MELANIE TAKAHASHI

Among the recreational users, the benefits of MDMA rest solely within the experience itself, whereas the therapeutically oriented individual feels that positive experiences and insights gained from MDMA could and should be incorporated into everyday life (ébid.:83). Ecstasy's ability to foster spirituality, personal development and life change has been documented at length (Cohen 1998; Eisner 1994; Metzner and Adamson 2001; Saunders 1996a, 199Gb; Watson and Beck 1991) and has been reported by ravers:

"Thanks, I think, to ecstasy, I was able to feel each person's situation, in all of its pain and implications... I have a new, real awareness of the global situation. I am graduating this semester and am now considering doing aid work in a Third World country for a while."

"I've grown a lot from E... The emotional vision, becoming wiser, becoming more aware of yourself is far more important than what E takes from you. You take from drugs and they take from you too. I always say that I took more out of drugs than drugs took out of me." (24-year-old male)

Ecstasy is significantly the most widely used drug at raves and the ingestion of MDMA for its characteristic transformational and empathogenic properties is consistent with the finding that spirituality and personal transformation are central themes associated with the rave experience (Takahashi and Olaveson 2003). A content analysis on 84 personal rave accounts revealed that 42 per cent of accounts characterized the rave experience as religious or spiritual, and well over one-third of the accounts sampled made reference to a life change or personal growth as a direct result of rave attendance (ibid.).

Another theme revealed by these accounts was the desire to create a better world through the application of PLUR (ibid.). Correspondingly, there is an expectation placed upon ravers to apply the knowledge gained from the rave experience outside the rave context to make a difference in the lives of others. This theme is evident in the following statement made by an anonymous raver who implores others to think about their motives for taking MDMA, encouraging users to promote the insights gained from ecstasy outside the rave environment:

"To all you E-heads out there, please, please, take the time to consider what you are doing to yourself, how it affects you and why you do it. E should be held as a sacred thing, not just something to do when you're bored. Get into the music, or something else, invite your passions to entrance you. Express what you've felt on E in the ‘real world’. Make a difference in people’s lives."

Similarly:
"Raves have indeed changed my life, and lucky as I am I have many wonderful friends with whom to share those changes! As I see it there wouldn't be any point to have been raving and living the whole rave experience without being able to extend those feelings and changes with my friends outside of raves." A hierarchy of drugs: ‘good’ versus ‘bad’ drugs

A hierarchy of drugs and substance users is a further indication of an underlying standard of conduct in operation. Many ravers emphasized the point that the ingestion of MDMA and other related substances is reserved for the rave environment, and it is this pattern of use which distinguishes ravers from drug addicts. The reference to ecstasy as a ‘holy sacrament’ reinforces the view that the rave experience is a ritual process wherein MDMA use is appropriate only in that ritual or sacred space (see Saunders 1996a:112; Malbon 1999:119-20). In reference to MDMA, one 21-year-old male informant stated: ‘For me the experience is sacred and special, by not doing it all the time it stays that way’

Many informants stressed that the rave experience is a process that includes more than the event alone; prescribed pre- and post-rave behaviors are well thought out and ritualized (see Saunders 1996a: 112-13; Malbon 1999:170-9). Thus, ecstasy, cannabis, and LSD, substances known to elicit a change in perspective, are deemed by some ravers to be more ‘acceptable’ than the ‘feel-good’ drugs such as heroin and cocaine.

Heroin and intravenous drug use is often considered socially unacceptable and taboo in the rave community (Power et al. 1996; Topp et al. 1999). According to one 21-year-old male, ‘heroine and cocaine are for stupid people with too much money’. Nitrous oxide was also viewed negatively by some subjects: ‘Some people will inhale nitrous oxide but that’s just pure stupidity’ (20-year-old female).

The ability to transform is a key component of the rave scene’s most popular rave drug, ecstasy. It is this unique property of the drug which may provide insight into the discontinued and infrequent drug user. The observation that the extraordinary nature of one’s first experience on MDMA can never be recaptured, making subsequent encounters less satisfying, was a consistently reported theme among subjects. The opinion that ‘ecstasy can teach you things, force you to see things differently, but there’s a limit and once you’ve reached it, you’re better off letting it go and preserve your neurons’ (20-year-old female) was a common sentiment.

The decision to limit or discontinue ecstasy use also has a physiological basis; frequent and excessive use of the drug will gradually deplete serotonin levels in the brain, meaning that the empathogenic and ‘ecstatic’ qualities of the drug will eventually cease, leaving only the amphetamine-like properties (Reynolds 1999:86). While some ravers attempt to preserve MDMA’s core properties by resorting to polydrug use, many others opt to limit MDMA consumption, and some elect to discontinue drug use altogether.

I encountered a number of individuals in the latter two groups throughout the course of my research — individuals who were specific in pointing out that the transformations resulting from past psychoactive substance encounters provided them with the ability to 152 MELANIE TAKAHASHI attend raves and attain similar experiences naturally. As I will now discuss, there are biological and psychological explanations for this commonly reported phenomenon. Ritual, flashbacks and neural tuning

Neural tuning refers to a ‘permanent change in the central nervous system (CNS), resulting from repeated experience of a particular condition of the nervous system which makes the individual more susceptible to re-establishment of that same condition’ (Castillo 1995:25). Neural tuning occurs when the balance of the sympathetic (ergotropic) and parasympathetic (trophotropic) activity of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) shifts as a result of continued stimulation of one system, leading to an activation response in the other (see Gellhorn 1969; Gellhorn and Kiely 1972). Under normal conditions, these systems are antagonistic to each other, meaning that stimulation of one will inhibit activation of the other. However, maximal stimulation of either system can produce a kind of spillover effect, resulting in the simultaneous discharge of both systems. Maximal stimulation of the ergotropic and trophotropic systems is associated with "the most intense forms of mystical experience and may lie at the heart of compelling spiritual experiences, meditative states, near-death experiences, and other types of human experiential phenomena" (Newberg and d'Aquili 2000:256). Many elements present in ritual (i.e. repetitive auditory and visual stimuli, dancing, and the ingestion of psychoactives) lead to the simultaneous discharge of the ANS subsystem, which can be expressed as profound alterations in consciousness and even a reorganization of personality (Laughlin et al. 1992:146).

Mechanisms such as these are commonly referred to as drivers (ibid.:146), and there now exists extensive literature on the psychobiological effects of driving mechanisms, drawn from cross-cultural research (see d'Aquili and Laughlin 1975; 1996; Gellhorn and Kiely 1972; Lex 1975; Mandell 1980; Neher 1961, 1962; Turner 1983; Winkelman 1986, 1997, 2000). Although neural tuning can occur after initial exposure to one or more of these driving mechanisms, learning plays an essential role as rituals are usually repeated throughout the life-cycle, fostering the development of new neural network patterns and the reinforcement of existing structures (re-tuning).

Research on the mind states referred to as trance and ceremonial possession indicates that personal beliefs and expectations, setting, and, most importantly, past experience are essential to trance induction (see Ervin et al. 1988; Rouget 1985; Ward 1984). I argue that what has been commonly referred to as the flashback phenomenon can be grounded within the framework of neural tuning. Recent publications on psychedelic drug flashbacks have departed from the classical biochemical and pathological explanation to suggest that the spontaneous re-experience of sensations originally associated with a previous drug encounter are the product of learning, environmental context, and personal expectation. Ecstasy, in addition to other synthetic drugs associated with the rave scene, has been reported to induce flashbacks among its users (see Batzer et al. 1999; Leikin et al. 1989; Lerner et al. 2000; Matefy et al. 1978; Metzner and Adamson 2001; Seymour and Smith 1998).

THE 'NATURAL HIGH' 153 I contend that psychoactive ingestion (specifically MDMA), in tandem with additional driving mechanisms present in the rave context, may produce simultaneous discharge of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system and subsequent neural tuning. Continued participation in the rave environment and repeated exposure to the rave event's driving mechanisms, such as dancing and repetitive auditory and visual stimuli, strengthen and develop previously tuned structures such that participants, over time, become adept at re-attaining these states naturally. Previous experiences can therefore be elicited with the presence of a limited subset of the original driving mechanisms, including, in some cases, only one. The reported change in perspective and the indication that after a period of raving one can eventually attend events and ‘tap into’ a previously drug-induced state naturally are consistent with what has been reported cross-culturally among societies where ritual and the experience of multiple realities are integrated in the culture’s cosmology. MDMA and neural tuning at raves: The altered states of consciousness fundamental to raving are not only regularly sought out by participants, but DJs are quite proficient at actively stimulating these experiences among the dancers. The ability to drive participants to the state of ‘ecstasy’ is part of the DJ’s craft. It is inscribed in their technique and is a measurement of their skill. DJs are ultimately responsible for the group’s consciousness and experience at a rave as ‘they create the state of mind and the buzz for everybody in the room...they can crash it or they can take it up as they choose’ (25-year-old male). It is for this reason that some have referred to the DJ as a ‘techno-shaman’ (see Hutson 1999; ENRG 2001).

Techno music has been correlated with an increase in heart rate and systolic blood pressure, alterations in levels of neurotransmitters, peptides and hormonal reactions, in addition to changes in emotional state (Gerra et al. 1998). As well as the auditory constant of techno music, participant use of drums and whistles and the photic stimulation of lasers and strobe lights have the potential to activate alpha and theta brain waves characteristic of trance and visionary states (Neher 1961). Conditions of extreme physical exertion such as prolonged dancing activate the body’s endogenous opiate system, wherein endorphins are secreted from the pituitary gland, resulting in an increase in delta and theta waves (Winkelman 1997:400) and the symptom of euphoria and analgesia. Prolonged dancing leading to fatigue, hyperventilation and oxygen and blood sugar depletion may synergistically produce hypoglycaemia and a hallucinatory experience (Winkelman 2000:148). Overheating from such extensive motor activity, in addition to exposure to the high temperatures generally present at raves, are further triggers which activate the release of endogenous opiates (ibid.: 151). The tendency for ravers to fast or limit food intake before, during and after an event, as was observed during fieldwork, is yet another trigger of alteration in consciousness.

Winkelman notes that fasting not only makes individuals more susceptible to trance states (1986: 179), but hypoglycaemia, a consequence of fasting, can intensify auditory driving produced from repetitive rhythmic stimuli (ibid.:178). Further, sleep deprivation has been noted to invoke brain activity typical of trance states (ibid.:176). Despite the presence of these natural driving mechanisms at raves, MDMA continues to have a dominant role in the subculture, and this may be due to the fact that the altered experience being sought out can be achieved with little effort. While over 90 per cent of the world’s cultures recognize and seek out altered states of consciousness (ASCs) (Bourguignon 1973), Euro-American society has tended to discount ASCs in favour of ‘rational’ thought as represented by the waking phase of consciousness. The failure to explore these states of consciousness in our culture has led to what Laughlin et al. (1992) label monophasic consciousness. Individuals socialized in a monophasic culture are not trained to attend to or develop their own personal phenomenology. For the monophasic individual, psychoactive experimentation provides an easy and immediate access to an ASG, and these substances have the ability to tune and retune the autonomic nervous system with little effort (Laughlin et al. 1992). According to Seymour and Smith, 'when one takes a psychedelic drug, that conditioning breaks down and one is aware of a whole new range of sensory material' (1998:241). This kind of new awareness was described by one informant as 'a key that opens you up to new ways of seeing things; it doesn't expand your mind but rather places you in a higher position from which you can see the world' (23-year-old male).

Some ravers who have taken psychoactives describe being 'on the same wavelength' with other psychoactive users (see also Malbon 1999:132), and this kind of mutual understanding implies a level of shared neural tuning among users. Statements such as 'when I meet someone who has raved, we don't even need to say a word to each other, we just know how the other feels' (22-year-old male), in addition to the frequently reported feeling of 'connectedness' at rave events, are indicative of the shared experience of neural tuning.

Not only did ravers refer to other members of the subculture as 'family,' but the opinion that one is better understood by another raver as opposed to a family member or friend who doesn't rave was frequently expressed: 'I have a childhood friend who doesn't take drugs, doesn't drink alcohol, doesn't rave. I know him very well but he doesn't know me very well. He knows me in a way but there's a whole aspect of emotions and experience that he has no idea I have' (24-year-old male).

Consistent with the aforementioned code of conduct, personal growth and transformation are expected outcomes of the drug experience among ravers. This expectation not only prescribes the context of drug ingestion for the rave setting, but also favours the selection of substances which enable the individual to obtain new knowledge or awareness from the experience. Research on trance states suggests that learning and past experience are fundamental to ASC induction, and this process is also alluded to by rave participants.

Many informants were aware of the fact that the music and dancing alone are enough to produce an ASG; however, they also emphasized that one must learn to attend to these natural driving mechanisms and MDMA can accelerate and facilitate this process. As I mentioned earlier, a number of informants pointed out that after a period of taking psychoactives, drugs were no longer required to achieve an altered state. This sentiment is expressed in the following 25-year-old male's statement: 'Once you're done experimenting, you’ve done this for two years of your life, once you've done that, you don’t have to search for that, you can go to events sober and still have just as much fun as you did when you were messed up five years ago, it’s not necessary to find that state of consciousness through drugs.' (25-year-old male)

Neural tuning is not only implied in these statements; some participants are very precise about how MDMA and other psychoactive substances operate in their systems. In referring to his own personal experience with ecstasy, Simon Reynolds suggests that an appreciation for and bodily reaction to the music can only be attained through an initial encounter with MDMA: 'Could you even listen to this music 'on the natural', enjoy it in an unaltered state? Well, I did and do, all the time.' But whether I'd feel it if my nervous system hadn't been reprogrammed by MDMA is another matter. Perhaps you just need to do it once, to become sens-E-tized, and the music will induce memory rushes and body flashbacks. (Reynolds 1999:139) To an outsider, techno music can sound repetitive, monotonous and incomprehensible as it defies the characteristics of conventional music. Rave music is comprised of rhythm and sound; it is anonymous, continuous, cyclical, and in this way it challenges the listener to develop new listening skills (Fritz 1999:76). According to Fritz, rave music demands a certain concentration and focus so the ‘listener becomes closer to being a part of the musical process rather than a passive audience’ (zbid.:6). Characterized as a three-dimensional sound specifically designed to penetrate the body (ébid.:76), according to many participants MDMA facilitates the ability to grasp the music such that musical receptivity transcends the auditory to include all the senses. The natural outcome of this embodied musical awareness is expressed through dancing, and MDMA's role in this kind of learning sheds light on the consistent finding that music and dancing outweigh drugs as the dominant appeal of raves. Although the relationship between techno music and ecstasy is noted by Reynolds to be one that has evolved into a ‘self-conscious science of intensifying MDMA's sensations’ (1999: 85), it would seem that the reverse is also true: MDMA functions to intensify sensations already evoked by the music.

The embodied experience of musical perception, and MDMA's facilitation in acquiring this knowledge, is evident in the following respondents' statements:

Flashbacks at raves: neural tuning

The term 'flashback' most often refers to a spontaneous re-experience of images, physical sensations or emotional states associated with a previous drug encounter (McGee 1984:273). Although the etiology of flashbacks has long been a focus of debate, I argue that the association between the flashback phenomenon and a psychoactive substance is our culture's way of explaining and categorizing the process of driving mechanisms and neural tuning. Generally, it is the individual who experiences psychological disturbances with flashbacks who seeks out medical attention (Seymour and Smith 1998:247), and this has introduced a sampling bias which has supported the tendency to regard flashbacks as pathological. Analysis of flashback occurrences among a random sample of psychedelic users, however, suggests that most individuals characterize flashbacks as positive and non-threatening in nature (see Batzer et al. 1999; McGee 1984; Matefy 1980; Matefy et al. 1978; Schick and Smith 1970; Wesson 1976). Examination of the triggers known to elicit flashbacks shows them to parallel a number of agents present at raves. Environmental stimuli which resemble the context in which the original experience occurred may trigger a flashback (see Matefy 1980; McGee 1984; Heaton 1975), and this has led some to view flashbacks as learned phenomena. Stimuli associated with specific experiences operate as memory cues which can trigger the re-experience of emotionally salient encounters that may or may not be associated with a particular drug. According to McGee, ‘the more similar the contextual stimuli are to those conditions prevailing at the time of the original storage of memories, the more likely the probability of their retrieval’ (1984: 277). While the location of rave events varies, there are a number of ‘contextual stimuli’ that are consistently present at raves. The techno music, crowds of dancers, glow-sticks, projections of psychedelic imagery and elaborate lighting systems can be expected at every event. These environmental factors are also conducive to this phenomenon since flashbacks are more likely to occur in conditions known to induce ASCs, such as stress, fatigue or reduced sensory input (Heaton 1975:157).

THE ‘NATURAL HIGH’

Whether the association is connected to a past drug encounter or previous exposure to a natural occurring ASC, the sensorial components of raves seem to trigger memory recall. Many informants noted immediate shifts in physical sensations and/or mind state upon entering the rave environment:

Fourteen thousand people jumping up and down and all you could hear was the banging of the floor, it was absolutely incredible. You walk in and all you see was this sea of people and all they had was two glow-sticks each, so 28,000 glowing objects jumping up and down, and just bang, that’s all you could hear. You couldn’t even hear the music ‘cause the banging on the floor was so loud. Absolutely incredible, I’m shivering just talking to you about it, but yeah it was phenomenal, it was an incredible feeling to walk in and just see this mass of people going nuts. I literally have goose bumps just talking about it. (24-year-old male)

Sometimes when I walk into a rave and smell the familiar scent of incense, the sight of the glow-sticks, and feel the overpowering beat of trance, I get this light-headed sensation and sense of weightlessness in my body that reminds me of the first experience I had on E. It’s awesome. (21-year-old female)

Similar sensations have also been reported by ravers when exposed to only one of the variables present at raves, such as listening to techno music at home:

It was 3.00 in the morning and this DJ played this song called ‘Air Tight’ and it's an incredible track, unbelievable song and the mode of response just listening to it at home, it still elicits the same response that it did that night when I was listening to it, and I have that experience every single time. (24-year-old male)

Personal expectation is also correlated with flashback experiences (see Matefy et al. 1978; Heaton 1975), suggesting that flashbacks are often sought out by drug users. According to one DJ, people attend raves with the expectation of reaching a transcendent experience. It is this anticipated physical and emotional ordeal that distinguishes a rave from a nightclub:

When you're going to a rave, you're going there particularly to experience a certain type of event. That’s what you're going there for. You’re going there to get this particular emotion, this particular sensation in this particular environment that you're looking for. You're going there to get it. (25-year-old male) Heaton (1975) found that by attending to relevant stimuli and blocking out external inputs, subjects were more likely to become aware of a broad range of psychedelic sensations. Some informants attributed their ability to recreate MDMA-like experiences by focusing on the music and bodily sensations while dancing:

"I believe that there's a very strong conditioned response when you take music and the pleasure that Ecstasy gives you, so I think that the mind can very easily extend that feeling of pleasure if you just focus on the music. I think lots of people don't take advantage of this, 'cause there is a way to extend the experience without drugs." (32-year-old male)

Ravers also talked about the ability to completely 'let go' while dancing and refer to this process as 'trance-dancing'. Although participants dance in groups, socialization on the dance floor is rare, as ravers will often refer to 'being alone among a crowd'. Some ravers described experiences involving the dissolution or disappearance of the ego through the process of dance. As one 32-year-old male recounts, "like I'm dancing, feeling empty, I cut all input from my senses and not physically but I'll close my eyes sometimes and once all the perceptions are gone, it's like being dead, like I don't exist anymore".

This also supports the notion that ravers are likely more proficient in inducing flashbacks, since flashbackers have illustrated greater adeptness than non-flashbackers at being able to lose themselves or 'relinquish personal control for the sake of a peak experience, and altering of consciousness' (Matefy 1980:552). Finally, there is an association between flashbacks triggered by marijuana, particularly in conjunction with LSD (see McGee 1984; Wesson 1976). This may shed some light on its widespread use in the Canadian rave scene; the underlying effects of state-dependent learning may encourage users to quit the class of synthetic drugs, favouring marijuana for its potential to induce MDMA flashbacks.

Conclusion

The majority of individuals who attend raves use psychoactive substances, and clearly the range and availability of synthetic drugs is on the rise in Canada. However, in the process of ascertaining the range and quantification of illicit substance use at events a growing category of rave participants has been ignored by academics. Examination of ravers' attitudes toward drugs has suggested that most ravers use these substances as tools to enhance the extraordinary bodily and emotional aspects of raving, which they believe to be primarily a product of the music, the dancing, and the crowd rather than the drug itself.

Underlying these attitudes is the existence of a code of acceptable behavior wherein psychoactive ingestion is associated with an intended outcome of learning, personal growth, and transformation. This expectation not only dictates that the context for ingestion should be limited to the rave locale, but has also influenced the drug of choice to be MDMA, a substance noted for its therapeutic and spiritual potential. In many cases, this kind of learning, which I have argued is 'neural tuning', has imparted to individuals the ability to reach a 'natural high' while in the rave environment. Although neural tuning can occur through repeated exposure to the natural driving mechanisms present at raves, psychoactive experimentation among individuals from a monophasic culture enables neural tuning that is immediate, and relatively effortless, among those who would otherwise be unacquainted with the potentials of natural ASC induction. The flashback phenomenon is evidence of the process of immediate tuning. Examining the triggers known to elicit flashbacks has illustrated that these triggers are all present at raves, and many participants have learned to manipulate these mechanisms to recreate natural highs that mirror past drug experiences. As this learning takes place, a growing number of participants argue that the same sense of community, abandonment, and transcendence can be attained from the music and dancing alone, and that these are the primary reasons for attending events. Although many ravers long for the "good old days" when raves were not contaminated by novel street drugs and blatant drug abuse, this research suggests that the original philosophy and perhaps vision of the rave movement are being kept alive by a small but potentially growing number of individuals who are clearly committed to the music, the dancing, and the vibe.

It should be noted that, although common themes and features of the rave scene are visible, it is not a homogenous subculture. The fragmentation of a unified genre of rave music and an accompanied style of raving to multiple genres—i.e. jungle, gabba, trance, Goa, hardcore and breakbeat, to name a few—has been witnessed worldwide. Thus not all ravers prescribe to PLUR and not all ravers are interested in personal growth and transformation. Individuals who are interested in the spiritual aspects of raving are more likely to listen to trance music and attend Goa trance events (Fritz 1999:190). Our survey research indicated that individuals who have had religious experiences at raves are much more likely to listen to trance music. The association between music preference and drug choice has also been noted by Weber (1999) and Reynolds (1999). Weber observed that in the greater Toronto area crystal methamphetamine is associated with jungle and techno and cannabis with hip-hop (1999: 327). Similarly, Pedersen and Skrondal (1999) found ecstasy use to be highest among house/techno rave-goers.

Most informants felt that the full effects of a psychoactive are more likely to be experienced on an empty stomach. The vomiting that can accompany the initial onset of MDMA was another reason for limiting food intake. Aside from beverages to prevent dehydration, food is generally avoided both during and after rave events since substances such as ecstasy and methamphetamine act as appetite suppressants.

Selecting ritual DJs, dancers and liminality in underground dance music

This chapter seeks to explore a contemporary performance arena where the liminal space the anthropologist Victor Turner believed once belonged to tribal ritual can be located—namely, that of underground dance music and its performance at raves and clubs. 

It is a suggestion he made throughout his writing, first appearing in The Ritual Process (1969), where he briefly mentioned the liminality of Halloween, attempts made by hippies to recreate certain ritual conditions under which spontaneous communitas might be conjured, and the ritual-ness of participating in groups as diverse as black youth street gangs, the Ku Klux Klan and Hell's Angels. In Dramas, Fields and Metaphors (1974), he grants three pages of (somewhat condescending) discussion to rock music scenes and how they might figure in his understanding of tribal communitas and ritual. In Process, Performance and Pilgrimage (1979a), he extended his acknowledgments of Western liminal practices to include the activities and initiation rites of religious or quasi-religious organizations such as churches, sects, clubs, fraternities, Masonic orders and secret societies. And by the publication of From Ritual To Theatre his scope of interest had widened so far as to include 'theatre, ballet, opera, film, the novel, printed poetry, the art exhibition, classical music, rock music, carnivals, processions, folk drama, major sports events and dozens more' (V Turner 1982:85, 86). Notwithstanding his perpetual distinction between the liminal and liminoid, Victor Turner believed that such activities and groups have discovered 'the cultural debris of some forgotten liminal ritual' (1979a:58) and somehow managed to excavate a connection to a numinosity thought lost to large-scale, complex societies.

Following his introduction to Richard Schechner in 1977 and a subsequent two-week workshop in experimental theatre, Turner discovered something of that elusive liminal energy and a sort of 'retribalization' among a spontaneous communitas of anthropology and drama students while 're-enacting' a series of Ndembu rituals. Perhaps encountering his own transformative threshold where, like the essence of liminality itself, he was betwixt and between the anthropologist's analytic endeavour to understand ritual and the dramatist's performative experience of ritualizing, Turner's accounts (1979b) of the workshop are suggestive of those anti-structural moments he characterizes as particular to ritual. Much of his final writing, some of it collected and edited after his death by his wife, Edith, took this to heart in declaring that '[t]he theatre and other performance arenas have taken over the liminal space that belonged to ritual' (E. Turner 1986:10).

Writing ritual-ness

The idea that performances of underground dance music are a contemporary manifestation of some ancient form of ritual is well established among participants of so-called rave and club cultures. From 'techno-shamanism', through 'neo-tribalism' to 'trance dancing', the language of ravers and clubbers is replete with references to a subculturally excavated sense of primitive numinosity. In the introduction to This Is Not a Rave, an insider's guide to Toronto's rave scene replete with first-person accounts, author Tara McCall expresses her own spiritual experience of the events:

Something magical happens to me during those twilight hours on Sunday morning. It is on the Sabbath that I always find my god. I am as nomadic as the others wandering from warehouse to warehouse to have my soul awakened. The music thunders through my flesh, the notes swim within my veins. DJs spin their scriptures with eloquence, zest and assurance. The bass rattles my lungs and beats in unison with my heart. Among scholars, many of whom count themselves as either longstanding or temporary participants in rave or club culture, there also seems to be an almost intuitive understanding and appreciation of the events as somehow transformative, transcendent, and quasi-religious.

For example, Rietveld refers to early house music events in Chicago as "a night-time church" (1998:129), Gore characterizes "the DJ as [a] high priest whose instrument is not the drum but the turntable" (1997:61), and Hutson suggests that a DJ "guides the ravers on an ecstatic journey to paradise—a presocial state of nondifferentiation and communitas" (1999:54). Such references have become central to the academic canon of rave and club cultures and reveal a set of a priori assumptions concerning underground dance music's ritual-ness. Given the theoretical prevalence of Birmingham's Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies (CCCS) in the literature on underground dance music, this is no surprise.

It is, however, something of an obstacle to understanding the processes through which rave or club events as socially interactive rituals unfold. Following Hall and Jefferson's (1976) study of British youth and the suggestion that virtually any collection of young bodies gathered under the banner of a subculture was engaged in rituals of resistance, Birmingham-inspired sociology and cultural studies have fallen short of addressing the structures and experiences of such rituals. This is largely because analyses informed by CCCS theory and method are marked by a disturbing lack of ethnographic material on the interactiveness of subcultural sites or events and the mediating role played by music and dance in many of those events—a disturbing trend considering the prevalence of music scenes in CCCS-inspired literature over the past 25 years.

Instead, music and dance are considered not as lived experiences but as static texts or signs to be read for some decodable political significance or as socially disembodied reference points used to illustrate current theories on deviance, class consciousness, commodity consumption, and stylistic resistance to the mainstream (Hall and Jefferson 1976; Hebdige 1979). Sarah Thornton's Club Cultures (1996) is one such example of this approach. In her neo-Marxist analysis of British ravers and clubbers, Thornton makes a number of allusions to underground dance music spaces as ritual, suggesting that clubbing is "a rite of passage" for British youth and that raves involve a "ritualistic passage" for their participants (ibid.: 57). Yet her discussion does not attend to any sense of movement or participation through such passages.

In a discussion of what might otherwise be deemed, following Turner, "social drama", Thornton investigates how specific and supposed conflicts (authentic/phoney, classless/classed, underground/mainstream) are played out through particular symbols (clothes, VIP rooms, record collections) of "subcultural capital". In identifying "subcultural ideologies" (ibid.: 6) shared by hierarchically ranked groups of participants, Thornton's analysis also seems relevant to the idea that rituals can be performances of contested power relations, directed towards the group and outsiders (see Harrison 1991). In avoiding the central role played by music and dance as performed events and concentrating on how conflict is played out through the successful consumption and signification of selecting ritual 169 subcultural signs, Thornton misses the most active illustrations of how her all-important insider/outsider dichotomy is resolved or transformed. This inattention to dramaturgical features is also characteristic of the post-structuralist approaches to rave and club cultures (Redhead 1993; Pini 1997; Rietveld 1998; Stanley 1997; Martin 1999) which, when invoking the ritual-ness of underground dance music without accounting for the central role of music and dance, construct idealized versions of raves and clubs rather than actual instances of situated, performed events.

The result is that references to raves and clubs as ritual events or to DJs as ritual specialists remain primarily metaphorical, anecdotal, and often culled from what might be called the ‘who feels it knows it’ approach of privileging informant testimonials. Readers interested in the co-construction of events by multiple participants are given little or no analysis of the specific performative contexts from which to understand how a house music event is like a church, how a DJ can be likened to a shaman, and how communitas is built from the dance floor.

Not even a recent initiate in rave or club culture would expect that what was lost can now be found simply by magically dressing up a venue, hoping a DJ will perform as he might have previously, or expecting a crowd of dancers instantly to commune. If an event is like a church, a DJ like a shaman, and a dance floor like communitas, it is because they are actively transformed as such through ongoing interactions between performers and participants as they experience music and dance.

How DJs and dancers engage in this potential for transformative experiences has only recently emerged as a topic for serious consideration by scholars. Until Fikentscher's (2000) ethnomusicological study of interactivity at New York City clubs, most authors simply provided clues as to the 'direct and reciprocal relationship between the DJ and his audience' (Langlois 1992:236). While the dance music press, insider accounts, and testimonials from DJs and dancers suggested a fertile ground for investigation, scholars tended to avoid the dialectical possibilities inherent in performance analyses or phenomenologically inspired investigations by simply treating such interactions as somehow ineffable.

With the publication of You Better Work! (2000), however, Fikentscher provided the first academic framework for understanding how a successful event is co-constructed vis-à-vis DJ-dancer interactions. I have taken up this general theme elsewhere in reference to the interactional work conducted by MCs in tandem with DJs and dancers at Toronto drum 'n' bass events (Gerard and Sidnell 2000). Both studies point to the temporalization and spatialization of events combined with structured performance techniques and social context as central features of what most participants consider to be essential ritualized events in their lives. Here, music and dance are the 'molecules of ritual' (V.Turner 1969:14), the combined and recombined aesthetic symbols or forms responsible for 'the structuring of structure' in all such events (Kapferer 1986:202). Such structuring and the process by which the aforementioned phenomena might occur can be further elaborated by considering van Gennep's three phases of ritual as they are applied to music (primarily) and dance (secondarily). 170 MORGAN GERARD
To investigate the "rave as ritual" hypothesis in the context of rave and club events, I discuss an event at Turbo Niteclub on Friday, 20 October 2001, in Toronto, Canada. By analyzing the spatialization of music, DJ-dancer interactions, and DJing as a ritually structured narrative, I illustrate how liminality is a constantly revisited theme and the root paradigm of rave and club cultures.

The spatialization of music
In his cross-cultural review of rites of passage, van Gennep maintained that transformation occurs during the successful movement between demarcated phases of separation (pre-liminal), transition (liminal), and incorporation (post-liminal). By suggesting that a "rite of spatial passage has become a rite of spiritual passage" (1960: 22), van Gennep locates transformative stages in space. If raving or clubbing can be likened to ritual, there must be some indication to participants that a separation from profane or secular space and time has occurred. Van Gennep characterized this phase as "passing through the door" (ebid.:20).

Thus, the obvious starting point for the study of the ritual process in underground dance music events would be outside the venue itself where people are awaiting entry. Turbo Niteclub is located in the centre of what is known as Toronto's entertainment district, a 2-kilometre stretch of clubs, restaurants, offices, and residential lofts in which traffic is directed one way west along Richmond Street and one way east along Adelaide Street. The club portion of Turbo's building is divided into two floors; during the night in question, local promotion company Lifeforce schedules drum 'n' bass in the basement and house, tech-house, and techno on the main floor.

The entrance door of the club faces south on Adelaide Street and is accessible by one of two line-ups: those entering the door from its west side are either ticket holders or waiting to pay cash at the admission door just inside the entrance; those entering the door from its east side hope to do so because their names are on the guest list. It's 10.30 p.m., and, arriving earlier than usual to take notes on DJ Tim Patrick's set upstairs, I wait in the guest-list line and hear Patrick's first record through the doors. Generally, two security personnel stand by the door conducting patrons to their respective line, while at the front of the guest-list line, a Lifeforce employee checks names on a clipboard and, if confirmed, gives tickets to those listed by the promoters, club owners, or featured DJs.

While Thornton has suggested we look at the line-ups and door policies of raves and clubs in order to understand how qualifiers based on age, race, gender, and sexuality allow for a culling of potential participants from the crowd inside (a process she connects to the inclusive/exclusive nature of such events), Turbo has no such policy except with regard to age. Even with an open-door policy, the highly structured organization of participants as they prepare to enter the club generates a great deal of anxiety: underage patrons worry they will be checked for identification and, if they have fake ID, wonder if it will get them through the door; those hiding drugs dread losing their party favours; ticket holders and those hoping to pay inside, if arriving during peak hours (1.00-3.00 a.m.), are concerned the club might be at capacity and they will have to wait until enough people leave before they are permitted entry; and, if they arrive before the official 1. 

At Turbo, immersion in the liminal is reflected in the club's design. Having passed the guest list, cleared security and presented my ticket through a glass booth, I am immediately directed inside by another security guard. Entering the club down a flight of stairs (which leads to the drum 'n' bass room in the basement), I then go upstairs, where Tim Patrick is playing a set of minimal house and tech-house to a sparsely populated room. At 10.45 p.m. this is no surprise; club events in Toronto rarely attract large crowds until 1.00 a.m. Although a number of people are mingling at bars, standing around the edges of the dance floor and sitting in the small area serving as a VIP room, nobody is dancing.

At Turbo, whether drum 'n' bass downstairs or house, tech-house and techno upstairs, for those 'watching' the dance floor from the vantage point of the VIP room or from the downstairs foyer or the bar, music is omnipresent and its palpable presence mediates all forms of social activity inside the club. But if dance is generally considered the central activity of such events, how do we account for non-dancing patrons in the context of raves and clubs as ritual? Previous scholarly works on underground dance music point us towards understanding dance's figurative role in relation to altered states of consciousness (Thornton 1996:60), building communitas (Fikentscher 2000:60), and going 'mad' or 'losing it' (Pini 2001). Like Turner's 'fertile nothingness' of liminality, where participants find themselves 'striving after new forms and structures' (V. Turner 1990:12), such accounts indicate that participants construct their own free, gestative cultural space, one that can be likened to spontaneous communitas. Removed from the dictates of discreet, polite Torontonian culture and given an opportunity to engage in ecstatic dance, participants discover those moments ‘when compatible people...obtain a flash of lucid mutual understanding on the existential level, when they feel that all problems, not just their problems, could be resolved; whether emotional or cognitive, if only the group which is felt (in the first person) as “essentially us” could sustain its inter-subjective illumination’ (V.Turner 1979a: 45). Yet throughout the course of the event it was observed that many occupants of the VIP room (as well as some of those drifting around the edges of the club) never once strayed onto the dance floor. Are such individuals peripheral to the ritual proceedings and, if so, who are they and what, if any, is their role? On this particular night, as is the case for most other events at the club, the occupants of Turbo's VIP room were mostly DJs, club and rave promoters, niche media pundits, and other industry insiders and their guests—in short, a demographic typical of most VIP rooms in contemporary club culture. While Thornton's analysis indicates that such figures are in possession of the most subcultural capital—markers of greater insider status which, she argues, betray the so-called egalitarian ethos of underground dance music events—I prefer to characterize their presence and role as indications of ‘normative’ communitas. Occupying a position removed from the dance floor, these ‘insider’ patrons (and a number of ‘regular’ clubbers allowed into the VIP room on this occasion) have a unique vantage point from which to observe and assess key aspects of the ritual proceedings: the conduct of the DJ; how occupants of the dance floor are attending to the music played, the DJ, and each other; and the reactions of their industry colleagues. Put simply they are able to monitor events in such a way as to make alternative judgements on the etiquette and efficacy of the performance. While it is common for promoters, DJs, media, and club owners to locate their participatory origins as former neophytes by regularly intoning such claims as ‘T'll always be a raver’ or ‘T’ll always be a club kid’, there is little doubt from the dance floor or from other VIPs that they stand out from the spontaneous and are staunchly rooted in the realm of the normative. As professionals, performers, entrepreneurs, etc., they are rarely caught in the throes of ecstatic dance. Instead, they are recognized for organizing, maintaining, and promoting the ‘utopian blueprint’ (V.Turner 1977:46) of the dance floor through activities which serve to contextualize events within a wider social and historical framework. Here, gossiping and networking serve to reinforce the social bonds of the community as one which exists both inside and outside dance (the activity) and clubs (the location); critically evaluating the event at hand affords promoters and DJs the opportunity to plan for and produce ‘better’ events in the future; attending events provides journalists and photographers with potentially valuable content for publication (which, in turn, serves reflectively to contextualize past performances); and informal business dealings enable entrepreneurs to perpetuate the ritual project as one which, if it is to continue, must confront the realities of event organization, commerce, and the concerns of local law enforcement. As brokers of what is variously labelled 'the scene', 'the culture' and/or 'the community', one might even suggest that, following Victor Turner's (1979a) characteristics of normative communitas, VIPs act as representatives (to the outside world) of a new social structure. This is particularly the case if one considers how promoters, DJs, club owners, and media collaborate in contextualizing and disseminating the reformative paradigm(s) of raving and clubbing to the everyday world. The central paradigm that Tave and club cultures offer to the everyday world is liminality itself.

Occurring record by record and interaction by interaction, liminality is presented and promoted as a transformational experience realized through music and dance. In order to illustrate this phenomenon, it is necessary to consider underground dance music both as an event which occurs through the programming and mixing of vinyl records by DJs for a dance floor, and as a variety of recorded music genres available on both vinyl records and CD. Both contexts reveal that liminality is the central aesthetic feature of underground dance music.

Techniques of liminality

As a recorded medium, underground dance music has been subject to a number of postmodernist investigations which marginally inform a discussion of liminality. Following Hebdige's (1987) analysis of the intersemiotic nature of sampling and pastiche in rap music, other scholars have pursued similar investigations into how techniques of composition locate underground dance music betwixt and between high and low culture, real and hyperreal music, black and white identity, and masculine and feminine subjectivity (Bradby 1993; Tagg 1994; Noys 1995; Thornton 1996; Rietveld 1998; Hutson 1999). For participants engaged in performances, however, there are less theoretical, more relevant features which directly evoke liminality.

Because most dance music records are produced by DJs primarily for their consumption by other DJs, reading underground dance music as a static text defeats the purpose of the music, which, ultimately, is to structure performances through vinyl records. That is, house, techno, and drum 'n' bass records work as tools DJs employ in the programming and mixing of sets. If one were to speak of emotion and meaning in house music, liminal features in underground dance music provide the most relevant starting point for understanding how DJs collaborate with participants to construct successful events.

During Tim Patrick's performance at Turbo, I observed four techniques of liminality as they occurred in both the records in his programme and the techniques he used to play them: filtering and looping, EQing and mixing. As the first DJ of the evening, Patrick's set began at 10.30 p.m. to an empty club. Twenty minutes later, there were 30 people mingling at bars and four people on the dance floor, only one of whom was dancing. By midnight, there were 35 people on the dance floor and approximately another 120 in the room. At this point, Patrick played what I identify as the first record of the evening exhibiting liminal characteristics: the combination of the filter and the loop. Both the filter and the loop, when heard individually or in tandem, like liminality in general, are not meant to produce immediate satisfaction (Broadhurst 1999). Rather, they are tension-, excitement-, and expectation-inducing effects intended to draw participants more fully into dance. Building from an ascending pattern, this particular filtered loop occupied 32 bars of the record in question. Its effect on the crowd was mixed: a number of the dancers recognized the effect as one which would likely precede a return to the thumping 4/4 pattern of the kick drum and thus began throwing their hands in the air energetically; others were unsure of the potential outcome and slowed their dancing in order to survey other participants, while approximately 10 people previously standing by the western bar abandoned their drinks for the dance floor. In each case, use of the filtered loop not only produced expectation and excitement but afforded participants an opportunity quickly to reflect on the state of the dance floor and their position vis-a-vis dance. With the dance floor half empty, by playing a record with a filtered loop, Patrick addressed and transmitted to the crowd the possibilities of what might be if participants would more fully attend the dance space.

The third liminal technique I wish to address is EQing. Throughout the course of his (and virtually every underground dance music DJ's set) Patrick was constantly manipulating the bass, mid and treble frequencies of the records, either as a means of mixing from record to record (i.e. dropping the bass out of the playing record to replace it with the bass of the next) or as an effect during the course of a single record. In cases where EQing is used during the body of a single record, it is done to affect the sense of time transmitted through music. From the familiar 4/4 pulse of the kick drum, which in house, tech-house, and techno makes up much of the performance's rhythmic narrative, Patrick temporarily suspended the dancers by dropping the bass out of the mix.

Throughout the course of my field research, I have observed two very distinct patterns in the way dancers react to this effect. The first involves club-culture neophytes; from the very beginning of the set, there were a group of four college-age women dancing together while facing each other in a circle. In Toronto, dancing together in a circle usually indicates novice status. When Patrick dropped the bass out of this first record, as if losing their footing or their timing, all four women paused, looked at each other in slight confusion, stopped dancing completely, and faced the DJ booth in unison as if looking for further instruction.

The second pattern observed involves club-culture initiands; approximately one metre to the left of the group of four was a single woman of a similar age dancing alone. While her Snug? clothes indicated a certain insider status, her reaction to the EQing demonstrated a practised engagement with liminality. Although there was a slight pause in her dancing as Patrick dropped the bass out of the mix, this woman maintained the flow of her movement and, likely counting the SELECTING RITUAL 175 record's time signature, increased the pace of her dancing at the exact point the bass was reintroduced into the mix.

Both reactions point to different levels of ritual experience. As such, dropping the bass out of a record demonstrates to dancers that they must obey the DJ not only by dancing but also by dancing together. Dropping the bass out of a record essentially functions as a levelling device—by interrupting the flow of time as measured through the kick drum, the DJ is able to assess and re-synchronize the dance floor. As Turner has noted, such actions on the part of those conducting rituals are essential in creating the prerequisite 'uniform condition' (V.Turner 1969:95) of spontaneous communitas. Within the span of twenty minutes, with four records played and two additional cases of similar EQing, the effects of this ‘grinding down’ of neophytes were observed: the group of four women continually surveyed the more experienced dancer to their left and, becoming more familiar with both the effects of EQing and the single woman’s corresponding reaction to the technique, no longer hesitated as noticeably and, progressively, reacted in a similar fashion. Mixes are the fourth, and most important, liminal technique. [1°] In all performances of underground dance music, every mix is a period of ambiguity for both the DJ and the dancers. Generally favoring the longer, more drawn-out mix in which he overlays two records simultaneously through EQing for a minute or longer, Tim Patrick is considered to be one of Toronto’s best technical DJs and rarely ‘trainwrecks’ a mix. [!!] However, there is always the possibility of error or a skipping record, which will reflect poorly on his supervisory ‘shamanic’ role in the proceedings. Although Fikentscher has noted that the programming of records is one mark of a ‘good’ DJ, mixing is equally important as both a technical skill and an art. A DJ’s reputation and career are, in part, based on mixing skill, and between every record played, mistakes can be costly for both performer and participants. For dancers, mixes are liminal in that they can sometimes be uncertain periods between the rhythmic structures of records. During this period, the ‘total involvement’ characteristic of Victor Turner’s (1979a:55) notion of flow can be broken by a poor mix. In such cases, the flash of spontaneous communitas is potentially threatened; dancers are often drawn out of their ecstatic state; they return to an increased awareness of both setting and self, and sometimes abandon the dance floor. A successful mix, however, allows for a continuous flow between mental, musical, and physical states. It is generally in this transitional period that DJs (when their mix is recognized as not only technically successful but also innovative and/or daring) and dancers (when enthusiasm, energy, drugs, and alcohol seem to best motivate a packed dance floor) find themselves caught up in those moments of spontaneous communitas that ravers and clubbers refer to as a ‘peak’. In his popular pseudo-ethnography of New York City clubs, Miezitis describes this experience as: a peak of excitement and energy when the music is most stimulating, when the crowd is the largest and the most loosened up, most energetic, and when the lights and theatrics resemble a grand stage finale. The peak is like a sexual climax when everything and everyone flows together, a moment when time seems erased. (Miezitis, in Fikentscher 2000:41) Variously signified by dancers throwing their hands in the air, blowing whistles, shouting or, in the case of drum ‘n’ bass, calling for a ‘rewind’, !2 peak moments unite the dance floor often through the release of tension built up during the mix and the fulfillment of expectations delivered by an almost prescient programming on behalf of the DJ. Whether such moments are triggered by the introduction of new rhythms, feints or breaks in rhythmic structure, an acceleration of tempo (Rouget 1980), or simply by mixing from one ‘hot record to another, the result is often a trance-like euphoria that, ultimately, defines a DJ’s set and the dancers’ experience as ‘successful’. Much of that success rests on the DJ recognizing that every set is a narrative with ritualistic consequences received and reflected in dance. With the traditional Western predilection for a beginning, middle, and end (Grimes 2000: 107), narrative is often likened to a journey. As a joint endeavour, the DJ or "soundscape architect" (Fikentscher 2000: 8) skilfully draws from a blueprint of performance techniques to resituate the dance floor, transporting it from "here" to "there." Rather than simply beginning and ending a set with interspersed peak moments, the passage process in a DJ's set is primarily encoded in every mix between records.

Identifying the stages as they unfold in a DJ's performance relies on an intricate observation of mixing techniques and an ear trained in the complexities of the specific musical forms. Given these, it is possible to isolate stages in a mix corresponding to van Gennep's tripartite model. First, separation is the point where the DJ indicates structural and temporal change through a type of narrative foreshadowing. By EQing the bass out of the forthcoming record, brief vocal, instrumental, and secondary rhythmic segments (such as a high-hat or snare) of the forthcoming record can be inserted into the mix. Second, transition is the ambiguous phase during which, for those trained in underground dance music's performance idiom, it is apparent that two tracks are being played simultaneously. This phase can last between one and five minutes, usually involving a delicate manipulation of the EQ in which the 4/4 pulse of one or both records is removed from the mix to synchronize "the structural past and the structural future" (V. Turner 1990:11) of two rhythmically independent tracks. Rietveld’s This Is Our House 21 Drop Bass Network's Jesus Raves, 29 June 2002, Racine, Wisconsin Source: Drop Bass Network THE SECOND COMING 22 Drop Bass Network’s Second Coming, 31 December 2000, Madison, Wisconsin Source: Drop Bass Network

Selecting Ritual 177 distinct records into a seamless mix. Finally, incorporation is that point at which the DJ fully completes the transition to the proceeding track, leaving behind all traces of the former record and returning listeners/dancers to the more familiar simplicity of one record. This can be achieved by progressively EQing all three channels from one record out of the mix: immediately, by punching a kill switch; gradually, by lowering the main volume control of the channel in question; or quickly, by moving the cross-fader completely to the desired channel.

Dancing passages

As noted in the case of EQing as a liminal technique, mixing as a passage process is received in a variety of ways depending largely on a dancer’s knowledge of underground dance music’s performance aesthetics. While neophytes make their first ritual passage through events somewhat tentatively, the initiated are more sure-footed. Throughout many of Patrick’s mixes, the excitement and expectation of the separation phase often went relatively or completely unnoticed by less experienced participants, while more experienced dancers displayed their cognizance of impending changes through gestural shifts such as sweeping or stabbing hand movements in sync with the impending record’s secondary rhythmic structure or a monitoring glance to the DJ booth.

Recognizing this initial threshold in the mix, such reactions illustrate the extent to which experienced dancers are fully embedded in the ritual process and how less experienced dancers are yet to develop the same level of ritual skill and/or knowledge. For example, it was observed that less experienced dancers often hesitated and surveyed others for cues throughout each phase. In the case of more experienced dancers, many of whom seemed either to know or to predict forthcoming changes, there were no awkward pauses and their understanding of, and participation in, the structure and timing of mixes was displayed through the blowing of whistles, throwing hands in the air and glances of affirmation between friends.

This final phase of the mix presents opportunities for dancers to distinguish themselves from non-dancers as actively managing their membership or sense of belonging in a collaborative community at the nucleus of the ritual proceedings. For dancers, successful movement through the mix completes the passage process in a way not accessible to those off the dance floor. One might even suggest that the more mixes one dances through, the more fully incorporated one becomes in the new community.

Furthermore, over the course of a DJ’s set, and after each cycle is successfully repeated (particularly in cases when peaks occur), participants might undergo an accelerated transcendence where the combination of music, dance and, sometimes, drugs results in a heightened awareness of what informants often refer to as the ‘vibe’—that elusive and ineffable quality of underground dance music events which defines a ‘totally sick’ night out. Yet, throughout the course of this event, many participants on the dance floor regularly disengaged themselves from dancing in order to buy drinks, go to the toilet, etc. By taking temporary reprieves, dancers were able to monitor the proceedings and reflect on their own perception of and 178 MORGAN GERARD participation in events as well as the agency of others. But because the narrative of a DJ's set is cyclical and liminality is always revisited, underground dance music events allow a fluidity of fully engaged participation and unregulated reintegration into dancing at any point. In most cases, it was observed that, within the span of a single, complete mix, most participants returning to the dance floor found themselves fully incorporated into that cultural space. During his set, beginning at 10.30 p.m. and finishing with Donald Glaude playing his first record at 1.00 a.m., Patrick played a total of 22 different records with 21 mixes connecting them. With 21 opportunities to encourage liminally located interactions between dancers, it took 90 minutes for Patrick and a particularly lethargic Toronto club crowd to find some sense of collective expression. After he dropped the bass out of the first eight bars of Harley & Feller's 'Deep Sensation' at midnight, more than 200 people were on the dance floor. For the next hour, Patrick managed to lead dancers further away from the world they left behind at the door and closer to club culture's promised land of transcendent dance. Although it was not Turbo's most successful night, Tim Patrick maintained his status as a DJ cult leader, and 600 people were well on their way to becoming "essentially us". Even the four college girls had broken a sweat and their circle. Having participated in this rite too many times to count, I call it a night at 4.00 a.m. Donald Glaude has whipped the crowd into a frenzy with a set of progressive, funky breaks, and Stretch & Hooker have just mixed their way into their third record. Temporally, my incorporation might be somewhat premature. This party will continue until sunrise and, while other patrons will also drift out of the club before closing, many will celebrate something of a triumphant return to the world upon greeting the dawn. For some, incorporation might be prolonged at private after-parties where, over breakfast and before returning home, talk of the event serves to interpret the performance both within the framework of group and individual participation and within the context of past performances. Spatially—past security, out of the club and into the almost deserted street—my return to the everyday world is marked by the knowledge that I can always return next weekend. While less frequent and more anticipated summer events such as the World Electronic Music Festival! perhaps fit more neatly into van Gennep's spatialization of ritual passages (an extended pilgrimage to the site, a longer period of being sequestered in the bush, a protracted return home), the frequency of Lifeforce Fridays at Turbo suggests a less idealized version of incorporation. The reality is that the orthodox boundaries set by choice and obligation, seriousness and play, or agrarian and industrial prevent underground dance music events from being 'airbrushed' (Grimes 2000:94) enough to match Turner's inclination for viewing activities in popular culture through the lens of tribal ethnography. Instead of efficiently returning to the mundane world as adults or other elevated social categories, participants receive their incorporative recognition as valued initiates only by returning to the ritual community itself. Turner's 1979 study emphasized the role of liminality in underground dance music, offering new cultural paradigms. Liminality is the root paradigm of underground dance music, according to Turner's definition. The author argued that dance serves as the primary conduit for liminal, transformative experiences in the lives of ravers and clubbers. Dance promotes interconnectedness, reconfigures the body beyond individual ego limitations, and offers numerous health benefits, both spiritual and physical.

Underground dance music events have become a global phenomenon over the last decade. This might indicate a more complete and socially recognized ritual incorporation for participants. The liminal experiences produced by the music-dance continuum are transformative at both micro and macro levels.

The author suggests that underground dance music's presence in popular culture is due to the multidimensional liminal experiences it offers, rather than resistance or postmodernist assertions. The transformative, transcendent, or quasi-religious nature of these experiences is unknown and largely irrelevant. The focus is on investigating the form of club events and how liminality is encoded through performance.

In conclusion, the author hopes to extend future inquiries into rave and club cultures beyond the metaphorical and into the actual. As the author walks home, they are struck by the emic suspicion that Victor Turner's quest for retribalization is well underway. The legal drinking age in Toronto (and the entire province of Ontario) is 19. Although Turbo had previously been an all-ages venue with a wristband giving access to roped-off bar areas, that policy changed for many events following the summer of 2000. Prohibited substances at Toronto raves and clubs include all illegal drugs, weapons, and food or drinks from the outside. While patrons at such events generally agree that security should confiscate weapons, the fact that many cross the entrance threshold while concealing Ecstasy, marijuana, cocaine, and other illicit drugs underscores the conflicting agendas of participants and those of promoters, club owners, and the police. Considering that four Ecstasy-related deaths occurred in Toronto between 1999 and 2002, one might suggest that some clubbers and ravers are notoriously prepared to flirt with substances many believe to be central to producing heightened states of liminality.

I refer to flyers, event phone lines, advertising, magazines, websites, and other promotional tools, which are largely responsible for conveying information about the ‘scene’, events, DJs, etc. While a number of both rave and club DJs have taken to using CD mixing technology in their sets, on the night in question only vinyl records were used. Filtering refers to a method of digital production in which sound is shaped by reducing or increasing the loudness of certain frequencies by processing specific sound samples through an 18dB octave low-pass filter. The effect is rather like ascending or descending through sound. Looping refers to a process where a sample—such as a word, spoken or sung phrase, or a particular instrumental hook from a horn or guitar (most often taken from classic disco and funk records)—is edited in a repeating cycle throughout a section of the record. Both digital effects are often created by producers using an Akai $1000 stereo 16-bit linear sampler, first available in 1985. EQing refers to a process through which DJs manipulate the frequency spectrum of vinyl records. Most DJ mixers feature three knobs controlling the bass, mid, and treble ranges fed to the amplifier and speaker system.

In Toronto, circle dancing generally indicates that patrons have been schooled in clubbing primarily at Top 40 clubs, where the ‘female huddle’ is often employed to rebuff male advances. Snug is a Toronto-based clothing label worn mainly by ravers and clubbers across North America. Mixing, spinning, selecting, and DJing all refer to a particular performance idiom in which DJs often seamlessly connect and combine separate records into what is recognized as a whole performance. Although being a DJ necessarily involves related activities such as buying records, practicing privately, and programming records for public play, mixing is the most visible activity of the DJ. Its importance in the relevant cultures cannot be understated: DJ booths at clubs and raves are often hawkishly watched over by would-be DJs hoping to learn some tricks of the trade; the various dance music media, including the liner notes of DJ-mixed CDs, often refer to and promote the technical mixing prowess of certain DJs; and, while an impressive record collection and the skill to program records over the course of a performance are highly valued, DJs who boast the skills to perform intricate, difficult, and often the longest mixes are generally hailed as the best 'bricoleurs' (Langlois 1992:235), 'soundscape architects' (Fikentscher 2000:8) and masters of 'a cult following' (Gore 1997:62). 11 'Trainwrecking' is one of many terms describing a mix gone wrong, generally a clash between two portions of separate records when the DJ has failed to correctly beat match one record to another. 12 As Simon Jones (1988:30) defines it, this consists of the 'interruption and constant "cutting-back" of a popular record to its opening bars...to increase the sense of drama and anticipation amongst the audience', a practice which, along with 'the DJ's exhortations and interjections...help[s] to socialise the dance event as a whole, by making it "live" and turning it into a creative performance' (1988:30). 13. The World Electronic Music Festival is a three-day event held over the second weekend in July outside of Toronto. Organized and promoted by local promotion company Destiny (in conjunction with Lifeforce and other niche music promoters), the event has been variously located in a farmer's field, on a beach, and in a national park. 14 I refer here not only to the popularity of rave and club events in various countries around the world but also to the use of underground dance music in other media (television advertising, film soundtracks, etc.), the use of images specific to underground dance music (the resurgence of the vinyl record and record players in various advertising) and the fetish-like popularization of rave and club fashion in the mainstream.

I begin by examining the formation of UK garage music, highlighting the heavy influence from gospel music and religious practices within the Baptist church, in terms of both its musical structure and delivery. I will then pay particular attention to some of the unique features of UK garage, such as the importance of the Sunday scene, the constant dialogue developed between MCs, DJs and participants, and the centrality of pirate radio, which distinguish this scene from others in London. I will examine the role of the modern MC and explore its link with that of the religious preacher and consider pirate radio as the spiritual home of UK garage.

The chapter intends to provide readers with an understanding of the spiritual and religious influences involved in the production and consumption of UK garage and to reveal the way in which these processes are mediated. This chapter draws on various primary and secondary sources, and is influenced by my own experience and involvement within dance culture.

I am currently a PhD candidate researching dance music, drug use and the information needs of London’s UK garage and underground trance and techno scenes. I have chosen to use ethnography to examine both scenes through insider status in a similar way to previous dance culture scholars (Thornton 1995; Rietveld 1998; Malbon 1999; Bennett 2000; Fikentscher 2000). Researchers who adopt this method are encouraged to ‘locate or situate’ themselves within the research, establishing their relationship to their subject area (Back 2001).

In doing so, I can now appreciate how my previous experience as a consumer of dance music since the late 1980s and as a DJ, promoter, drugs counsellor and dance outreach worker since the 1990s has informed my methodology and translated into my ethnographic research practice. These roles have not only provided me with crucial insights and improved my understanding of dance culture, but in addition helped me to develop networking techniques required for gaining access to specific areas of my research field. These factors, combined with living in London and being constantly exposed to the current sounds of pirate radio, have enabled me to view the constantly changing landscape of the capital’s dance culture.

Scene fragmentation

To understand the development of UK garage, it is important first to consider the process of scene fragmentation which began in the early 1990s and consequently led to the formation of an array of interconnected scenes comprising Britain’s wider dance culture. This process is linked to early attempts aimed at restricting the development of British dance culture through the introduction of various legal measures. These began in December 1989 when Graham Bright, Conservative MP for Luton South, sponsored a Private Member's Bill, which later became the Entertainments (Increased Penalties) Act 1990. This legislation raised the level of fines for breaching the licensing laws from £2,000 to £20,000 and introduced a maximum six months prison sentence for those organizing unlicensed parties (Collin 1997:111-12). The act was later strengthened when the then Home Secretary, Douglas Hurd, granted the police additional powers to confiscate equipment used at these unlicensed events (Push and Silcott 2000:60). Other amendments to the Local Government Act 1963, the Private Places of Entertainment Act 1967, the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982, and the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 were all clearly aimed at the early 'acid house' phase of dance culture (Redhead 1997: xi). Later, the introduction of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 crucially shifted focus, in that it became the first Act to place restrictions on individuals attending or attempting to attend unlicensed events.

Throughout the early 1990s, the British police and local authorities pursued a continual crackdown on illegal parties, which coincided with the liberalization of licensing laws, as clubs' opening hours were extended while promoters were encouraged to organize events under a regulated framework. This resulted in a gradual demise of 'illegal' events held in unlicensed premises that took several years to transpire, as the majority of party organizers moved their operations towards nightclubs and other licensed venues.

Consequently, divisions began to emerge in the early 1990s, as dance-music participants began to fragment and mutate into smaller social groupings focused around specialized subgenre consumption (Newcombe 1992:7-8). Many of these groups contributed new discourses to dance culture by adapting it to suit their own needs and sensibilities (Collin 1997:5). This ongoing process of restructuring continues to produce an array of interconnected scenes that combine to form the wider British dance culture.

Currently, throughout London, specific scenes focusing on UK garage, underground trance and techno, and drum 'n' bass music have continued to adapt and adopt an array of supporting structures to encourage their development in an increasingly competitive market. This has included the creation of scene-specific niche media in the form of magazines and websites dedicated to certain genres, coinciding with an increase in specialized record shops catering for individual or related scenes.

Distinct forms of visual imagery associated with these scenes have emerged and are now clearly visible in the advertising and marketing of events. When discussing flyer designs, Nathan Brett suggests that, as a medium, flyers 'boast more freedom of visual expression than almost any other area of commercial art and design' (1996:1). Brett also asserts that, in contrast to the images of rock and pop musicians, dance music lacks an obvious visual focus. Therefore, flyers are left to convey the 'spirit, emotion or vibe of a club' (ébid.: 1), which is why UK garage flyers have adopted slick design protocols that often incorporate sexualized imagery of female clubbers and references to champagne. Reflecting the glamorous dress code associated with UK garage events and the upwardly mobile aspirations of its participants, this design style is clearly distinguishable from the psychedelic imagery favored by the underground trance and techno scene, which alludes to its participants' favored repertoire of recreational drugs.

More recently, flyer-distribution companies have begun to create scene-specific flyer packs, handed out at related events or distributed through associated record shops, adding to a further separation of musical scenes existing in London. It's a London thing

Since the late 1990s, UK garage music has been a predominant feature on London's unlicensed network of pirate radio stations (Braddock 2000:66) and the scene has up until recently dominated much of the capital's clubland. Participants at UK garage nights generally reflect London's multicultural and multi-religious diversity. Second- and third-generation Afro Caribbean, South and East Asian, Greek, Turkish, and Irish youth are an integral part of the scene, and at events held in London, there is usually an equal mix of white and ethnic-minority participants, the majority of whom were born in the UK. However, this can vary and will often reflect the socio-demographics of a particular area, especially if an event is heavily advertised on a local pirate radio station, as this is more likely to attract a specific local crowd. Birmingham, Manchester, and Bristol have also developed sizeable UK garage scenes, and many UK universities are regularly visited by touring UK garage artists.

In a secular society, the UK garage scene provides participants with a sense of belonging to a wider community, which is accessed through participation at UK garage events and continually reinforced by listening to pirate radio. The genre's crossover into mainstream popular music culture has enabled many within the UK garage scene to develop a range of successful music-industry careers.

Sounds of the London Underground

While helping to establish it as a key element of British dance culture and a feature of the international dancescape, since 1996, UK garage consumers have followed their favorite DJs and MCs to holiday destinations such as Ayia Napa in Cyprus, Ibiza, and, more recently, Faliraki in Rhodes. This reflects the influence much of dance culture has had on the UK youth tourism market, which sees young people organizing their holidays to correspond with their musical interests (Sellars 1998: 611). Although Ayia Napa caters to other dance-music genres, it has nevertheless become an essential component in the lives of UK garage consumers. Many of London's biggest UK garage club nights, such as Twice As Nice, Smoove, Exposure, and La Cosa Nostra, lead the almost quasi-religious pilgrimage to the Cypriot resort each year. Attending Ayia Napa, whether as a DJ, promoter, or participant, enhances an individual's cultural capital and is regarded as a defining element of inclusion in the higher echelons of the UK garage scene.

It's a spiritual thing

Many of the spiritual and religious aspects found within contemporary UK garage can be traced to key genres instrumental in its development, such as house music, which influenced many of the early UK garage productions. Hillegonda Rietveld reveals that African-American musical traditions, including gospel, disco, soul, funk, and Latin salsa, informed the musical structures and sensibilities of house music developed in Chicago and New York during the 1990s (Rietveld 1998:6). Kai Fikentscher (2000) adds to this, suggesting that New York underground dance music, which includes house, shares several features with African-American worship. He asserts that, as institutions, both the church and underground dance clubs "feature ritualised activities centred around music, dance, and worship, in which there are no set boundaries between secular and sacred domains" (ibid.: 101). Fikentscher asserts that both the consumption of underground dance music and African-American worship are equally intertwined within processes of unification and self-affirmation. He also points to similarities in the way DJs and preachers each strategically build pace throughout their respective performances or ceremonies towards an emotional peak. In addition, Fikentscher sees parallels in the way they are equally regarded as cultural heroes who are respected and admired by their followers. He goes on to suggest that many underground dance-music producers and artists served musical apprenticeships in community church ensembles and choirs. As a result, the stylistic vocal features of gospel music were incorporated into underground dance music along with ‘a variety of themes, sacred and secular, social and political, that have long been associated with the Black church tradition’ (ibid.: 105). Furthermore, he reveals that the use of prominent gospel instruments such as the organ and acoustic piano became a common feature of house music produced in New Jersey, New York, Detroit and Chicago.

In Britain, American house productions which featured gospel-like vocals were generally known as ‘US garage’, referring to the seminal New York Paradise Garage club, where resident DJ Larry Levan played an eclectic mix of records including 188 CIARAN O’HAGAN gospel-inspired disco and early house productions. The club ran from 1976 until 1987 and still ‘remains the most mythologized of all the New York gay discos’ (Silcott 1999:19). Levan drew a great deal of inspiration from the idealism of David Mancuso’s Loft parties held at 647 Broadway and was undoubtedly influenced by Mancuso’s musical preferences for soulful, rhythmic songs with lyrics that carried positive meaning, that were playing in a way in which each followed ‘the last in a profound musical narrative’ (Brewster and Broughton 1999:253).

Crucially, the majority of early UK garage productions were heavily influenced by American artists who extended Levan and Mancuso’s musical aesthetics, such as Frankie Knuckles, David Morales, Todd Terry, Tommy Musto, Victor Simonelli, Marc Kitchen, Roger Sanchez, Masters At Work, Mood II Swing, Kerri Chandler, Blaze and, most importantly, Todd Edwards and Armand Van Helden. Many house-music records often feature sentiments of recognition printed on the centre label from producers to various individuals. These acknowledgements regularly mention ‘thanks to God’, revealing the religious beliefs present within the American house movement.

South London’s Sunday scene UK garage events emerged in the early to mid-1990s, originally as Sunday morning ‘after hours’ parties held in various South London pubs in and around the Elephant and Castle area. These events attracted clubbers keen to keep the party going after leaving house and garage events across London such as Garage City, Release the Pressure and events held at the Ministry of Sound. At these parties, DJs such as Mickey Simms, Justin Canter and Matt ‘Jam’ Lamont became renowned for pitching up house and garage records to increase their tempo to help clubbers stay alert (Bidder 2001:223; Sawyer 2000). Subsequently, the first wave of UK garage productions by artists such as Grant Nelson, then Tuff Jam, Smokin Beats, Industrial Standards, Booker T, MJ Cole, Baffled, Ramsey and Fen, Banana Republic, Scott Garcia and R.I.P., began to increase the beat-per-minute ratio of tracks, whilst creating a distinct skippy beat and heavier bass-line sound. These new ‘roughed-up’ and faster UK productions were clearly distinguishable from the smoothly produced and slower US tracks (Chapman 2000). At this stage, UK garage was a relatively underground entity, reliant on the Sunday-scene and pirate radio support, which began to broaden its appeal. Events also took place at the Southwark Arches, near London Bridge, and in 1997, the most influential Sunday-scene party, Twice As Nice, opened at Club Coliseum in Vauxhall. Sunday-scene events attracted an older, dressier crowd, many of whom worked in the club and wider music industry, and helped to establish a glamorous designer dress code that was to become associated with future UK garage events. Rietveld suggests that this element of the scene is infused with religiosity, in that events occur on the main church day, which is regarded as ‘best-clothes-day for South London Caribbean youth, who have grown up with Gospel Sunday School experiences’ (2000:209). Rietveld goes on to point out that it is also ‘a day to show off one’s material achievements and upwardly mobile aspirations’ (ibid).

Sounds of the London Underground

Reynolds asserts that ‘dancehall reggae fans originally lured into jungle by its ragga samples back in 1994’ moved towards the developing UK garage scene (1998: 420). During this crossover, the MC became an integral part of UK garage events, and many of the production techniques associated with jungle merged into the evolving UK garage sound. By 1997, widespread music press coverage led to the term ‘speed’ garage being used to identify the genre; this was later replaced by ‘underground’ and then ‘UK’ garage. The Sunday scene also introduced R ‘n’ B to the second or backroom at events, which in turn influenced the emergence of ‘2 step’ garage. This addition drew heavily on R ‘n’ B influences, especially in terms of its vocal arrangements. All of these Sunday-scene developments helped to further distinguish UK garage from its American counterpart, which continued to remain predominately DJ focused.

Rewind and come again

Drawing on Paul Gilroy’s (1993) work, Rietveld suggests that in various examples of UK garage music one can hear crossovers of musical techniques that have developed in both local and imported genres, which can be said to be part of a Black Atlantic musical logic (2000:208). Like so much of UK garage, the continuous dialogue between the MC and audience is a tradition originating in the early Jamaican sound systems. Dick Hebdige reveals that during the 1950s Jamaican sound-system DJs such as Duke Reid and Prince Buster would ‘add spice to the instrumental records they were playing by shouting out their favourite catchphrases over the microphone. These talk-overs or toasts soon became a popular feature of the blues dances’ (Hebdige 1997:83). Tracing the development of reggae in Bass Culture, Lloyd Bradley indicates that once the DJs of these early systems ‘began to chat on the mic about more than their sound systems, their records, their women or their selves, it was the ghetto’s newspaper’ (2000:5). The process of ‘chatting on the mic’ performs a community role, which is observable within the contemporary UK garage scene. The MCs customary function of hosting an event whilst maintaining a rapport between participants and DJ has begun to expand. Currently many MCs incorporate discussions on a wide range of issues directly or indirectly related to the UK garage scene. Some MCs make reference to political and social issues affecting young people growing up in urban environments—such as unemployment, rising crime, gun culture, drug use and social exclusion. This particular dimension, combined with other communication methods adopted by UK garage MCs, provides us with parallels to the role of the Baptist preacher. Discussions concerning sensitive issues that directly affect local parish communities are an integral part of Baptist church services. This aspect was reinforced during my ethnographic fieldwork at a New York Baptist church in 2001, as both the resident and visiting preacher spoke openly about issues concerning alcohol and drug use that were relevant to their local parish communities. Both preachers integrated these sensitive and often contentious subject areas into their sermons in the same way that many UK garage MCs raise similar issues in their lyrical dialogues. Furthermore, UK garage MCs have incorporated call-response techniques to encourage vocal and physical feedback from their audience in a similar way to that in which Baptist preachers do to interact with their congregation.

Baptist preachers frequently end a statement by inciting a response from parishioners to acknowledge its content, often by calling for a 'witness'. Parishioners normally respond by raising their hands and vocally agreeing with the preacher's statement. MCs often use this technique to confirm or stimulate UK garage participants' loyalty to the scene by encouraging members of an audience to respond to questions about their participation in key events. This can include whether people have or intend to support particular sound systems at the London's Notting Hill Carnival, attend a named event, visit Ayia Napa or listen to a specific radio station or show.

In addition, they regularly send out 'big ups', confirm or deny rumours and, most importantly, call for 'rewinds'. Sending out a 'big up' involves an MC specifically mentioning an individual, crew, organization, or particular geographical location during the course of their performance. This gesture is usually accompanied by positive comments and can be used to establish respect for particular people within the scene according to how often they are mentioned. In London, UK garage MCs often use call-response techniques as a way of identifying local divisions within a crowd and to establish respect for certain parts of the capital. This will depend on how often an area is mentioned, but, more importantly, on the order in which areas are announced. The last area to be announced usually receives the loudest reaction and establishes where the majority of participants come from. This may be used to acknowledge local tensions, for example, between areas north and south of the river Thames, which have existed for many years.

When an MC feels that a particular record is favored by the audience, he or she often calls for a 'rewind', which involves the DJ dramatically stopping the record and quickly winding it back to a particular point to start it again. This often produces a screeching sound effect, which adds to the tension created by the accompanying MC and involvement of the crowd. The range of vocal acknowledgements used by UK garage participants in appreciation of the MC's and DJ's skills can include screams, shouts, and whistle or horn blowing. Physical responses usually comprise raising hands, jumping in the air, waving handkerchiefs, and banging on walls or tables. Although the range of physical and vocal gestures used within the UK garage arena can be seen as more intense than those employed by Baptist congregations, they follow the same ritualized procedures of interaction, which foster a sense of belonging and communion within both environments. A contemporary UK garage MC's role requires an ability to read and direct the mood of the crowd while commenting on and pre-empting the DJ's skills. However, it is important to point out that there are great disparities in the levels of competence displayed by various UK garage MCs, in terms of both their technical skills, such as controlling vocal levels, and their ability to interact with their audience and maintain the collective energy of the dance floor, often referred to as the vibe (Fikentscher 2000:81). Nevertheless, there are some extremely talented MCs SOUNDS OF THE LONDON UNDERGROUND. 191 on the UK garage circuit, whose performances are conducted with exceptional professionalism. Many have diverse repertoires of rhymes, raps and lyrical dialogue, which can often involve dramatic stage performances including throwing microphones between MCs whilst maintaining an intense vocal tempo. Stylistically, a distinct UK garage vocal delivery has developed and been popularized by the mainstream success of MC crews such as the Masters of Ceremonies and So Solid. Many UK garage consumers attend events specifically to see their favourite MCs, in the same way that participants follow particular DJs within other scenes. Often UK garage crowds can be observed repeating an MC’s lyrics word for word, in a way that resembles a congregation following a preacher’s sermon.

Recently, the UK garage scene began experiencing difficulties generated by an alleged association with gun crime. This came about after a shooting at London’s Astoria nightclub, which took place during a So Solid concert at the end of 2001 (Smith and Nettleton 2001). The incident resulted in the cancellation of the group’s subsequent tour dates and saw the emergence of an informal ban on UK garage events taking place within London’s West End. Recently comments made by the government’s Culture Minister Kim Howells concerning MCs’ lyrics supposedly glamourizing gun crime were criticized as racist, failing to understand that the discussion of gun culture merely reflected the society in which fans live (Gibbons 2003). Nevertheless, these remarks further compounded the issue and added to the scene’s dispersal to Greater London and suburban venues. However, in other parts of Britain numerous nightclubs and promoters have become reluctant to cater for UK garage events. In response to these restrictions UK garage promoters have begun to place more significance on their R ‘n’ B content to reduce any negative associations. This issue has further enhanced the centrality of pirate radio to the existence and maintenance of the scene. Now, more than ever, pirate radio is viewed as the ‘spiritual home’ of UK garage, providing DJs, MCs and UK garage music with essential exposure.

Parallels can be drawn between the way the scene has become reliant on an illegal network of radio stations to support its community and how members of ‘undesirable’ religions have resorted to clandestine worship to uphold their faith. One such example is the ‘mass rock’ services that took place in Ireland during the 18th century when Catholicism, the majority religion at the time, was outlawed by British rule. As a consequence, the faithful were forced to gather on common land, usually on high ground in order to avoid detection and subsequent prosecution. At these locations, a priest would place a hand-carved crucifix on top of a rock and perform a service to support the religious needs of the persecuted Catholic community. In a similar way, the clandestine operations of pirate radio stations are supporting the UK garage community through this problematic period, as their main places of ‘worship’, nightclubs in this instance, are restricted. Throughout Britain's relationship with unlicensed radio broadcasting, or 'pirates' as they are more commonly known, spans almost 40 years. They have given crucial exposure to new forms of music. Between 1964 and 1968, pirates broadcast from offshore ships around the UK. The most famous station was Radio Caroline, which Matthew Collin (1997) suggests was the first pirate station to play rock and R 'n' B, rarely aired on national radio. He also suggests that pirates have continued to fill cultural gaps, particularly for black music such as reggae and soul. Collin (1997) argues that this process continued with house music, which was noticeably absent on licensed radio stations until 1990 (cbid.:130).

London's dance culture was greatly influenced by pirates such as Centreforce, which began broadcasting various forms of dance music in May 1989. They were followed by a host of others, including Sunrise, Obsession, Fantasy, and later Dance and Kool FM (Garratt 1998:155; Belle-Fortune 1999:57). Other stations, including Girls FM, London Underground, and Freak FM, are regarded as important pirates that were amongst the first to introduce UK garage music to the London-wide audience during the early to mid-1990s.

During the formative years of the UK garage scene, when the music was 'filling the clubs, but not being played on mainstream radio, the role of the pirates was fundamental' in maintaining its presence and attracting new consumers (Sawyer 2000). Drawing on Sarah Thornton's work, one can argue that as a form of communications medium, they played an important part 'in the assembly demarcation and development' of this musical scene (Thornton 1995: 160).

Since 1997, the majority of the capital's pirates have focused on various elements of UK garage, and at present, there are 73 pirate stations broadcasting in London, of which 37 play UK garage (Pir8radio 2003). Throughout the late 1990s, several licensed British radio stations such as BBC Radio 1, Capital Radio, and Kiss FM have moved previously 'specialist' UK garage shows to primetime audience slots, making expirate radio acts such as the Dreem Teem, DJ EZ, DJ Luck, and MC Neat household names (Williams 2000).

Pirates help to foster a sense of community amongst UK garage participants due to their apparent openness and accessibility to listeners, who are encouraged to contact stations via telephone or text messaging to exchange greetings with friends and relatives, send out 'big ups,' and ask for requests. It is here that the community role of the MC again comes to the fore, as they often provide and maintain an important link with disaffected youth, by regularly sending out messages of support to individuals serving custodial sentences in young offenders' institutes and prisons, a community function often overlooked by commercial stations.

Many operate on a small-scale basis involving a network of friends run on a semi-professional basis, while others are highly organized and directly involved with the promotion of UK garage parties in and around the capital. Their daily running is fraught with dangers, mainly due to their illegal nature, as stations operating without a Radio Authority broadcasting license are liable to prosecution (Radio Communications Agency 2002). As a result, pirate stations employ a range of methods to avoid detection, including relaying signals between booster aerials in an attempt to safeguard their studio's location, and are shrouded in secrecy. Gaining access to participate as a DJ or MC requires intricate negotiations, often initiated via personal connections. Nevertheless, despite numerous complications, individuals involved with pirate radio broadcasting regularly negotiate a myriad of complex issues in order to support the cultural development of their scene.

Conclusion
This chapter has provided insight into several procedures that have been incorporated into the UK garage scene and identified a sense of belonging or spirituality resonating within the UK garage community. Undoubtedly, gospel music traditions were crucial in the development of house music emanating from New York, New Jersey, Chicago, and Detroit. Notably, the production and consumption of house music in these regions drew on various aspects of African-American worship to inform its musical structure and delivery.

The emergence of UK garage was heavily influenced by American house music and later embodied religious practices associated with the Baptist church. Similarities can be found in the way DJs and preachers approach their respective performances and also in the way they are regarded as key cultural figures. However, in the context of UK garage, these parallels can be extended further to incorporate the central role of the MC, as MCs have adapted features associated with Baptist preachers, such as using call-response techniques to interact with their audience.

In addition, MCs have developed a community role by raising a wide range of social issues in their vocal repertoires and maintaining essential links with disaffected youth and the wider UK garage community through their involvement in pirate radio broadcasting, which has recently grown in significance as a direct consequence of informal restrictions placed on UK garage events. Furthermore, the emergence of Sunday after-hours events transformed a traditional worship period into a key element of the scene and helped to establish UK garage's 'Sunday best' dress code.

Music

Amador, E. (1998) ‘House Music’, Yoshitoshi Recordings YRO28.
SOUNDS OF THE LONDON UNDERGROUND 195
A selection of key records played during the development of the UK garage scene
Artist Title Label Year
24 Hour Experience ‘Together’ Nice ’N’ Ripe —-:1994
Todd Edwards ‘Saved My Life’ I! 1995
CJ. Bolland ‘Sugar Is Sweeter’ Internal 1996 (Amand’s Drum ’N’ Bass Mix)
Scott Garcia ‘A London Thing’ Connected 1997
Kristine Blond ‘Love Shy’ (Tuff Jam Reverb 1998 Classic Vocal)
DJ Luck & MC Neat “A Little Bit of Luck’ Red Rose 1999
So Solid ‘Oh No’ Relentless 2000
Pied Piper & The ‘Do You Really Like It Soul Food 2001
Masters of Ceremonies The Streets Original Pirate Locked On 2002
Material 10 Gamelan, techno-primitivism, and the San Francisco rave scene!
Gina Andrea Fatone

In August of 1997, at a rave in the foothills of the Sierra mountains, a five-member Balinese gamelan group based in Santa Cruz, California, became part of the Vibe.> Via a powerful performance experience that fused techno music with traditional Balinese gamelan, the group’s participation in this alternative cultural event‘ led to subsequent invitations to perform at raves in the San Francisco area, as well as an invitation______ This techno-primitivist construction, one amidst multiple stances performed in rave, involves the interrelated roles of cultural borrowing, homogenized “ethnic-ness,” and the quest for “authenticating” experiences in the context of the technocultural present. A return to innocence

It is evident from the growing body of literature concerning rave culture that so-called “tribal,” “primitive,” or “pagan” elements of raving are decidedly self-conscious amongst a prominent constituent of participants. In logging on to one of the many rave collective web pages, for example, the self-identification of ravers with “pure,” unadulterated, pre-industrial society, and the romantic notion of collectively returning to “tribal” roots through the rave process is strongly apparent. The Guerillas of Harmony web page (Twist 2000:1) includes links to essays with titles such as “Roots of Trance Dance,” “Children of the Evolution,” “Cybertribe Rising Revisited,” and “Rave and the Rebirth of Celebration.” One San Francisco raver states: “I think it’s a return to innocence.” Quoting him further: "It has roots in prehistory. It's like one of these big dance sessions where they would chant all night long until the sun comes up or something. That's my personal feeling... I really think they're tapping into something really deep in the psyche." (personal interview, 21 May 1998)

As ravers often draw analogies between themselves and what they conceive of as tribal or primitive societies, rave culture has been referred to as “neo-tribal” (Gore 1997:54) or neo-primitive. This identification with “primal” societies is not limited to the rave scene, having strong representation in other forms of alternative culture, such as New Age, Wicca, and various radical ecological reform groups. Graham St John identifies a “postcolonial primitivist” movement amongst Australian youth, “a culture variously committed to the defence of the rights of native ecology and peoples, or natural and cultural heritage,” with a goal of “returning” to the “wild” themselves (1999:164). In “approximating “nature,” St John proposes, participants engage in a “quest” for authenticity (ibid.).

Similarly, ravers’ casting of all-night mass dance events as “prehistorical,” along with the implication of an inherited psychological substrate for such communal performances, points to an association of certain “primitive” behaviors with “original” human experience. In imitating or recreating perceived “primal” activities, rave participants experience “pure” humaneness—they are themselves authenticated.

The will of the Technology Goddess

Raving is often referred to as ritualistic by participants and scholars of performativity alike (e.g. Gore 1997; Reynolds 1998; Silcott 1999). Originally applied to premodern cultures, the classic ritual theory of Arnold van Gennep (1981), later “modernized” by Victor Turner, has been useful in the analysis of alternative cultural performances, although the model has been criticized for excluding both corporeality and competing interpretations of the ritual event among participants (see St John 1999). It may be valid to argue that raving is essentially a continuation of an ancient performative ritual behavior and nothing fundamentally new. However, core components of the rave event—the means of sensory bombardment—are produced through electronic/digital technology (e.g. computer-generated visual projections and highly amplified electronic music). Beyond this, social relations between participants are mediated by the presence of modern technology. The sheer volume of the music dictates that communication between participants is largely non-verbal. Like other alternative cultural events, rave is a site of multivalent experience (Gore 1997:65). For some, raving is a spiritual experience through which they feel deeply connected to other participants. Initial rave experiences often evoke in the novice a sense of enlightenment. Note the following excerpt of a “testimonial” in which a participant describes the vibe he experienced at his first rave: It wasn’t until I was 25 that I discovered the scene. It was like becoming color for the first time. I love being awake, I love having my eyes open, I love every moment that I’m alive. I’ve been painted by the brush of raving with a palette of vibes, people, love, music, unity, movement, peace, and togetherness. I am in color. (posted on the sfraves discussion list, 13 June 2000) As has been discussed elsewhere in this collection, writers and ravers have noted that a main motivation for participants is immersion in a feeling of communitas generated at the event (Somberg n.d.: 6; Saunders 1995:1). This communitas (or even ecstatic trance), it is significant to note, is achieved through high-tech means— particularly through mass dancing to music comprised of simulated and sampled sounds, often enhanced by pharmaceutical technology.

In Generation Ecstasy, Simon Reynolds refers to the various musics (or “hallucinogenres” of rave) as “sampladelia,” or “perception-warping music” which deconstructs “the metaphysics of presence” (1998:41, 44). Ravers, involved in what they themselves term “ecstatic trance dancing,” speak of submitting themselves to the will of the DJ, often referred to as a shaman: “House music is the sound of the cultural blender running at warp speed. It’s a techno-shamanic dervish” (Heley 2000). As René Lysloff writes, “trance is actualized via the interaction of the human and the machine, implicating a postmodern “secular religion” where technology itself is worshipped” (Lysloff n.d.:11). In fact, the credo of techno-paganism may be found at hyperreal.org, along with prayers such as “We thank the Technology Goddess for giving us the ability to rave” and “We finally wish that the Technology Goddess will receive our ecstasy while raving as an offering and a celebration of her omnipotence.” This ethos of abandoning oneself to the will of the machine and dissolving into a communal mass of dancers has remained one of rave's most salient aspects, dating back to proto-rave techno music of the early 1980s.

Rave is also distinguished as a technocultural artifact in that its planning and restoration phases take place in virtual space. This forum, in scope and nature of social relationship, is not something that could be replicated in reality, due to the anonymity afforded by faceless interaction in virtual space. As the drug Ecstasy removes fear, allegedly the element which controls our behavior (Saunders 1995), for the purpose of establishing a greater communitas, I suggest that the virtual forum serves as an extension of this chemical agent for some ravers. ‘T reached a nirvana/euphoric state sitting right in front of the gamelan... I have drawn attention to a nostalgia for the “primal roots” of mankind among ravers and interpreted the rave event as a technocultural practice. I will now introduce Gamelan Anak Swarasanti and discuss the ensemble's role(s) within the San Francisco rave scene. Anak Swarasanti primarily plays a type of ceremonial orchestra known in Bali as gamelan angklung. It is a four-tone ensemble consisting primarily of four-keyed bronze metallophones of different sizes or registers, the keys of which are suspended over bamboo resonators. Other instruments of the gamelan angklung include a horizontally mounted row of knobbed gongs, two drums, a small pair of cymbals, bamboo flute, a small vertically suspended gong, and a small horizontally mounted gong used for time-keeping (Tenzer 1991:86). In Bali, the angklung ensemble traditionally performs at temple ceremonies, processions, cremations, and village festivals.® It is one of three theoretically required ceremonial gamelan in village ritual life (along with the larger gamelan gong and the processional orchestra gamelan beleganjur) (McPhee 1966; Bakan 1999:11).

In Northern California, gamelan angklung Anak Swarasanti rehearses weekly and performs regularly in the Santa Cruz community. Most of the group’s performances are purely for entertainment (e.g. summer music festivals, college performances, and local garden parties). In November 2002, the group performed at a Santa Cruz benefit for the Balinese victims of the October 2002 terrorist bombing in Kuta, Bali. The Anak Swarasanti website includes descriptions and photos of its various performance venues.

The gamelan’s all-Western membership is mixed in gender (three females, seven males) and age (24-60). Members are either working professionals (most are in the high-tech industry) or university students. Repertoire includes traditional and contemporary compositions for gamelan. Compositions for gamelan angklung are cyclical in form and thereby variable in performance length.

At raves, where Anak Swarasanti is normally expected to play a set several hours long, the group collectively arranges extended versions of traditional ceremonial pieces. Anak always performs in the ambient space, a room or space set apart from the main dance location(s) where ravers can come at any point during the evening to “chill out,” or take a breather from the more extreme goings-on at the event. Although some dancing does take place here, people usually use the space to be still. There are often mattresses to lie on or rugs to sit on. Music in the ambient space is generally calmer, quieter, may be rhythmic or non-rhythmic, and is meant to function in an atmospheric way. The gamelan, with its seamless, minimalist, and repetitively structured sounds, fits well into this scheme. However, its presentation is almost always mediated by the addition of a layer of electronically produced music added to the texture. This is not meant to be a simple overlay of synthesized music contributing to the ethereal soundscape, but an interactive relationship between electronic musicians and the gamelan.

This syncretic ideal is illustrated by the following email excerpt authored by a member of Anak Swarasanti planning the group’s appearance at a rave in the spring of 2000:

"Use more of the big gongs. For example: have the gongs match beats with the dj, phase the dj out, bring in the gamelan, and reverse that at the end of the gamelan set. Possibly even keep the gongs (in different varieties) playing continuously between songs, so there is no silence. Participation (like dancing or meditation) is much easier with continued sound." (email by a member of Anak Swarasanti, spring 2000)

And this is from a DJ to the sfraves list:

"I hope to be joining the Gamelan Anak Swarasanti in the ambient area for a special marathon sunset performance. If you've been looking for music historically associated with hypnotic mental states, this is the real stuff." 

Ethnomusicologist Margaret Kartomi, in describing the required musical elements in Javanese gamelan accompaniment to folk trance, states that music must be “mesmeric in effect,” and contain a steady regular pulsation with repetitive tonal patterns based on a restricted number of pitches (1973:166). Balinese psychiatrist Luh Ketut Suryani discusses the hypnotic effect of traditional Balinese ceremonial gamelan music on Balinese gamelan players, and describes the music as having a basic, relatively unchanging pattern, repetitive, rhythmically steady, and tending toward monotony in volume and intensity (Jensen and Suryani 1993:123). Suryani reports that Balinese ceremonial gamelan players feel “as though they are floating above the ground,” “nearer to the gods” and “in another world” (ibid.).

In both gamelan angklung (and commonly in other types of gamelan music) and techno, there are simultaneous layers of musical complexity playing out at different levels of tempo and “busy-ness.” Although rave music is much louder than gamelan music, often the emphasis (in both musics) is on the creation of a kind of endless ground through minimalistic repetition of instrumental bytes which tends to entrain the mind of the listener. Coincidentally or not, types of techno and gamelan music, and their respective musical textures, are both present in communal gatherings where dance and altered states of consciousness are the intention of at least a subgroup of participants.

Institutionalized occasions for “entranced” dancing (with gamelan orchestra accompaniment) in Bali include the Kris dance (male, group trance ritual) and the Barong/Rangda ritual (protector dragon vs. monstrous witch in showdown between 202 GINA ANDREA FATONE the forces of good and evil). A larger five-tone orchestra (gamelan pelegongan) accompanies these dramas involving trance. The repertoire of this gamelan again involves intricate, closely interlocked melodic figuration as well as complex stratified polyphony. Although the dramatic accompaniment requires sudden changes in tempo and dynamics at times, repetitive clichéd figurations over ostinatos and stretches of metronomic tempo remain characteristic of the music.

While the gamelan angklung is not the particular gamelan ensemble associated with rituals involving trance in Bali, its textural characteristics are in many ways idiosyncratic to much gamelan music in general, including those ensembles that are present in trance contexts. This has led me to consider possible relationships between events that employ similar musical textures and whose participants intend to achieve extraordinary consciousness.

At Hyperreal’s Trance List Archives the trance subgenre of techno is plainly characterized as a means to altered states of consciousness (ASC): “Through the use of repetitive and extended beat patterns and/ or rhythms, this music often induces trance-like states in those who listen or dance to it.” In Rouget’s often cited work Music and Trance: A Theory of the Relations Between Music and Possession, the author states that, although music “does play a part in triggering and maintaining the trance state, it does not owe its effect to the properties of the musical structure, or if it does, it does so only to a small degree” (1985:96). Becker applauds Rouget for “putting to rest” the idea of a causal relationship between types of music and types of trance (Becker 1994:41). It is generally understood that the entire trance context as a package—including all sensory stimulation, in addition to belief system and expectations of the participant —is responsible for inducing altered states of consciousness. Becker suggests that the musical component of trance, acting as a "physiological metonym," "invokes" an entire "mythology" to which certain emotions and behavior are attached (ibid.:45). In Bali, deeply sensual cues such as incense, strongly scented flowers, and bright ornate costumes accompany ritual. It is likely that in the rave context the music volume, visual bombardment, physiological excitement of dance, desire for an altered state, and other elements of rave described earlier, heighten possible transportative mechanisms perceived in the music. However, the musical contribution (or "universal" relationship of music) to trance states remains debated amongst scholars. This vision is clearly expressed in Kathleen Williamson's characterization of raving: "There is a pulsating awareness of sharing archaic understandings, reviving lost traditions...which are all invested with new technological innovation. The sounds are the new epic poetry of this century.... The knowledge is beyond consumerism and materialism, and associated disaffected, alienated and generally self-destructive style of the industrial being... The sounds and rhythms produced by techno artists seem to be more and more profound in their ability 204. GINA ANDREA FATONE to communicate the most...deeply resonating primal understandings. It’s the re-discovered language of transcendence.... Here is the “coming of age” ritual which Western culture has long forgotten." (Kathleen Williamson, at hyperreal.org; italics mine)

Within techno-primitivism, it appears, technology is paradoxically embraced in an attempt to regain the very thing which mechanization is denigrated for taking away —our basic human-ness. Reynolds asserts that digital music “abandons all the elements of feel” (1998:44). While all instrumental music makes use of technology of some kind, electronically produced sound is often viewed as particularly “artificial,” “lacking warmth,” “emotionless,” or “removed” from the human body.

While revering such a music, could ravers’ concurrent attachment to “the primitive” be an unconscious effort to resist (or counterbalance) the dehumanizing aspect of the music being embraced—an effort to reclaim or hold on to the human element in the face of pervasive, ever-expanding technology while reveling in the hedonistic aspects of both? This construction within which participants worship both technology and the primitive perhaps keeps the Vibe in balance. Technology may have its way, but at the same time identification with the primitive quells anxiety produced by the threat of ever-increasing mechanization and distancing from the “authenticating” power of the “natural.”

When viewed from this perspective, the appropriation of the gamelan by the San Francisco rave scene appears to have its own logic. In addition to proposed formal musical similarities with techno, the gamelan is successfully integrated into the rave event, on the basis of its perceived homogenous “ethnic-ness,” “otherness,” or primitive associations—in other words, for what it represents. This representation is effected through the “exotic” gamelan instruments—intricately carved and painted, sitting amongst carefully prepared offerings, burning incense, and _ other miscellaneous Balinese ‘paraphernalia’—and the otherworldly sound of an orchestra of bronze gongs and metallophones.

I propose that information such as where this ensemble comes from, its history, its “authentic” performance practice, who usually plays it, or even what it’s called is irrelevant in the context of rave. It is not necessary to possess such in-depth knowledge. What è important is that the presence of the gamelan affirms the romantic, self-perceived identity of raving as part of something “primal” and resistant to the mainstream. In this construction, I suggest that the “exotic” equals the “primitive,” associated with the roots of humankind and the sacralized lifestyle to which some ravers desire to return. More to the point, through a conflation of the ethnic/exotic and the primitive, the gamelan serves as an authenticating agent within the rave event. While participants may perceive themselves as experiencing “authentic” culture in the form of the gamelan, the unwitting result of this borrowing process may be the eliding of cultural particularities, and the subsequent reinforcement of the concept of a generic ethnic/primitive/Other. It is likely that other "world" musics may be successfully appropriated by rave. GAMELAN AND TECHNO-PRIMITIVISM IN SAN FRANCISCO 205

Contrary to the intentions of alternative cultural events, in the very act of interacting with surfaces of entities in this way, ravers are perhaps engaging in a very mainstream kind of behavior. Turkle (1997) describes a current psychosocial operative mode in which representations—rather than transparent entities—are sufficient for interacting with the world. It is often claimed that there is an increased tendency within postmodern industrial culture for one to be satisfied with surface-only knowledge of, or relationships with, cultural items that make up one’s "idioverse" and contribute to identity construction. Hopefully without appearing to accept wholesale a totalistic concept of postmodernism, I suggest that the gamelan's appropriation into a context (such as rave) in which it functions as a more or less origin-free entity speaks to this claim.

Conclusion
My intent was to consider how and why a Balinese gamelan could have made its way to the foothills of the Sierra mountains in the summer of 1997 and, in doing so, contribute to the discussion of local rave culture in the U.S. via electronically produced sensory experience, community in virtual space, and attributing cosmic significance to modern technology, San Francisco rave is an alternative cultural performance firmly located in the technocultural present. In an interpretation of rave's appropriation of a gamelan ensemble, I considered two possibilities: a similarity in musical structure within rave music and traditional gamelan music, and the ensemble's absorption as a tool of authentication for rave participants. It is likely that both possibilities possess merit. Through a simultaneous embrace of the modern technological revolution and a redeeming, nostalgic identification with the "primitive," I argued, a seemingly contradictory techno-primitive ideology has been constructed. An examination of techno-primitive practice revealed how disembodied cultural entities may be mixed and matched in such a way that genuine differences are eradicated, and how a resulting generic ethnic-ness (conflated with primitive-ness) serves as an authenticating agent. The agent in this case is the Balinese gamelan.

Additional studies of the means by which representations of homogenized ethnic-ness, in the form of live "world" musics or instruments, are incorporated into other alternative cultural events may further illuminate processes inherent in subcultural identity formation.

Nyoman Sedana, Balinese performing artist and scholar, explained in a personal communication with the author in 2001 that, although the ensemble has traditionally served a Hindu-Bali ceremonial function, performances of contemporary music or adaptations of non-ceremonial pieces for gamelan angklung have more recently begun to take place in secular settings. Indeed, gamelan angklung groups now take part in government-sponsored gamelan competitions (Bakan 1999:97). And while membership in gamelan angklung groups has traditionally been confined to males, Sedana added that females currently perform this music in Balinese conservatory settings. My experience with gamelan includes study of Balinese gamelan angklung, gamelan gong, gamelan gendér wayang, and central and west Javanese gamelan in the U.S., Bali, and Java. 

An opposition to this view of techno music is found within Australia’s alternative cultural event ConFest (Conference/Festival), where nostalgia for the primitive and a return to “pure,” earth-connected living are similarly core values (St John 2001). As described by Graham St John, the aural space of ConFest is decidedly contested. Here, techno-trance enthusiasts find themselves at odds with a significant constituent of event-goers who view loud, electronically based music as “invasive,” “inappropriate,” and threatening the environment as well as the overall authenticity of the ConFest experience. Sharply contrasting with the techno-primitive view of dancing to techno as a means of building communitas, this music is regarded by many ConFest participants as mechanistic and a threat to sociality (St John 2001). The San Francisco Bay area-based Hawaiian hula company Na Lei Hulu I Ka Wekiu recently fused traditional dance and music with techno for a performance at a Bay area rave. This performance was repeated for an audience at the downtown Los Angeles Grand Performances summer music festival in August 2002.

Only a mass idealistic fashion within Youth Dance Culture, swelling up from the gene-pool itself and now planet-wide, can produce the sufficiently colossal fractal mutation in Humanity’s lifestyle necessary for it to survive and go on to rave among the stars. (Fraser Clark, from The Book of RavElations)

Where technician meets tradition. With ancient ways and modern means; we pilot the temple, to the land of the gods. (Gaian Mind)

Throughout the 1990s, psychedelic trance accelerated the interfacing of technology, ecology and spirituality. Psytrance became a transnational context for the growth of a planetary ethos among youth, for the evolution of eco-spiritual commitments expressed and performed through dance. This chapter charts these developments, uncovering a pattern of revitalization associated with the fin de siécle—a period of unfettered optimism fed by cyber and digital developments adopted and championed in the cultural response to an accelerating environmental crisis. It documents an eco-millenarian dance movement rising out of global centres and marginal sites throughout the 1990s. The creative amalgamation of contemporary technologies and reconstructed religiosity is shown to have manifested in the cultural output of influential ‘altered statesmen’, and is communicated through the rituals and epochal events of new ‘tribal’ formations emerging within a global technospiritual youth network.

In the early 1990s, humanity, so the consensus seemed to be, had built up a momentous head of steam. With the implosion of the Soviet Union, the emergence of post-apartheid South Africa, and the prevalence and utility of computer-mediated communication, David Dei, founder of Cape Town’s alternative magazine Kagenna, observed that ‘the most important social manifestation in the history of humanity’ was taking shape. A complex counterculture consisting of a ‘fragmented rag-tag nation of reality technicians, cyber operatives, pagan evolutionaries, trance guerrillas, and Zippies’ were adopting ‘African Shamanic Technology—a hardware thought TECHNO MILLENNIUM 1 211 appropriate for ‘recolonizing the psyche-space of the entire superstructure of society’ (Dei 1994). It was time, according to Dei, ‘to use our newly won tools-of-the-gods or Deity Devices as true extensions of our being...for the creation of a perfect and beautiful deep green world’ (zbid.). This strident narrative taps into a sense of hope amidst crisis, an idealism at odds with the dominant historical trajectory of war, environmental disaster and famine. Heralding novel technological developments deemed necessary for consciousness revolution, the idealism echoed that of the techno-utopian Peter Russell, who regarded new communications media as critical in achieving inward development, triggering the shift from personal to global consciousness. In The Global Brain Awakens (1995/1982), Russell indicated how the history of humanity demonstrates a tendency toward greater interconnectivity. With the internet and the worldwide web, Gaia was speculated to be 'growing herself a nervous system'. Drawing upon the message of self-maintenance and responsibility in Lovelock's Gaia Hypothesis, the mounting crisis was itself considered to be 'an important evolutionary drive' pushing us into new levels of cooperation, with human cells self-organizing into 'a rapidly integrating global network, the nerve cells of an awakening global brain' (Russell 1995). And, since many of the advocates and emissaries of the IT-led global consciousness revolution were also electronic-music enthusiasts, as Rushkoff conveyed in Cyberia (1994), the sentiment was perhaps more accurately 'rave-olution'.

Timewave Zero and the Alien Dreamtime
Terence McKenna (1946-2000) was the principal spokesperson for the raveolution—his body of work on technological 'ingressions into social novelty' becoming prominent amongst techno-millennialists. A student of the ontological foundations of shamanism and the ethno-pharmacology of spiritual transformation, McKenna championed psychedelic consciousness. Discovery of a complex fractal 'timewave' encoded in the I Ching, the ancient Chinese Book of Changes, led McKenna, together with his brother Dennis, to found Novelty Theory. Rooted in Chaos Dynamics and Complexity Theory, Novelty elaborated Alfred North Whitehead's notion of novelty into a mathematical speculation concerning 'the fundamental architecture of time'.

The ultra-novel event McKenna called 'Timewave Zero' models the world as we know it, achieving "congrescence', the apogee of infinite complexity, on 21 December 2012. Discovering the quantum mathematical ordering principles of the ancient Chinese oracle, the McKennas were able to plot waves of 'habit' (conservation) and 'novelty' (strangeness) transpiring over the course of history, observing that the last 1,500 years reveal an acceleration of novelty which will culminate in 'a complex attractor that exists ahead of us in time'—pulling us towards it, determining and terminating history.

In Alien Dreamtime, a live spoken word performance recorded with ambient Space Time Continuum at San Francisco's Transmission Theatre on 26 February 1993, McKenna stated that 'something is calling us out of nature and sculpting us in it's own image'. 'You can feel', he elaborated, 'that we're approaching 212 GRAHAM ST JOHN the cusp of a catastrophe, and that beyond that cusp we are unrecognizable to ourselves. The wave of novelty that has rolled unbroken since the birth of the universe has now focused and coalesced itself in our species'. The statement was an iteration of an earlier performance reproduced as part of the track 'Re: Evolution' from the Shamen's 1992 album Boss Drum: History is ending. I mean, we are to be the generation that witnesses the revelation of the purpose of the cosmos. History is the shock wave of the Eschaton. History is the shock wave of eschatology, and what this means for those of us who will live through this transition into hyperspace, is that we will be privileged to see the greatest release of compressed change probably since the birth of the universe. The twentieth century is the shudder that announces the approaching cataracts of time over which our species and the destiny of this planet is about to be swept. In McKenna's framework, planetary novelty will accelerate exponentially to a point which, according to the maths, possesses a quantified value of zero—the Omega Point, the Eschaton: December 2012. In a most extraordinary development, the calculations were only much later discovered to be almost identical to the cosmic rebirth foreseen in the Tzolkin, the Mayan Sacred Calendar. According to archeoastronomer John Major Jenkins (who published his work in Maya Cosmogenesis 2012 [1998]), over 2,300 years ago the Maya calculated that the December solstice of 2012 (6 a.m. on 21 December) will occasion an alignment of the path of the sun with the Galactic Equator of the Milky Way (which the ancient Maya recognized as ‘the Sacred Tree’), an event signifying cosmogenesis in Mayan thought, the end of a great gestation period and the birth of a new world age.° Corresponding with the Tzolkin, McKenna modelled an accelerating rate of change making major species change immanent. Yet, while the end of the world was nigh, it would hardly correspond to the apocalyptic scenarios of orthodox religion. According to McKenna, the ‘strange attractor’ lying in the future ‘throws off reflections of itself, which actually ricochet into the past, illuminating this mystic, inspiring that saint or visionary’. Furthermore, ‘out of these fragmentary glimpses of eternity we can build a kind of map, of not only the past of the universe, and the evolutionary egression into novelty but a kind of map of the future’.

While psilocybe mushrooms catalysed the evolution of language (and technology) in Homo sapiens 50,000 years ago, our species once again stands at the threshold of a major evolutionary event. McKenna felt that the understanding of ‘planetary purpose’ was critical for humans to become ‘agents of evolution’. An advocate of the ‘archaic revival’, a return to ‘the palaeolithic world of natural magic’ and community in preparation for the coming Eschaton, McKenna was himself such a humble visionary. In the revival, humanity would experience reconnection to ‘the vegetal Goddess’, to the Earth Mother: ‘Returning to the bosom of the planetary partnership means trading the point of view of the history-created ego for a more maternal and intuitional style.’ And the use of hallucinogenic plants would enable TECHNO MILLENNIUM 213 the reawakening of traditional attitudes towards the natural world, re-establishing "channels of direct communication with the planetary Other" (McKenna 1991: ch. 15). McKenna thus effectively promoted the role of the shaman in the contemporary world.

With the dissolution of boundaries triggered by psychedelics, one cannot continue to close one's eyes to the ruination of the earth, the poisoning of the seas, and the consequences of two thousand years of unchallenged dominator culture, based on monotheism, hatred of nature, suppression of the female, and so forth. So, what shamans have to do is act as exemplars, by making this cosmic journey to the domain of the Gaian ideas, and then bringing them back in the form of art in the struggle to save the world. The message that nature sends is, transform your language through a synergy between electronic culture and the psychedelic imagination, a synergy between dance and idea, a synergy between understanding and intuition, and dissolve the boundaries that your culture has sanctioned between you, to become part of this Gaian supermind." From the early 1990s, McKenna had championed the underground dance phenomenon as an integral component in the psychedelics-led revival. Enabling one to see 'the wiring under the board...to recover the jewel lost at the beginning of time', rave would assist in conditioning humanity for the upcoming transition to 'hyperspace' from three-dimensional time and space. Psychedelic youth culture was a quantum leap in the novelty model. Again, speaking on 'Re: Evolution', he stated: "The emphasis in house music and rave culture on physiologically compatible rhythms...is really the rediscovery of the art of natural magic with sound. That sound, properly understood, especially percussive sound, can actually change neurological states, and large groups of people getting together in the presence of this kind of music are creating a telepathic community of bonding that hopefully will be strong enough that it can carry the vision out into the mainstream of society. Raves, and psychedelics were going to bootstrap humanity for the impending shift. This new youth culture, he stated, is the real new world order and it’s going to carry all of us into a world of completion and caring that we have not known since the pyramids were raised." The new rave culture is the cutting edge of the last best hope for suffering humanity. "Take back the planet—it’s yours, it’s yours. These are the last minutes of human history folks. The countdown is on. This is not a test. We're leaving this world behind, for a brighter, better world that has always existed; in our imagination."


Like the ultimate scout leader, the message McKenna delivered to thousands of young people in his capacity as guest speaker at psychedelic trance events across the globe—from Megatripolis in London, to San Francisco’s Toon Town and Australia’s Transelements—was 'be prepared': "This is not a dress rehearsal for the apocalypse.... This is the last chance before things become so dissipated that there is no chance for cohesiveness. We can use the calendar as a club. We can make the millennium an occasion for establishing an authentic human civilization, overcoming the dominator paradigm, dissolving boundaries through psychedelics, recreating a sexuality not based on monotheism, monogamy and monotony.... We are the inheritors of a million years of striving for the unspeakable. And now with the engines of technology in our hands we ought to be able to reach out and actually exteriorize the human soul at the end of time, invoke it into existence like a UFO and open the violet doorway into hyperspace and walk through it, out of profane history and into the world beyond the grave, beyond shamanism, beyond the end of history, into the galactic millennium that has beckoned to us for millions of years across space and time. THIS IS THE MOMENT. A planet brings forth an opportunity like this only once in its lifetime, and we are ready, and we are poised. And as a community we are ready to move into it, to claim it, to make it our own."

While it was criticized for propagating a not unfamiliar 'linear masculine eschatology' featuring a 'breakneck rush towards a crescendo of connectedness and barrier dissolution—a Cosmic Climax' (Gyrus 1999)—the predicted encounter with the 'transdimensional object at the end of time' gathered conceptual momentum. And the process enhanced McKenna's status as a heroic folk-theorist at the same time as it lent legitimacy to the preoccupations of the global underground dance community. Post-rave psychedelic dance culture has embraced variations of Timewave Zero and the Mayan Tzolkin, granting 21 December 2012 varied significance. Indeed, what the date actually implies is open to vast interpretation, as it is taken to occasion hyperspatial breakthrough, alien contact, planetismal impact, historical explosion, quaser ignition at the Galactic Centre,!° the "dawning of the techno New Jerusalem or Cyber-Zion' (McDaniel and Bethel 2002), or the birth of the "World of the Fifth Sun, the cleansing of the earth and the raising of a higher level of vibration'." The Melbourne-based Barrelful of Monkeys (BoM) elicit a principle message. Post-2012 is regarded as a ‘Dreaming Universe’ and ‘our very momentum of describing this event continues to concrese it into the act of becoming’. Whether the coming event is held to be ‘the Eschaton, the Dreamtime, the Logos, the Imagination, the Omega Point, an AI [artificial intelligence] Virtuality or simply the momentum of history and culture reaching its zenith...we get to choose how we interpret it. Catching glimpses of eternity, they’re following McKenna’s advice and preparing ‘to be born into the next world’. Grafting the Hundredth Monkey TECHNO MILLENNIUM 215 syndrome, the BoM have taken on the role of ‘artists and madmen and trypsters and children [and] all God’s Fools’, divined to ‘pass on the new awareness to the rest of the race’. Just as it took 1 percent of humanity to ‘make that SHIFT in consciousness, as happened about 50,000 years ago when we fell into language and history...[w]e have to lock in the harmonic upload opportunity synchronizing through local spacetime Dec 21st 2012 and reel in the 5th dimension!’

CyberTribe Rising: anarcho-spiritual techno-tribalism

The writing of anarcho-mystic Hakim Bey (a.k.a. Peter Lamborn Wilson) was heavily implicated in forging the primitivist-extropian alliance at the heart of the Alien Dreamtime. His Temporary Autonomous Zone (1991), or TAZ, became poetic inspiration for cooperative, consensual, non-commodified dancescapes amplifying re-enchantment and the liberation of desire. Outside the surveillance of the state and the incursions of the corporate world, the free outdoor rave-TAZ became a tech-savvy anarcho-liminal utopia wherein inhabitants claim to achieve that which resembles a peak-experience, or union, with co-liminaries and nature. As ‘a means to maximize autonomy and pleasure for as many individuals and groups as possible as soon as possible’, the TAZ is also an effort to ‘reconcile...wilderness and cyberspace’ (Bey 1995). While it accommodates efforts to attain the ‘palaeolithic’, the immediate insurrection is optimized and orchestrated through the internet. Hosting promiscuous utopics, the TAZ would give birth to mutant offspring carrying primitivist and extropian genes. And while gatherings became humanist laboratories hosting techno-shamanic experimentation with unpredictable results, the ‘downloading [of] political expression and reverie learnt on the dancefloor and inside the webs of networked mainframes INTO the OUTSIDE geography of LIFE AS WE KNOW IT’ (Dei 1994), was a practice widely assumed in the global dance community throughout the 1990s (cf. Razam 2001).

The popularity of McKenna’s psychedelicism, the Mayan Sacred Calendar and the TAZ idea amongst the ‘digerati’ illustrated disenchantment with the conventions of radical opposition. As the idea of socialist revolution was eschewed, there grew an optimistic belief that ‘disappearance from the grid’ in the form of networked ‘communities of feeling’ would, with the assistance of technology and deconstructionist spirituality, stimulate the evolution of the Global Brain—thus giving rise to psycho-cultural transformation. This trajectory was exemplified by the social formation given character in Geoff White’s influential “‘CyberTribe rising’ (1993). In White’s view, a new horizontal ‘cybernetic model’, which he called ‘C512' (or ‘Community, Consensus, Cooperation, Communication, Cybernetics, Intelligence and Intuition’), and its concomitant technology, was mutating from the post-World War II vertical-control model______ With C512 technology, ‘information passes from small groups to other small groups through what some call the Web, an interconnected communications network made up of mail, word-of-mouth, phone-trees, VCRs, fax machines, audio cassettes, free software, and computer networks’ (zbid.). White promoted a decentralized social and economic paradigm, observing a network of “‘CyberTribes’ which were operating through autonomous, consensual, and cooperative strategies, and which, while based on the cybernetic model, were being shaped by Deep Ecology, Distributed Systems Theory, and Chaos Theory (Maffesoli, 1996). As a technology of sharing and cooperation, C512 was heralded as ‘the technology behind Temporary Autonomous Zones’, and the inspired CyberTribe was ‘a step towards the realization of Global TAZ networks’ (zbid.).

Throughout the 1990s, numerous inspired techno-tribes emerged in Europe, North America, Australia, Japan, and other locations in pursuit of the desired ‘revival’ through the facilitation of TAZ-like enclaves. One of the earliest and perhaps most influential examples of cyber-tribalism was London’s ‘terra-technic’ sound system Spiral Tribe. With techno as their ‘folk music’, the Spirals believed their free parties were techno-shamanic rites, ‘reconnecting urban youth to the earth with which they had lost contact, thus averting imminent ecological crisis’ (Collin, 1997, pp. 203-204). While some cyber-tribals, like the Barrelful of Monkeys, build robust conceptual scaffolding heavily indebted to the likes of McKenna or Sheldrake, others, like the Midwest's Future Harmonix, emit cloying off-planet trajectories: ‘together we will build a galactic network of light. And now we are issuing a call to awakening and uniting of Starry Family on this planet, so we can all Together go home into galactic oneness’.

Regardless of agenda, these DiY dance collectives and sound systems are sites of youth belonging and identity. As an umbrella organization in British Columbia, Tribal Harmonix, states: By radically rethinking the meaning and function of community, tribal dance collectives are creating a model of positive social and cultural change in society as a whole. Moreover, the experience of dancing together brings healing, understanding, and peace in an otherwise tumultuous and rapidly changing world (Maffesoli, 1996). Like Maffesoli’s ‘neo-tribes’ (1996), these tech-savvy organizations are voluntary, unstable, and sensuous micro-cultures interconnected in a network of lifestyle nodes and centres of sociality between which individuals are known to oscillate.

And each node achieves its fullest expression in the festal, the DIY event, the techno-corroboree—where various new tribes gravitate to share grievances and exaltations, and to forge a recombinant culture of cyber, psychoactive, and ecological concerns. Thus, in 1999 in Berlin, 35 communities representing a spectrum of projects and agendas founded Sonics-Cybertribe-Network for Rhythm and Change, members of which converge annually. In more recent times, an annual conference-festival, the LA-based Gathering of the Tribes (GoTT) emerged. In 2002, with Biodiversity as the event’s theme, the GoTT hosted workshops and presentations on a range of issues from ‘Indigenous Rituals and the Making of Sacred Space’ to ‘Yoga and Temple Dance’, to ‘Social, Environmental, or Political Change through Music’. Fifty years since the end of World War II, a vanguard of liberators has secured a beachhead on the east coast of America, and has begun to work its way inland along the Hudson. For a man who once wrote how he anticipated "the great gaian dj 'strange attractor' mix[ing] the end game of the second with the opening chords of the third millennium," Fraser Clark's association with McKenna's cosmogonic scheme had been well established. In the years approaching Z Day, Clark, the editor of Evolution magazine (originally Encyclopedia Psychedelica International, Epi) and founder of London clubs Megatripolis and the Parallel YOUniversity, had been an influential articulator of the technology/ecology/spirituality tryst. Coining the word 'zippy' (Zen-inspired pronoid pagan) to describe those who disowned hippy-like pastoralism and embraced the cyberdelic evolutionary possibilities in technology, and compiling Sharmanarchy in the UK, an album championing England's revitalization through a fusion of the house generation and green movement, like McKenna, Clark evangelized rave as the newest and most significant vehicle through the end-times.

"Like the old pagan festivals," Clark announced in a speech delivered at Stanford University on 2 May 1995, "we're all in this together. This is our planet. She is indescribably beautiful, gigantic. We are atoms of that living Goddess. Personally, I can't see a better way to help people to learn a love, respect, and reverence for Nature than the classical open-air all-night Rave. Can you imagine what it felt like with 20,000 people going for it and actually feeling together, and the power of a people together...and then dancing the sun up? It is awesome, it is religious, and it is life-changing." In a communiqué posted on California's WELL (Whole Earth 'Lectronic Link) conferencing system in May 1994, Clark proposed that "any relatively conscious planeter has at least begun to suspect that the competition-based system within which human culture is currently operating is incapable of adapting, and needs to be re-coded." And since "the Sign" for which we all yearn is "that WE, the relatively conscious, are a hell of a lot more numerous than even WE supposed," there was reason for optimism.

Thus: The news is good. Very, very good. I see only one sociological phenomenon within Western Culture which has any chance of bringing about the required maximum change in the maximum number of people in the minimum period of time. UK Rave Culture has been evolving for five years now, and at its most accelerated, the tribal rave scene has united the raw young idealism and 218 GRAHAM ST JOHN enthusiasm of Rave with the eco-wisdom of Festival Culture to produce a mix of meltdown proportions." Clark's trans-Atlantic missiology was born. "Rave Culture" was "the end of the word as we know it," and the cross-hemispheric zippies, harmonizing rationality and mysticism, fusing practicality with idealism, and technology with ekstasis, were the inter-subcultural intercontinental vanguard of the end-times. Emerging from the 1960s counterculture, influenced by Gurdjieff and witnessing the possibility of new technology, Clark considered "the System" to be collapsing under its own weight of contradictions, and anticipated rave as the next and last "breakthrough device." In 1987 the Epi predicted that a cooperative cultural virus reproducing within the new dance culture would "infect the whole planetary culture." The coming "renaissance of sixties idealists and end-of-the-millennium techno-shamans" was prophesized in Clark's The Book of RavElations to be humanity's last chance. "Rave was to be the final carrier of the inclusive, cooperative 'meme', constituting the critical mass necessary to get everybody 'out of their heads and purely mental Processes and into... their bodies and hearts.'7 For the man who came to share the mantle with McKenna as 'the Timothy Leary of the 1990s', possessing distinct millenarian possibilities, the acid house phenomenon was more than a mere simulacrum of the 1960s. Indeed, in a later prediction a 'Global Summer of Love' was expected to blossom in 1997, when the 'Raver children' would continue the 'Beautiful Revolution'—the task of changing the world unfinished by hippy forebears 30 years before." To this end, Clark had founded the London dance club Megatripolis. The meaning of the name can be inferred from Clark's postings on the WELL in February 1995.> Megatripolis was an evolved biographical concept raised from Clark's unpublished science fiction novel 'Megatripolis Forever'."° 'After centuries leading right across the short hairs on the very cusp of System Disaster', he wrote, "WoMankind finally made the necessary evolutionary leap to collective consciousness long foretold, escaped the illusion of Time itself and camped permanently in the FUTURE PERFECT STATE which they named Megatripolis.' But only a few 'escaped the illusion', evolving 'beyond time' and capable of 'balling': wandering through the past, obsessed with 'researching' why things had remained wrong for so long amongst their ancestors. We also learn that the utopian dreams and visions universal to human societies are actually 'future memories' of the Megatripolitan Utopia, of 'how things already are beyond this absurdly thin veil of time'." Thus, as was announced in his speech on 4 November 1993 at Megatripolis, zippies were starting to pick up the pieces of the future: by remembering it (because 'we've lived there so long in the future'), and since the citizens of the future perfect state keep dropping hints in our time as they travel through.'$ In Clark's techno-organic science-futurism, Megatripolis (which in 1995 opened for a while in San Francisco as Megatripolis West) was a this-worldly accelerated learning model for the long awaited mass mutation to the Future Perfect State. The ethno-trance club offered ambient lectures (‘edutainment') in the early evening, with 'Parallel YOUniversity'””' talks delivered by the likes of McKenna, TECHNO MILLENNIUM 219 Ram Dass, Alexander Shulgin, Rev. Ian Stang (Church of the Subgenius), Rupert Sheldrake, Francis Huxley and Robert Anton Wilson. Musicians and DJs present included Deee-Lite, Irresistible Force (Mixmaster Morris), Mark Sinclair (Pendragon), Youth and Chris Decker. Inside, Clark claimed, you would meet time-travelling Megatripolitans amongst the residents and patrons. Were these zippy residents the immediate predecessors of Mega-tripolitans themselves? Perhaps— though in Clark's Gurdjieffian logic, as humans are all potentially zippies we are indeed all Megatripolitans—we just aren't conscious of it yet: at my highest I have sometimes seemed to glimpse that we are actually a// Megatripolitans, in some sense, already. Whether we realise it or not. Take another look. Doesn't this present 'unfinished state' feel more like the dream, the teaser, the pale shadow of what we re Meant to be?" Following this narrative, at Megatripolis, patrons could get closer to their destiny, perhaps even merging with the landscape of their becoming—if only for the night. The role of future memories, remembrance of the future perfect state, are as crucial to Clark's vision as they are to McKenna's theory. Timewave Zero is the Future Perfect State, and the Archaic Revival preparation appears to be the key. The novelty wave chart, with Megatripolis as 'the beach head of a benign mutation in the present', suggests that the tide was apparently in. A proclamation from January 1995 claimed that "the Final Battle for the Human Soul will be decided here in America, and you, dear Raver or Raver-to-be, are destined to be on the front line, and already are, whether you yet realize it or not."

The greatest campaign in Clark's rave-o-lutionary Millennium was the 1994 Zippy Pronoia Tour of the US. The Tour's objective was to bootstrap the hedonic bliss and communal vibe of the rave party into a mass movement for planetary awakening. Rainbow hippies coupling with techno-freaks were destined to produce 'Rainbow Ravers'.

Clark and his team organized underground events in New York City, Boulder, San Francisco, and the Rainbow Gathering in Wyoming. The 'Omega Rave' was envisioned to host 60,000 in the Grand Canyon but resulted in a much reduced event in Arizona's Kaibab National Forest as part of the World Unity Festival.

The Zippy-Woodstock failed to materialize, despite expectations of a cultural and spiritual tsunami. 'Zippy' was more a zeitgeist than a movement, as various individuals and groups adopted the term for their networked activities. This optimism of the 1990s was inherited from previous countercultures, particularly hippies, and aimed to hold fast against government and corporate encroachment.

In response to the early commercialism of rave, young digital musicians, activists, and esotericists produced their own music, built websites, published zines, and held free parties. This network of new digital, chemical, and cyber-enabled artists and anarchists was held together by a hopeful view that decentralized and pirated technology can be adopted for spiritual advancement, self-development, and wider cultural change.

Clark believed that the zippy phenomenon would stimulate the quickening of the 'new new age', promoting the rave-millennium. However, he was often perceived as a media-wise hustler of youth culture, little removed from other marketeers selling the millennium. Critics noted that the Zippy pitch sounded dangerously close to a Fruitopia commercial. Clark was rebuked and dismissed by cultural radicals and anarchists for his enthusiasm and short efficacy.

The zippy 'programme' deviated from the tech-dependent libertarianism harboured by Extropians. Cyberpunk critic Vivian Sobchak commented, "A zippie feels the terror and promise of the planet's situation and is prepared to use anything short of violence—magic, technology, entrepreneurial skill—to create a new age in as short a time as possible." Moreover, the intentional consciousness-raising party is a lasting zippy legacy. While Megatripolis became London’s edutainment capital, San Francisco’s the Learning Party—where events like ‘Envision the Eco-village’, held in October 2001, are themed with guest speakers, DJs and VJs—may well be the US equivalent. Global trance-formations: children of the sun and moon

With its reputation as a countercultural hotbed, San Francisco became a laboratory for the 1990s cross-pollination of techno-eco-spirituality. The Bay Area became a crucible for technospiritual trends sampling New Age and Neo-Pagan lifestyle traits using accessible and alternative technologies. Trance, trance dance or psytrance— which, at the hands of a ‘digital shaman’ like Goa Gill, had been incubating on the beaches of Goa between the mid-1980s and early 1990s and later percolating in domestic clubs like London’s Megatripolis and Return to the Source—carried the weight of an expressive spiritualism adopted by a community harnessing new electronic media in their simultaneous return to tribal roots and ascension to the stars.

Desmond Hill declared that, from 1991, San Francisco was home to ‘the most vibrantly conscious House Movement in the world... [with] an energetic enthusiasm and sense of togetherness that is sadly lacking in the gray wastelands of England’s dark Albion isles’ (Hill 1999:105). In the early 1990s, buoyed by the dot-com boom, and filled with a growing awareness of the global environmental crisis, techno-millenarians seemed to be at their highest density in San Francisco. Many of the young tech-savvy populace believed they were at the head of a new information revolution, and members of the TECHNO MILLENNIUM 221 emergent San Francisco rave community set forth to emit the signals of a ‘liberation theology’.

Writing in 1996, Hill stated: Something is going down in California.... The SF [San Francisco] Rave Community are the precursors of that something.... The post-literate techno prankster is just a hint of what is promised.... The movement is gaining in strength, in numbers, in vision, in purpose. It is international in scope, and, like a strange new virus in our cultural biocomputer, it is not to be ignored. (Hill 1999:106)

Hill went on to display the mood of possibility that pervaded this community, a network identifying with the countercultural advances made by 1960s forebears, and whose goal was to ‘re-adapt, re-educate, re-generate in order to face our responsibilities for the future of the Earth and all the species upon it’ (ébid.:99). A 1992 article by Anarchic in Rhythmos audaciously broadcast that ‘we are the generation’ (in Twist 1999:8). Come-Unity, the early ‘House Nation’ crew, stated “We Are The Planet’s Future’ (ébid.:29). And Mission Earth, an early San Francisco rave, stated on its flier: ‘always remember we have a responsibility to guide the next generation into the next millennium’ (Hill 1999:105).

As part of the WholeLife Expo, members of the SF Rave Community had converged at the SF Cyberforum on 30 April 1993, where expatriate Briton and Toon Town organizer Mark Heley stated: ‘it is important that we only have one item on our agenda: Heal the Planet’ (in Eisner 1994 xviii). In another statement attributed to Heley: “When you dance you integrate your body with your mind, you integrate your individuality with the collective, and you integrate this human race with the planet’ (in Hill 1999:105). Indeed it was the intentional ritualizing of trance dance that came to feature prominently in an emergent spiritual______ Consistent with webs of understanding manifesting in New Age and Neo-Pagan networks (St John 200la), an eco-dance consciousness rose within the post-rave community, revealing the interdependence of self-growth and planetary conservation among its participants. Clark had earlier pointed out that the ‘local rave is the local opening point...[in] the battle to save the planet and ourselves’.°? The integrated web of self and globe, of thinking globally and acting locally, retained a strong presence in later dance discourse and practice.

Contemplating the meaning, purpose, and direction of the ‘energy’ or ‘vibe’ often stated and felt to be at the heart of the local ‘tribal’ party, Jason Keehn (a.k.a. Cinnamon Twist) has articulated a self-globe ethic arrived at via Gurdjieffian philosophy, eliciting an affirmative response to the enquiry about whether trance-dancing can ‘save the planet’. In a self-published essay, Keehn (2001) builds on Gurdjieff's doctrine of ‘reciprocal maintenance’ to speculate about the possible role of underground global dance culture, thus following Clark (and McKenna) in valorizing psychedelicized mass trance dances as the viable ‘antidote’ to the egotism 222 GRAHAM ST JOHN at the heart of the West’s ecological vandalism.

We are informed that Gurdjieff draws attention to humanity’s forgotten obligation to perform our ecological function in the web of life. That is, as opposed to serving the evolutionary process by continuing to supply the planet, the moon, and the solar system with ‘the particular gradient of energy’ understood to be their due, human beings have largely become parasitical energy consumers, despoilers of the planet, circumstances which have resulted in the humanitarian disasters of the 20th century.

As a possible mode of ‘intentional suffering and conscious labor’, Keehn argues that trance dance may be a Gurdjieffian ‘path of return’, the kind of sacrificial ‘work’ thought necessary for humans to regain consciousness. Perhaps a small-scale means of establishing a necessary partnership or synergy with what Gurdjieff’s student J.G.Bennett (in Twist 2002: unpaginated) calls the ‘invisible world’, it is inferred that such activity may be a means of serving the future through meaningful human reciprocation with the planet.

According to Keehn, paralleling that found at Grateful Dead concerts and Rainbow Gatherings, ‘a melding of group feeling and energy into an ecstatic, orgasmic release’ is experienced at trance parties ‘that feels nothing less than spiritual or religious’ (Keehn 2001). Performed ‘by the right people in the right way with the right intentions’, trance dance: is capable of producing that same energy Gurdjieff believed Mother Nature needs from us...[and] the use of psychedelics in conjunction with intensive dancing to certain rhythms, by a new breed of individuals, may be a way to fill our cosmic obligation without the life-long spiritual training otherwise required. (Keehn 2001)

More than self-salvation, or simply implying the salvation of community—as in the ecstatic plight of the underground gay community discussed in Chapter 1 — Keehn’s trance-dance sacrifice is a ‘cosmic obligation’, a possible means of ensuring the survival of humanity in the planetary system. A possible answer to modern distancing from natural world rhythms, trance approximates an obligatory rite, something of a dutiful performance, for re-enchantment-seeking youth. As Kathleen Williamson indicates, such dance holds significant grounding potential: ‘our experiences with sound, psychedelics, and the dance ritual are the stirrings of communicating via the ebb and flow of the earth’s rhythms and letting it seep into our collective emotions’ (Williamson 1998). 

Such ‘communication’ is possible at events that are not only ‘immediate’ in Bey/Wilson’s sense of convivial paroxysms, but potentiate familiarity with non-human otherness. In these experimental zones, encountering native biota and participation in natural cycles through the technologically mediated dance contextualize the dissolution of human/nature boundaries. The immediate events implied had evolved in San Francisco from the early 1990s. At the time it was reported that ‘futuristic nomads are taking music out of the clubs and back to the earth. Sitting around campfires, sharing nocturnal tales, TECHNO MILLENNIUM 223 they are recreating timeless environments and reconnecting with natural forces’ (Hill 1999:100). Influenced by Goa psychedelic full moon parties and the UK feral sound-system tradition, these gatherings are often held in open-air locations (where dance floors are positioned in bushland, forest, beach or desert), celebrate celestial events and seasonal transitions (e.g. moon cycle, solstices, solar eclipse and other planetary alignments), and are attended by a large cross-section of the dance community, including pagans, travellers and other practitioners and affiliates of a techno-Earthen spirituality who may or may not consume psychoactive alterants. Hosting intentional “Trance Dance’ rituals approximating Keehn’s paean to ‘transform energy into higher gradients and radiate it back out into the world’, these events incorporate fluorescent décor, fractalized mandala projections, altars, chai tents, totemic installations, sacred geometry, earthworks, large speaker stacks positioned at the cardinal points and psytrance—with a seductive syncopated rhythm using ‘ethnodelic’ samples (e.g. didjeridu, djembe, sitar) together with an assemblage of psychotropic lights and visuals. Sonorous and sensual, sometimes opened with permission ceremonies conducted by indigenous custodians or through blessing rites, such events are celebrated as ‘no spectator’-style odysseys with a celebrated climax at sunrise. Following the first SF Full Moon party held by British expatriates Wicked sound system (incarnated from Tonka sound system) at Baker Beach in March 1991 (see Push and Silcott 2000:54—8), new spiritual dance collectives emerged on the West Coast, and then elsewhere across North America. The most influential of these has been southern California’s Moontribe, which formed in Los Angeles in 1993, holding regular full moon parties (Twist 2002). For instance, Moontribe’s Gaian Mind, held in January 1997 (Perring 1999:23-4), celebrated a’six-pointed star’ formation consisting of an alignment of all the planets, the sun and the moon. Koinonea, who have facilitated trance events called ‘2012’ since 1996, claim they are ‘dedicated to bring healing to the planet through sacred dance ceremonies [by employing]...ancient rites using modern day technology, hoping to reaffirm the bonds of connectedness with each other, the planet, and the spiralling galaxies’.>4 Having led a dance ritual at Four Quarters InterFaith Sanctuary of Earth Religion in Artemis, September 2002, Philadelphia psytrance collective Gaian Mind are proponents of a dance-based eco-spirituality: The energy of modern electronic dance harnessed by pagan spirituality and ceremonial settings joins the tribal traditions of our ancestors with the living tribal traditions of today. The result creates an experience of spirit that unites our common heritage as children of this planet.*° The Consortium of Collective Consciousness (CCC)______ 

Converging in San Francisco a year after an inspirational Goa beach experience in 1993, the CCC are definitive. “We dance for 224 hours and hours’, they state on their website, “encountering aspects of our own personal karma, and the karma of humanity, transcending layer after layer like an onion, until the dancer disappears altogether and only the dance remains’. This techno-mediated ‘rediscovery of ancient trance tradition’ represents a ‘full-circle return of humanity to its primordial beginnings’: Is it by pure coincidence that this profound, inspired, reconnection is occurring now, in the looming shadow of a world grown sick through overpopulation, environmental decay and corruption? Or could this be a divine manifestation, gifting the collective shaman of humanity with a vision of interconnected love consciousness at the most crucial moment?

Enabled by communication technology and cheap airfare, the CCC further speculate: ‘Perhaps we are the earth’s first global tribe...spread across the planet and circum-navigating it’. The key rendezvous points for this self-identifying ‘fluoro- Rainbow tribe’ are gatherings celebrating not only lunar cycles, but total solar eclipse —like the annual Solipse Festival held in Zambia in 2001, or Outback Eclipse in South Australia 2002. Other events include the Solstice Music Festival on the slopes of Mount Fuji and Australia’s Rainbow Serpent. Such global dance tribe events are lauded as ‘planetary healing communities’ (Antara and Kaye 1999), where collectively generated ecstatic energy can be consciously directed into the ‘planetary grid’, thought positively to impact collective consciousness.

Casting the Dreamspell
A further strategy of reconnectivity is evident in the adoption by new tribes of the Mayan 13 Moon Calendar. Post-rave dance milieus are affiliating with the World 13 Moon Calendar Change Peace Movement committed to the replacement of the Gregorian calendar with what is known as the Dreamspell calendar on 25 July 2004, “Galactic Freedom Day”. Stimulated by José Argiielles, who claims to have revealed timecodes in the classic Mayan calendar consisting of complex physical and spiritual cycles, the Dreamspell calendar forms the basis of the movement for a new Time. While the annual cycle of 13 moons falling each 28 days demonstrates ‘harmony with the Earth and with the natural cycles coded into the human female biological cycle’, the Tzolkin records a spiritual cycle which the Maya claimed came to them from the galaxy. In this cycle, widely regarded as the ‘13:20’, there is a 13-day galactic cycle and a 20-day solar cycle. Both cycles turn together, overlapping to form the 260-day cycle of the Tzolkin.

Argiielles began interpreting the Mayan codes of time in his The Mayan Factor (1987); and, in conjunction with Lloydine Argiielles, a subsequent work, The Dreamspell: Journey of Timeship Earth 2013 (1991), conveyed the mathematics of fourth-dimensional time (‘the Law of Time’) in the Tzolkin—a synchronic order of time distinguished from third-dimensional astronomical time. In his Time and the Technosphere (2002), Argiielles distinguishes the ‘natural time’ of the cosmos from the ‘artificial mechanistic’ time which humanity entered 5,000 years ago. For Argiielles, since the artificial time frequency of the 12-month Gregorian calendar and the 60-minute hour is arbitrarily imposed (a paradigm of the ‘warrior hero, separation and fear’), the survival of humanity and the avoidance of an environmental catastrophe are dependent upon our adoption of a harmonic calendar based on the Mayan cycles. For Argiielles, the end-times are chiming. On 11 September 2001, we received a signal that history is ending. Ostensibly, the collapse of the World Trade Center towers created a fissure in ‘the technosphere’ and opened up the noosphere: ‘Earth’s mental envelope’. Such a disaster is thus apparently a sign of humanity’s progression ‘into the love-based, artist hero paradigm of natural time’. But this is not the end of the world, just the end of the world as we know it, part of a prophetic ‘time release’. The approaching end-time is, in fact, the end of Time.

In the campaign for ‘the New Time’, a ‘major planetary consciousness shift propagated through contemporary techno-tribal networks. In September 2002, at Portugal’s Boom Festival, the Planet Art Network’s ‘Caravan for the New Time’ created a ‘Natural Time Zone’: a 10.5-metre dome surrounded by a tipi village where, amongst meditations, universal ceremonies to honour the directions, Dreamspell play shops, and galactic passport decodings, participants were able to discover their own ‘galactic signature’. The annual Global Eyes calendar features a “Mayan natural time calendar’, and DIY ‘tribes’ have self-organized to spread the message of ‘eco-techno-evolution’ through time shift: “We are now at the end of the Dreamspell of history and at the beginning of the Dreamspell of galactic culture’. Citing Argiielles, such is the belief of the Circle of Tribes, a Northern New Mexico dance collective who choose to align their gatherings with the full moons and the lunar Mayan calendar. Accordingly, ‘we are coming to the end of the belief in the male dominant, warrior hero, fear and separation paradigm [a]nd we are preparing to move into the love-based, artist hero paradigm of natural time’.

Furthermore, EarthTribe, a group of artists, DJs, filmmakers, ‘bioneers and dreamers’, have undertaken plans for a multimedia project, Journey Through the End of Time, documenting their adventures through North America and into the heart of Latin America to build a self-sustaining eco-village in the Costa Rican rainforest. Gathering knowledge and skills required to create a globally sustainable culture, the EarthTribe aim to travel through Mexico to 39 ig investigate the message of time left behind by the ancient Maya. Visiting their modern-day descendents and sacred sites, they'll engage in shamanistic rituals, where the dream world and our own collide, discovering together what the Mayans believe will happen as their calendar comes to an end in the year 2012.

A transhumant collective of artists, DJs and promoters, Mycorrhiza, encourage people to create their own Eden or Shambhala by returning to ‘natural time and natural living’. Apostles of the Campaign for the New Time, they have focused on establishing ‘a network of sustainable, conscious, harmonious 13:20 communities’. Travelling from their base in Canada, down through the US, Mexico, and Guatemala, to Costa Rica, Mycorrhiza’s annual Timeship Terra Gaia caravan is committed to ‘creating a web of energy to protect and sustain Earth, aiming at increasing awareness of our interdependence with the natural world’. The collective takes its name from ‘the largest living organisms in the forest’. Mycorrhizae ‘act as a vast underground web to help sustain the forest. Mycorrhiza is a symbiotic association that forms protective strands around the roots of trees, forming a dense energetic network throughout the forest soil’. As ‘an underground energy network that sustains’, they are the ‘human macrocosmic reflection’? of a fungus whose role in forest ecosystems was earlier valorized by Terence McKenna (see McKenna 1991). Earthdreaming: from the Isle of Albion to the Red Desert

While North American dance tribes valorize ancient Mesoamerican culture, elements of which have been excavated and reconfigured by various popular scholars, European future primitives like the semi-nomadic Spiral Tribe revere ancient monuments—especially those at Stonehenge and Glastonbury—as sites of special significance. Yet, as earlier discovered by New Age travellers, migration by semi-nomads to these and other significant sites dotting the rural landscape was perceived by the government as an invasion, a sacrilege. Thatcher was intent on repelling the invasive hordes populating and profaning the tranquil idyll of rural England (see Sibley 1997), their wild spatial territorializations precipitating moral panics and state terrorism. Such was incarnated most famously in the 1985 ‘Battle of the Beanfield’ (McKay 1996), where 1,000 police routed New Age travellers en route to their annual Stonehenge Free Festival on the summer solstice. Further Draconian statutes and domesticating measures followed the Castlemorton ‘mega-rave’ of 1992, culminating in the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act (1994), which criminalized a lifestyle and immobilized large free celebrations, including those representative of Earthen spirituality with an electronic soundtrack. Such repressive measures have been met with intriguing tactical responses.

An infamous creative maneuver was manifested in the series of scrap-metal 'Henge' installations built by London’s 'recycladelic' industrial-sculpture collective Mutoid Waste Co (MWC). The first MWC Car-Henges were raised at Glastonbury Festival in 1987, followed by another in Amsterdam (1989), a Truck-Henge in Italy, Tank-Henge in Berlin and several fixed antipodean installations: a Car-henge at Australia’s ConFest (1991), Combi-Henge in East Gippsland, Victoria (1997), and Plane-Henge, raised in May 2000 on Arabunna land near Lake Eyre in the South Australian desert. A response to English Heritage’s confiscation of the 'cultural headstones' of New Age travellers, the new and diasporic Henges became 'an iconic substitute for the real thing' (Cooke 2001:139), providing a new generation of travellers with a set design for the performance of wild abandon and rallying points for cultural and ecological struggle.

While public access to the stones during summer solstice was reinitiated in 2000, under the MWC mantra 'Mutate and TECHNO MILLENNIUM 227 Survive' these sculptures have evolved into significant reference points for international technomads whose cultural logic combines the desire to dance fiercely in the present with the commitment to 'reclaim the future' (St John 2001b). Conceptually transmuted and geographically relocated by scrounger-shaman and founding member of MWC Robin Cooke, in the Australian landscape these icons became scaffolds upon which new activists were invited to hang their own flags and banners, portals through which future primitives and antipodean terra-ists would pass. Plane Henge was constructed during Earthdream2000, a nomadic carnival of protest attracting hundreds of travellers (representing over 20 countries) through central Australia from May to September that year. Beginning in 2000, this outback odyssey was envisioned by Cooke as a 'mega-tribal' gathering transpiring annually until 21 December 2012. In the lead-up to 2000, via subterranean communication channels and over the internet, crews rallied to Cooke’s call. Re-enchantment and reconciliation are pervasive tropes motivating a network of new tribes formed by Western (and Westernized) youth participating in spiritual relationships with the natural world through dance. Eco-radical collectives, white sadhus, and sound-system crews were ready to integrate their vision with their own, traveling the last few thousand kilometers of the old millennium together. Disembarking from around the globe, techno-tribes, performance artists, and other parties mapped Earthdream into their itinerary. Since 2000, in cooperation with and in support of traditional owners, a series of free party events (including a major event held on the winter solstice) and intercultural anti-uranium mining protests have transpired on Aboriginal lands.

The proactive millenarian event of a technospiritual movement, Earthdream is the product of a strengthening alliance between radical environmentalism, new spirituality, and dance culture. In Australia, such an alliance has evidenced unique reconciliatory patterns amongst techno-tribalists. The element of sacrifice endemic to reconcilement possesses a feral legacy. Since the early 1980s, eco-radical youth formations became committed to the celebration and defense of natural and cultural heritage, forming throughout the 1990s a network of terra-ist collectives engaged in campaigns to blockade unethical logging, mining, and road projects (St John 1999, 2000). These reclamational strategies have been assisted through the adoption and repurposing of a range of sophisticated campaign tools (laptops, digital cameras, samplers, and synthesizers) by DIY techno-tribes whose appearance can be understood in the context of the deep wounds inflicted upon the natural environment and indigenous inhabitants, of which settler Australians and their descendants are increasingly aware (St John 2001b).

Opposing the nuclear industry and supporting Aboriginal sovereignty, Ohms not Bombs is a techno-tribe exemplifying this process. Largely the labor of expatriate Londoner Peter Strong, Ohms not Bombs is a Sydney-based nomadic sound system inheriting proactive and inspired agendas downstream from the confluence of DIY anarcho-punk and New Age traveler movements recombined within a community context influenced by Jamaican émigré reggae and rasta sound-system traditions. As the technomadic 'edutainment' capital of Australia, since 1995 the Ohms objective has been: "tuning technology with ecology, DJing our soul force into the amazing biorhythms of nature': 228 GRAHAM ST JOHN [With] co-created magic...this land is returned to the ancient and magical indigenous chain of wisdom. If we unite our purpose a massive healing can be set in motion.... Help institute a sound system for all, join the Earthdream, support Aboriginal sovereignty, and help dance up the country in rave-o-lution."4

A reconcilement with native land and people is a frequent pattern detected in the discourse and practice of Australian techno-tribes like Ohms. Many outdoor events, or 'bush doofs', recognize the authority of traditional custodians. For example, following a ceremonial welcome from the Wardani elders, participants at Western Australia's Earth Stomp (facilitated by the Tribe of Gaia) are said to undergo 'collective awakening and unification of human consciousness to the wider interconnectedness of Gaia' (Rowe and Groves 2000:159). According to Rowe and Groves: "Technology can be used in the interests of the Earth. Sound is a potent force when it comes to igniting human energy fields, it has the ability to make you move. We utilized technology to synchronize Earth, Body, Mind, and Spirit' (ébid.: 160). This chapter has demonstrated how electronic dance culture became implicated in a principle of revitalization associated with ecologism. Documenting the vast terrain of techno-millennialism—an interacting compendium of influential salvific models, utopian dreams, poetic tracts, and visionary art emanating from the likes of McKenna, Clark, Bey Argiielles and Cooke, variously cannibalized by trance elements within the global electronic music diaspora—it uncovered a characteristically 'shamanic technology' percolating within trance culture. The techno-futurist/revivalist attributes evoked and exploited by an emergent milieu have been mapped—from local DIY tribes and regional scenes to a global movement of technomads celebrating significant celestial events.

From the Dreamspell to Earthdream, from the Isle of Albion to the Red Desert, 'trance-formations' respond to environmental crises by acting locally. Such 'action' includes open-air dance, an intimate participation in landscape occasioning a somatic relationship with place, ostensibly enabling a meaningful connection or synergy with the Earth. Sometimes silly and sometimes sound, in revolutionary attitudes towards the self, time, and one's immediate environment, in heroic doses and mega-raves, in intentional rituals and dance activism, this eco-rave consciousness champions the interdependence of person and planet.

The globalization of digital art-religion
Reflexive change is a leitmotif of Western modernity, progressing, modernists believe, towards universal happiness and enlightenment. This teleological claim of infinite progress has, nonetheless, been denounced by “countercultural” movements as farcical—an Enlightenment ideal of utopia to be replaced by Romantic dys/ utopias. Yet, paradoxically, these cultures of resistance emerge from within modernity itself. They manifest cosmopolitan, expressive, and reflexive trends arising from the very modern dynamics they criticize. Globalization complicates this counter-modern dialectic by speeding up self- reflexivity in a non-teleological way (Giddens 1989; Wallerstein 1989). Digitalism, nomadism and the acceleration of transnational flows become constitutive of emerging countercultures (Featherstone and Burrows 1995). Representative phenomena, such as Techno and New Age movements, are thus situated at the intersection of countercultural continuity and postmodernist rupture and, enmeshed with the technological, political, economic, and cultural realities of global modernity, their development is crucial for understanding the possibility of alternative modernities.

What constitutes a “counterculture” in the early 21st century? Can New Age and Techno movements be seen as “countercultures”? Most scholarship on the matter provides historical outlooks on 1960s “radicalism,” 1970s “decline” and 1980s “cooptation” (Frank 1997;______ Techno is ritually expressed in multimedia dance gatherings such as "raves" and "trance parties" taking place at urban "wild zones" (Stanley 1997) or secret rural areas. Techno rituals constitute temporary spaces of ecstatic and psychedelic experience induced by techniques of shattering and reshaping identities (Collin 1997; Redhead 1997; Reynolds 1998). "Rave is more than music plus drugs, it is a matrix of lifestyle, ritualized behavior, and beliefs. To the participant, it feels like a religion; to the mainstream observer, it looks more like a sinister cult" (Reynolds 1998:5).

Positioned between leisure, religion, and politics, debates circulate about Techno's meanings and political content, notably its emphasis on sensorial hyper-stimulation, intense hedonism, and communitarian effervescence (Borneman and Senders 2000; Ingham et al. 1999; Best 1997; McKay 1996). Nevertheless, the current proliferation of Techno tends to veil its origins in the 1980s among marginalized, "underground" subcultures in global cities and utopian sites: ethnic gays in Chicago and New York (house and garage music), blacks in Detroit and London (techno and jungle music), and hippies/freaks in Ibiza (Spain) and Goa (India) (trance music).

These cultures of resistance emerged during the wild times of the neo-liberal capitalism of Thatcher and Reagan, and have been rapidly disseminating throughout international circuits and "postcommunities" (Ortner 1999). In sum, "Techno" signifies the emergence of aesthetic and stylistic manifestations of digital culture, which unfolds through symbiotic interactions between a global counterculture and various national mainstream cultures.

As a movement and process, New Age queers religious, scientific, and aesthetic realms, and designates a rhizomatic "network of networks" incorporating a vast universe of subjects, practices, and groups (D'Andrea 2000; Heelas 1996; York 1995). Underlying its multiple forms, the New Age's basic premise is the cultivation of the self (Bildung), rendered as a precondition for a new secular and spiritual age.

As an early 1970s countercultural derivation, New Age ethno-ecological, parascientific, and psy-spiritual syncretisms reflect the diffusion of a reflexive mysticism formerly confined within erudite circles of Western Romanticism (Luckmann 1991; Bellah 1985). Thus, expressed in casual statements such as "I don't have any religion but my own spirituality," growing interest in Zen, Yoga, Sufi, Cabala, Alchemy, and Wicca indicates the psychologization of world religions and native traditions as tools for the reflexive and expressive cultivation of the "self."

Techniques of the self (music, meditation, body-techniques, encounter groups, diets, etc.) are employed for attaining special subjective moods. But a dual logic of "love-wisdom" and of "power-control" evinces contradictions between expressivist and instrumentalist drives within the New Age movement, reflecting either historical trends toward individualism or neo-liberal ideologies of predatory capitalism (D'Andrea 2000; Comaroff and Comaroff 2000; Bellah 1985).

New Age stimulates religious transformations in the West, particularly the emergence of a global meta-spirituality which indexes a multiplicity of equivalent spiritualities of the self. Although studies on New Age and Techno do not usually interface, a careful comparison evinces a common horizon: alternative lifestyles informed by aesthetic, erotic, and hedonic/ist values and practices; cultivation of expressive forms of individualism;______ Based on modes of shattering and shaping identities, Techno and New Age operate as sites of experience wherein new forms of subjectivity and community are central concerns (McKay 1996; Grof and Grof 1990; Lukoff et al. 1990). These shared characteristics are intensified by global processes, such as cultural rootlessness, hyper-mobility, and new network forms, which contribute to the development of a culture of transpersonalism on a global scale. As such, countercultures express and entail a wider crisis of cultural legitimacy by problematizing dominant categories of “reason,” “ego,” and “objectivity” through the cultivation of non-ordinary states: “our normal rational consciousness is one special type of consciousness, whilst all about it there lie potential forms of consciousness entirely different” (James 1936:378). Thus, the seemingly disparate practices of Techno and New Age index a globalizing digital art-religion. However, this global subculture has to interact with various national cultures, institutions, and forces—markets, states, societies—which seek to regulate and appropriate New Age and Techno. It is often claimed that these movements are merely social forms of alienation and escapism, profitable economic activities exploring “naive” and “exotic” drives, or ideological expressions of a new global middle class. While not disagreeing, we must assess the accuracy of such claims since factors surrounding the implications of Techno and New Age remain largely unknown. The development of “global countercultures” across contemporary societies under global compression manifests tensions readable in multiple ways: social diffusion (from “underground” to “mainstream”) and distinction (production of “new” substyles), transgression and cooptation, singularization and commodification, reflexivity and fundamentalism, utopia and dystopia. Since global flows reterritorialize in concrete sites of experience, struggle, and signification, a critical dimension of analysis resides in the issue of space. Because of their historical, geographical, and cultural importance, this study considers the centrality of Ibiza and Goa in the shaping of global countercultures. Not only are these sites charged with “charisma” and “movement,” but Goa and Ibiza are also linked through the transnational circulation of alternative subjects, practices, objects, and imaginaries. In addition, both places exhibit a similar picture: leisure industries capturing and commodifying “utopia,” spirituality, and freakness. Alternative subjects thus navigate through turbulent spaces of mainstream labor, leisure, and law via supple strategies of material—symbolic negotiation and informal networks of support. In sum, based on an ethnographic study of Techno and New Age experiences of nomadic subjects who live and circulate within Ibiza (Spain) and Goa (India), this project addresses the formation of transnational networks of “alternative” lifestyles in “utopian” spaces. Within global and critical studies, the emergence of global countercultures relates to three interconnected issues. First, in the context of globalization, Techno and New Age can be seen as transnational formations that suffer as well as induce the deterritorializing effects of “time-space compression” (Harvey 1990). Digitalization, migration, and media are main processes in the analysis of how globalization affects Techno and New Age, requiring new methodologies on translocality and network mapping. Second, in the context of modernity, Techno and New Age can be seen as countercultures that critically respond to (or express) the modern apparatus of “sexuality” (Foucault 1976). In this case, Techno and New Age operate as a politico-cultural "counter-apparatus" centered on an aesthetics-erotics of the self. Requiring detailed analysis of ritual and lifestyle, this "counter-apparatus" potentially allows new forms of subjectivity, sociability, intimacy, and institutionality that depart from the biopower of the nation-state and major moralities.

Third, in contrast to postmodern studies that rely on fictional, literary, or abstract materials, this investigation of global countercultures focuses on empirical phenomena that instantiate seminal postmodern tropes: the nomad, the cyberpunk, and the neo-tribe (Deleuze and Guattari 1980; Featherstone and Burrows 1995; Maffesoli 1996). It seeks to demonstrate how nomadic, digital, and tribal practices are empirically articulated in a "counter-apparatus," which indexes a field of possibilities and agencies enabled by the complex nature of reflexive globalization.

Freak ethnoscape: aesthetics, nomadism, and spirituality

Around April, global freaks arrive on the Mediterranean island of Ibiza (Spain), before the mass of Anglo-Saxon tourists. They live and work throughout the tourist season (May-October), after which they leave again for faraway locations. And so did I from 1998 to 2002, living with a DJ, a yoga teacher, a neo-sannyasin, and a couple of eco-workers in various circumstances throughout my anthropological fieldwork. I was researching Techno and New Age experiences in various sites, such as mega-clubs (Space, Privilege, Amnesia, Pacha, El Divino, Es Paradis, Eden), trendy bars (Café del Mar, Bar M, Khumaras, Dome), and trance parties, as well as alternative markets, sunset meditations, and Biodance, yoga, and Reiki workshops.

In terms of national cultures, I circulated within three main groups: the Spanish inhabitants and club workers; the seasonal mass of British tourists and club/bar workers; and the multinational community of cosmopolitans dedicated to the shaping of an eco-expressive "style of life."

"Ibiza" dazzles as a charismatic icon of freedom and pleasure, a golden Utopia for European youth. In addition to its 100,000 residents, each summer the tiny island hosts 2 million tourists, an impact that has left Ibiza struggling with the pattern of hotel concentration initiated in the 1960s. Consistent with the rise of tourism as the largest global industry, 80 percent of the island's wealth derives from leisure, with major clubs and bars being central to it. While Space is renowned as "the best club in the world" within the global club scene, Privilege stands out as the world's largest club, with a 10,000 capacity (see Guinness Book of World Records). Industry estimates indicate that around 12 percent of visitors fall directly into the "club tourism" category, while marketing strategies sell the concept of "sun, fun, and sex galore," attracting a youthful, carefree tourist clientele constituted predominantly by the British working class (40 percent of tourists), and German and Spanish middle classes (25 percent and 15 percent, respectively). As a result, after centuries of poverty and isolation, La Isla Blanca often tops Spanish, Mediterranean, and even European rankings for per-capita income, economic growth, and tourism—as well as those for divorce, AIDS, and drug consumption. 

These socio-economic indices demonstrate an intense and fast-changing society, and validate the claim that “Ibiza is paradigmatic to those who interrogate the development of contemporary societies” (Rozenberg 1990:3). Yet Ibiza projects us outward, into a complex logic interrelating global and countercultural processes. The island’s foreign population is unique. While there are officially 11,000 immigrants, the real figure may double when frequent, albeit mobile, “visitors” are included. In this community of increasingly hyphenated and blurred citizenships, national origins (German, British, French, Dutch, Italian, Latin and North American) are fading references. In addition to Spanish cosmopolitans, a large number of this population are born of bohemian parents of differing nationalities, hold dual citizenships, and speak multiple languages. Having lived in three or more countries, India holds a special signification in the lives of many. Many are drawn from middle and upper social strata locally and abroad, often members of artistic, cultural, and economic elites (Institut Balear d’Estadfstica 1996; Rozenberg 1990). Most have chosen the island as an ideal place for shaping an aesthetic “style of life’, rather than the usual economic-centered motivations of most Spanish and African immigrants. Embodying reflections of later Foucault (Foucault and Lotringer 1989), their “aesthetics of existence” is manifested in various spiritual, creative, and hedonistic practices, cultivating values of freedom, pleasure, tolerance, and self-exploration. Often, these cosmopolitan subjects have sought to break away from the stress, boredom, and meaninglessness they experience in “mainstream” society. However, despite fleeing “the mainstream,” Ibiza’s transnational imaginary has paradoxically placed these se/marginalized people at the very center of its creative life, a cultural elite crafting much of the seductive charm of the island. This charisma is disseminated globally, as these cosmopolitan subjects are also global nomads who sustain alternative lifestyles by tracing nodes of freakness along transnational circuits. Typical alternative careers include luxury traders, therapists, healers, yoga teachers, fashion professionals, musicians, DJs, party promoters, drug dealers, travel agents, pack-and-go workers, rich bohemians, etc. Art and spirituality loom large on this alternative map of “utopian” sites that includes Ibiza (Spain), Goa (India), Bali (Indonesia), Bahia (Brazil), Ko Pagnan (Thailand), Byron Bay (Australia), San Francisco (U.S.A.), in addition to other varying locations. At another level, such utopian sites are interconnected and sustained by big urban centers (usually global cities) such as London, Frankfurt, Milan, Tel Aviv, Barcelona, Buenos Aires, Mumbai, and Bangkok. Such geo-cultural formations can be represented as a freak ethnoscape,* understood as a global web of mobile subjects, practices, objects, and imaginaries correlating to an alternative lifestyle centered on expressive, hedonic, cosmopolitan, and nomadic tropes. The making of alternative formations through the trajectories and discourses of nomadic subjects indicates discontentment towards Western dominant structures, and suggests, more than the congealing of various national self-expatriations, a general civilizational diaspora. Displaced souls in India: the alternative triangle of Techno and New Age Besides multi-locality, the organizational and ideological dimensions of the “freak ethnoscape” characterize it as a truly global culture. 

Alternative subjects circulate within planetary regions as distant as Ibiza and Goa; nonetheless, more than mere instrumental means, their practices of displacement and connectivity are constitutive elements of a lifestyle informed by globalism. Their shared practices are co-informed by a worldview structured by core categories of “movement-and-charisma,” as this study seeks to demonstrate. In Western Romantic imaginaries, India is a referent that nurtures utopian desires for an alternative life away from the despiritualized routine of modern reality. In fact, many Ibiza “residents” have visited India, particularly Goa, Poona, and Manali, the “alternative triangle of India.” In Ibiza, Indian religious, artistic, and gastronomic objects overtly circulate within tourist markets and chic boutiques, reflecting the consumerist drives of the majority (tourists and middle classes). On the other hand, an aestheticized “India” pervades the daily life of many Western subjects by means of cosmo-mystic life-orientations and body-techniques (meditation, yoga, super diets, breathing), reflecting a “style of life” inspired by ethical decisions (Davidson 1994; Hadot and Davidson 1995). By late October, global nomads arrive in India, in advance of the charter tourists and vacationing backpackers from Western/ized countries. And so did I. During the pre-monsoon seasons of 2001 and 2002, I interacted with various alternatives, freaks, and bohemians, attempting to understand their lifestyles, cultural orientation, and background, as well as their socio-economic strategies in relation to native and tourist formations at the local, national, and global levels. Traveling and living in freak regions, my daily life in India consisted of attending various events in the “alternative triangle”: guesthouses, underground bars, parties, hippie markets, beaches, ashrams, bus and train stations, etc. I sought to combine ethnographic methods with a nomadic sensibility in order to grasp the movement within the movement. Consequently, I had to move in and out of Ibiza and Goa several times between 1998 and 2002 in keeping with important geo-climatic windows that complement both sites. Goa “happens” during the European winter (from November to April) while Ibiza “happens” during the Asian rainy season (from May to October). This climatic periodicity frames oscillatory patterns of nomadism traced by global freaks. As Deleuze and Guattari point out, “nomads do not move” (1980:381): they are permanently trying to keep the smooth space of creativity and experimentation. ANTHONY D’ANDREA 239 During the early 1970s, a community of hippies and neo-sannyasins (Osho followers, as described below) colonized the northern Goa beach areas of Anjuna and Vagator (Odzer 1995; Chapter 14 in this volume). Paradoxically, although fleeing from the West, they benefited from Goans’ Christian-Westernized legacy of relative tolerance for leisure practices and individualism! In the ensuing years, “Goa” emerged as a signifier for a party-cum-drug paradise during winter seasons (Newman 2001; Odzer 1995; Saldanha 1999). By the late 1980s, the scene turned digital and tribal, with post-hippie post-punk freaks developing a new style of electronic music in rituals of psychedelic intensity: the hypnotic “Goa trance” (or “techno trance”) music played in secret “trance parties” in secluded beach or jungle areas of Goa. This concept filtered back to the______ As these developments reveal, the diffusion and resignification of countercultural practices, objects, and symbols can be read in a mapping of de/reterritorializing flows. At the onset of the 21st century, the trance scene was still taking place in Anjuna and Vagator, whose villages now boast upgraded resorts, bars, cyber cafes, and other ancillary services. Nonetheless, the area still differs from the nearby charter tourist beaches of Baga and Chapora, with their chaotic hotel urbanization, and from the more relaxed beaches of Arambol and Palolem, frequented by backpackers. And new sites are gradually incorporated into the trance scene, such as the highly secluded Om beach (in Karnataka), where long and wild parties are occasionally thrown.

The global freak community is a tiny minority, probably a few thousand people in the midst of 1.1 million annual tourists visiting Goa State and its 1.5 million population (Goa Directorate of Planning, Statistics and Evaluation 1998). Although 90 percent of tourists in Goa are male Indians, the industry targets the 10th of Western tourists for their superior purchasing power. Foreigners come from the U.K., Germany, Israel, Japan, Italy, and Scandinavia, among a myriad of other nations. The majority is comprised of charter tourists, who do not travel around, but just spend a couple of weeks in beach resort areas demonstrating no real interest in local life, let alone culture and history.

Nevertheless, the freak minority plays a critical role in the development of "utopian sites." Alternative subjects are well aware that they will inevitably be succeeded by backpackers, then tourists and, gradually, all the urban and tourist structures. Utopian paradises are thus transformed into giant tourist traps, while cultures of resistance are commodified as "empty" entertainment for the vacationing populace. Inflation, land value, pollution, and resource depletion escalate as a result. For these reasons, freaks generally avoid tourists, local authorities, and natives, other than for basic income-generating exchanges (e.g. artistic and healing activities, hippie markets, drug dealing, etc.).

In this context, techno-freaks perceive themselves as belonging to a marginal and vanishing culture requiring countermeasures of mobility and stealth against commodification and repression. Their postmodern melancholia stems from an awareness of the contradictions between their countercultural forms of resistance and the capturing modes of mass societies from which they (unsuccessfully) flee. Freaks are not tourists. While tourists consume exotic places for short periods and within tightly structured labor/leisure life-cycles, alternative subjects assume remote places as "homes" for extended periods and within a holistic "style of life" that seeks to combine labor, travel, leisure, and spirituality.

Moreover, although scorning the "commodification of experience" by conventional tourists (MacCannell 1989), freaks do not find anything special about most traditional cultures they engage with. They thus emulate the skeptical, romantic, and elitist gaze of the "post-tourist" (Urry 1990). For all their material and cultural particularities, it is wrong to conflate them with tourists. In Deleuzian terms, tourists belong to the striatic space of dwellers, while freaks live by the lines of flight of nomads. Within this culture of nomadism, Goa is not only a center for the territorialization of global countercultures but also a corridor linking other main nodes in India, particularly Manali and Poona. In northern India, Manali and the villages of Parvati Valley accommodate the trance scene in the Himalayan mountains. Here, multinational freaks are outnumbered in a party population that is 90 percent Israeli. Considering the popularity of Goa trance music in Israel, most of this party crowd is formed not by nomadic freaks but rather by Israeli travelers and “part-time” freaks, i.e. subjects who consume alternative fashion, albeit devoid of the meanings that motivate countercultural resistance. In any case, these giant mountains provide a magnificent scenario for techno trance gatherings, a sublime experience of digital paganism at a 4,000-meter altitude: high-tech tribal music and young bodies, dancing and wandering within green forests of pine and grass, lit bonfires, the refreshing breeze of snowy peaks, and an absolute blue sky—a veritable experience of the Nietzschean “superhuman.”

Located between Goa and Manali, Poona is a gentrified city near Mumbai hosting the world famous Osho Commune International. This paradise-like “meditation resort” provides a total environment for those seeking self-transformation and spiritual growth. The Osho movement is a good case for exploring the relations between New Age and Techno. Music, therapy, celebration, and meditation pervade daily life in the “Osho ashram.” In the huge camp-like Buddha Hall, hundreds of practitioners (about 80 percent Westerners) do one-hour “dynamic meditations,” which begin with cathartic stages of chaotic dance and gibberish, moving towards introspective stages of silent stillness and relaxation. Moreover, the commune’s “Multiversity” offers a wide range of group workshops centering on creative and cathartic expression. During three-day “encounter groups,” potent music is employed by therapists as transformative catalysts. Notably, predominant musical styles are techno, house, trance, ambient, and New Age music, played at specific moments throughout the workshop.

Besides the Buddha Hall and Multiversity activities, once a week the ashram administration “allows” short-duration dance parties where DJs play house music, exotic world-beats, and a bit of trance. Nonetheless, too emotionally derailing trance music is ANTHONY D’ANDREA $241 opposed by some therapists since many visitors are already undergoing intense therapies during the day.

During the 1970s, Osho's vision attracted many youthful, creative, and wealthy converts from the Western world. Very briefly, Osho (Bhagwan Rajneesh), also known as the “Rolls-Royce Guru” or “Sex Guru,” was an outrageous Nietzschean philosopher who sought to combine Buddha with Zorba, by affirming and celebrating Life (“I would only believe in a God who danced”) (Osho 1967, 1987). For decades, Osho lectured and organized “meditation camps” throughout India (Osho and Neiman 2000). When he lived in America, his commune in Oregon was closed by conservative political forces in 1984 due to Osho's virulent speeches against religion and politics. Osho returned to Poona, where he died in 1990. The permanence and growth of the ashram after his death depended on adaptation to legal and political structures. Internal dissent and purges took place within the movement, as more countercultural sannyasins disagreed with the ashram's official take on elegant marketability and social accommodation, in addition to its disapproval of trance parties and drug experiments being carried out by “rebel” sannyasins and freaks around Poona. During the post-Oregon diaspora, many sannyasins returned to Ibiza, a special place for practices of “love and liberation.” While participating in the nightclub life, they also introduced New Age techniques from the U.S.A., including the use of MDMA for meditation and body therapies. Although "ecstasy" was already known in European gay and anti-psychiatric circles, it was through the interaction between sannyasins and late 1980s clubbers in Ibiza that MDMA became an explosive discovery for European youth enduring the harsh times of neo-liberal capitalism on the rise. The legendary 1987 "enlightenment" of British DJ figure-heads (Oakenfold, Rampling, and Holloway) upon first trying ecstasy in Ibiza was pivotal in the subsequent explosion of Loved Up 1990s rave culture. The phenomenon rapidly flowed from the underground to the mainstream, from Poona, to America, to Ibiza, to London, to the world. Within multiple flows of alternative subjects, objects, and imaginaries across East and West, Osho sannyasins were a bridge between the 1960s counterculture and the 1990s Techno movement. This genealogy of flows exposes the singularity of countercultural lifestyles. While "displaced peoples" have "localized minds," such as migrants orienting melancholic identities to their homelands, alternative nomads pose a quite different picture. Techno-freaks and Osho sannyasins belong to a universe of displaced peoples with displaced minds. These Global Nomads seek to drift away from their Western homeland and, inspired by imaginations of a Romantic East, they asymptotically move towards a smooth, impossible space—"u-topia" by definition. By celebrating rootlessness and nomadism, global nomads shape cosmopolitan post-national identities that question the essentiality of the "local," and embrace the "global" as the new home and reference.

GLOBAL NOMADS IN IBIZA AND GOA

Silicon cage and post-sexualities
The emergence of transnational forms of digital art-religion must be understood in contexts of postmodern global capitalism. The "iron cage" of modernity rapidly becomes the silicon cage of techno-financial capitalism, while the human body is reduced to a carbon cage, a map of genes and rights colonized by high-tech engineering, legal intervention and commodification (in a Robocop scenario). At the semiotic level, fast production and circulation of signs and commodities undermine the subject's ability to make sense of reality, forcing him or her to make dramatic and uneasy decisions (Appadurai 1996; Giddens 1991; Jameson 1991). On the other hand, the corrosion of tradition by globalization enables the emergence of post-traditional identities by means of reflexive and cosmopolitan forms, understood as "detachments from provincial identities" and "strangeness within and outside the self" (Cheah and Robbins 1998). The very problematization of locality-making must be seen as a resource rather than as a barrier for the production of meaning and identity (Lasch 1994). Thus, the retrieving of reflexive meaning from global chaos can contribute to overcoming the corrosive effects of global commodification (Turner 1994). It is through the interplay between local environs and global processes that such aesthetic hermeneutics reconfigures time—space notions and structures of affection and belonging. As the production of localities and of subjectivities are interrelated (Appadurai 1996; Povinelli and Chauncey 1999), the "self" becomes "the new strategic possibility," an open project of reflexive elaboration within a "life politics" (Foucault and Lotringer 1989; Giddens 1992). The question is to evince how reflexive subjectivities are formed within deterritorialized conditions. In this sense, rather than agonizing chaos, reflexive globalization also provides the conditions through which New Age and Techno can rework the new cages of postmodern capitalism. Through playful moves of micro-transgression and calibrations of “intensity-moderation,” we may be witnessing exercises of emancipation, or, conversely, escapes from the pasteurized rationale of modern life. Or still, echoing Weber and Foucault, “something other we don't know what it is.” All in all, the central characters of critical poststructuralism—the mad, the marginal, and the artist—are metonymically condensed in the “global freak,” the schizo- nomad of this research. Art therefore arises as a site of experimentation for reconstituting social life and harmonizing spheres of science and politics.

If so, how to evaluate social movements of liberation? According to Foucault, they are innocuous in so far as they remain parasitic of science, rooted in the dominant apparatus of “sexuality” and “biopower,” which constitute the modern subject of discipline, production, and self-control. Not only have liberation movements centered their struggles on questions of sex and “natural” rights of the “individual,” but they have also subsumed their tactical moves under scientific modes as resources of legitimacy. Since these gestures preclude a real move away from the legal-scientific apparatus of “sexuality,” ANTHONY D'ANDREA = 243 liberation movements remain entrapped in the epistemic vectors they seek to transcend.

“Couldn't everyone's life become a work of art?” This was not some vapid plea for aestheticism, but a suggestion for separating our ethics, our lives, from our science, our knowledge” (Hacking 1986:239). Liberation from and through modern arrangements (market, state, and science) will require a new ethical “morality” centered on an “aesthetics of life” in which science and morality play an informative, not a normative, role (Foucault 1984:611). “New forms of community, co-existence and pleasure” would overcome scientific colonization and body politics centered on the “normal-pathologic” binary of confinement and exclusion. By displacing the modern apparatus of “sexuality,” a new erotico-aesthetic ethics can operate as a counter-apparatus leading towards an age of post-sexuality (a new arrangement of bodies, selves, intimacies, sociabilities, knowledges, and institutions).

The central question is how erotico-aesthetic formations of Techno and New Age contribute to this post-sexuality age. As such, they amoralize desires by emphasizing degenitalized pleasures; they appropriate techno-scientific knowledge by transgressing their uses and disciplinary foundations; they defy the centralizing logic of legal administration of bodies and spaces by promoting rituals that celebrate marginalization; they criticize modern economic rationality by pointing out its ecological irrationality. In sum, as countercultural formations, Techno and New Age queer, transgress, and reverse dominant devices that constitute modern subjectivities.

“Limit-experiences” of digital shamanism and nomadic spirituality

Because the forging of the self is experienced at the phenomenological level, the analysis of subjectivity forms must consider lived experiences, subjective practices, and imaginaries. Devised by Foucault via Nietzsche and Bataille, “an experience is something you come out of changed” (Foucault 1978:27). Since the macro-analysis of countercultures is important but insufficient for understanding the nature of emerging subjectivities, the transformative power of queer spiritualities must be assessed with reference to the notion of “limit-experience” (zbid.). At the intersection of body, power, and identity, a limit-experience occurs as a traumatic or sublime event that transgresses the boundaries of coherent subjectivity, "tearing the subject from itself" at the limit of living, intensity, and impossibility. Yet, in a second stage, such events require recollection in a space outside: "an experience is, of course, something one has alone; but it cannot have its full impact unless the individual manages to escape from pure subjectivity in a way that others can at least cross paths with or retrace it" (Foucault 1978:40). The mutual acknowledgement of something extraordinary animates a sense of sharing that bonds individuals and the world.

Oftentimes limit-experiences are induced by altering devices, grasped in Weberian terms as "intoxicating elements of orgiastic sensuality": music, drugs, dance, touch, among other techniques (Weber 1913). Alternative ways of perceiving and understanding reality thus entailed are potentially disruptive of subjective, collective, and political identities. This potential for transformation poses a menace to the legitimacy of civilizations, which depend on the control of populations and subjectivities, as particularly exemplified by the biopower mechanisms of the nation-state. However, as absolute eradication is impossible, exercises of self-transformation become marginalized while reinforcing exclusionary practices and moralities.

The ritual exploration of limit-experiences is then largely confined to alternative or "underground" subcultures, for which "intoxicating elements" are rendered as catalysts of charisma and problematization. In New Age and techno music, rhythmic and melodic features stimulate specific sensorial-affective responses, such as states of well-being, timelessness, disorientation, and intensity, often associated with imaginaries of inner utopia (or dystopia) or unio mystica. Whether as "narcotic," "angelic," or "plastic" sounds, the development of digital music as a "science of psychedelic sounds" seeks to mimic psychedelic or spiritual states (Erlmann 1996; Reynolds 1998). Such audio-emotional mimicry of inner states facilitates the experience of "movement" towards the "extraordinary."

Among intoxicating elements, drugs stand out for their corporeal and political implications. They amplify extraordinary experiences, whether in dance or spiritual scenes. LSD and MDMA provide two different phenomenological registers. While LSD (acid) propitiates a psychedelic asceticism enacted by mental states of hyper- imagination and mystical transcendence, MDMA (ecstasy) creates an oceanic eroticism expressed by affective states of excruciating pleasures and overflowing immanence. Notwithstanding their phenomenological complementarity, both substances greatly facilitate the setting of collective experiences of the extraordinary, such as "Temporary Autonomous Zones" (“TAZ”) (Bey 1991). But as dangerous as sacred, drugs can destroy as well as enlighten the user. Drug abuse by itself quite often transforms chemical blissfulness into nightmarish despair, as the two-year cycle of MDMA indulgence repeatedly demonstrates. In Techno, it is arguable whether drugs are mandatory for "understanding" digital music or achieving group acceptance. In any case, the following maxim holds: the basic drug is the music, a music that drugs the subject and makes him or her dance. The history of drugs congeals New Age and Techno, suggesting a single countercultural formation. Synthesized in Germany in 1910, MDMA was rediscovered by American psy-researchers by the mid-1970s and employed in experimental psychotherapy. Known as “Adam” for its effects of “Edenic rebirth” on patients, MDMA was also quickly absorbed by New Age circles as a device for creativity and self-exploration (Escohotado 1998:1,019-33). However, the epidemic dissemination of MDMA as commercial ‘ecstasy’ during the 1980s led to its criminalization in most Western countries. Even so, ecstasy became the drug of choice in the club scene, reaching massive levels of consumption in Western Europe throughout the 1990s. By and large, a comparison of MDMA and LSD reveals similar patterns of discovery, multiple cross-usage, dissemination, and criminalization.

An overlap between Techno and New Age ritual symbolism frames digital dance events as neo-shamanic experiences. Particularly raves and trance parties, these are multimedia dance events in hidden urban or rural areas, secretly announced within informal networks of young “initiates.” A tribal layout places the dance floor at the center of the venue, and technological devices are strategically positioned for altering subjects’ minds: mega-speakers powered by multi-deck amplifiers; smoke machines; laser beams, ultra-violet and stroboscopic lights; and video projections of extraordinary images: kaleidoscopic fractals, dazzling angels, digital babies; ethereal gardens, crystalline waves, super-nova stars; zooming spaceships, industrial plants, sex manga cartoons; or air bombardments, atomic mushrooms, and slavery; wastelands, destruction, cyber monsters, etc. As a postmodernist art genre, these videos are set on iterable mode: images unfold for a few seconds and are instantaneously repeated; the next sequence, though, extends shortly, and is looped again, and so on: repetition with difference. At a deeper level, iterability dramatizes modern routine and neurosis in a clash of boredom and excitement, hugely intensified by psychoactive substances.

Likewise, rave décor draws on tribal, military, psychedelic, and utopian elements: colorful drapes, tents and banners, psychedelic paintings, aromatic candles, incense, religious symbols (Om, Shiva’s Trident) and statues (Buddha, Nataraj, Ganesh). Enveloped in kaleidoscopic mystery, a rave or trance party is felt as a pulsating organism that engenders extraordinary experiences. By combining art, technology, and religion, the DJ is the new digital shaman, responsible for creating and maintaining an atmosphere of excitement and communion in the crowd. As a witchdoctor healing the sick, divining the hidden, and controlling events (Mauss and Hubert 1902), the DJ plays music with techniques of continuous beat matching, planning, and improvisation of “tracks” (records) in direct, albeit intuitive, interaction with the dancing and non-dancing crowds. The music is extremely loud and its multi-rhythmic layers unfold through iterable and restless refrains: repetitive beats and loops of sound with minor alterations of tones and insertion/removal of layers and staccatos. This endless pattern of repetition-cum-difference pumps untiringly for many hours, often days, as DJs alternate without interruption. Rather than circular, digital music is spiral, if not fractal. As intensity sets in, iterable sounds transform music into a meta-music of derailing sounds, altering people’s sense of mind, body, feeling, time, and reality. The dance floor gradually becomes a powerful zone of psychic fields. While "raving," "when the dancer becomes the dance" (Osho 1988:55), sounds and lights acquire tangible textures and are felt to merge with the dancer's soul. It is akin to Neo mastering The Matrix. Induced naturally or chemically, states of perception are altered, and the self disintegrates; the ordinary sense of a bounded atom melts into waves of flows: flows of pleasures and imaginations, synchronizing with other bouncing bodies, merging with the crowd into an ocean of light, sound, warmth, and dance. The Judeo-Christian individual is replaced by a Confucian experiencing of a cosmic self. Or, in the Zen acceptance of paradox, raving sensations are as orgiastic as ascetic, as private as collective, as inner as outer—a dismantling organism, a Body-without-Organs.

This explains why a rave (or trance party) never really climaxes but remains looping, spiraling in a crescendo, into higher plateaus of intensity (Deleuze and Guattari 1980). Good digital music and gatherings keep creativity at the edge of experimentation: the Body-without-Organs of Techno, which unfolds like a nomadic desiring-machine, an assemblage of lines of flight moving into and through the realms of the "extraordinary." This phenomenology of ecstasy corresponds to "limit-experiences," as, both in Techno and New Age rituals, subjects repeatedly report sublime and traumatic experiences. Pleasure, pain, catharsis, awareness, despair, and happiness underlie such accounts of non-ordinary sensations and states. Telepathy, mystical visions, paranoia, ego dissolution, excruciating pleasures, deep insight, serenity, and cosmic love are not uncommon. It is not that the experience awakens a particular feeling, but rather that amplified feelings are the source of a limit-experience.

As an exercise of intensity and impossibility, these transpersonal practices engender experiences of personal derailment—deterritorializing asignification—sacred madness with rewards and dangers. Nonetheless, the tribal features of Techno and New Age rituals should not be seen as revivals of primitive, premodern forms of life, as is often claimed by insiders and some scholars. Countercultural neo-tribalism is structured by meanings and functions centered on the question of subjectivity sensed sacredly by the subject as a matter of "utmost individuality" (Heelas 1996; cf. Dumont 1983; Maffesoli 1996). Such ritual spaces emulate dilemmas of postmodern subjectivity: the constitution of flexible and reflexive identities within digital, mobile, and neo-capitalist environs.

The Durkheimian notion of "collective effervescence" must be reassessed within these parameters: through the group—as a necessary condition—but because of the individual. In global countercultures, horizontal (spatial) displacements are accompanied by vertical displacements (self-identity). Global nomads (bohemians, New Agers, freaks, ravers) enjoy their condition as long-distance travelers, spiritual pilgrims, regarding the whole planet as a space for moving, if not a "home" in itself. Significantly, these peoples are familiar with "limit-experiences," seen as "trips" into and out of the self (as vertical displacements). Poles of mystic contemplation and ascetic action are reconfigured at this point as "tripping" indexes hedonic/ist and erotic forms of innerworldly redemption ("innerweltliche Erlésung") (Weber 1913; Corsten 1998). New Agers and techno-freaks refer to their explorations with music, dance, and drugs as spiritual experiences, a "deep trip." ”DJs describe their central task as "taking the crowd on a journey." When taking acid or ecstasy, the consumer is wished a "nice trip." "Space-ships" and "intergalactic voyages" are common representations of the psychedelic "journey" into non-ordinary dimensions. Significantly, the word "hallucinogen" comes from the ancient Greek alyein, which means "to wander," and relates to the distracted gaze of trancing shamans. A drive for something not ordinary underlies all of these examples, a drive for movement as an extraordinary experience.

Ibiza and Goa are as intoxicating as music and drugs. On the one hand, it is obvious that limit-experiences and countercultures may occur anywhere in the world and without recourse to "intoxicating elements." On the other, there is a general belief that emphasizes the importance of "being there" (in India, in Ibiza—in the "Otherland") in order to experience life and Being. Travel-talk endows as much meaning as prestige upon those who have "been there," to extraordinary places and dimensions. Yet, as the world shrinks, Ibiza and Goa become global icons for the expression as well as for the commodification of alternative lifestyles: Goa parties, New Age Orientalisms, and Ibiza fashion have become signifiers with a global circulation. Paradoxically, the more countercultures capture the desire for alternative charisma, the more they serve consumptive capital (Povinelli 2000; Best 1997).

Nevertheless, Ibiza and Goa still hold as global references for an alternative way of life animated by a cultivation of nomadism and spirituality. How countercultures prompt social transformation through the very capitalist forms they criticize remains a critical question.

Counter-conclusions: flexible economies and subjectivities
In the capitalist stage of flexible accumulation (Harvey 1990), alternative subjects live within interstitial spaces of leisure, alternative or informal economies and welfare systems. Nomadic strategies include autonomous, seasonal, or part-time jobs, artistic, tourist, and "health" careers, or illegal activities. They frequently count on parental allowances, inheritance, or state-based unemployment support. Quite often these strategies involve a combination of all of these possibilities.

In Ibiza and Goa, typical locations for income-generation and socialization are nightclubs, ashrams, tourist markets, sunset bars, alternative centers, eco-cooperatives, among others. In India, Global Nomads purchase exotic luxuries from local producers (handicrafts, clothing, jewelry, psychoactive substances) in mutually beneficial, albeit unequal, exchanges. In the West, these commodities will be sold in boutiques, markets, and streets at highly inflated prices, exemplifying how alternative strategies are materially reproduced.

The geo-economic territorialization of global countercultures in "freak" sites impacts on the lives of local communities, as perceived by natives and analysts. The presence of big hotel chains in Goa and Ibiza has led to environmental degradation, capital alienation, and social conflict (Dantas 1999; Rozenberg 1990). On the other hand, the presence of freak communities represents decon-centrated income for local villagers in addition to the queer charisma that they convey to visited places, inadvertently paving the way for tourism. However, local populations disagree with alternative lifestyles (dressing, parties, sociability, nudity, drugs, music, noise).

In Ibiza, despite their role in promoting the island's utopian imaginary since the 1930s, alternative subjects had to adapt to the conditions and opportunities of a rapidly modernizing society or leave the island for "more primitive" sites in Mexico, India, or Brazil. As the old hippie complains, “Then they loved us, now they blame us!” In India, Techno and New Age activities became sources of income for local communities. Besides the ancillary activities of taxing, lodging, restaurants, and the pervasive “chai economy,” trance parties in Goa became complex joint-ventures of Goan gangs and Western DJs, the former seeking profit through sound-system rentals, bar sales, and police bribes, and the latter aiming at shamanic excitement and prestige. Although drug consumption abounds in the clubs, bars, and parties of Ibiza and Goa, in most cases there is no basic economic motivation linking party organization and drug dealing, as commonly suspected regarding trance gatherings. It is well known that party promoters often lose money on their parties. Nonetheless, they allow drugs as a way of creating a “nice atmosphere” among friends and the crowd. In Ibiza, trance parties are organized by non-profit gangs of youngsters, and the underground scene unfolds secretly through the agonistic motivations of sociability, excitement, and transgression of global and Spanish freaks.

On a larger scale, transnational flows of nomadic countercultures and the resulting circuits, networks, and ethnoscapes are affected by various agencies and structures operating at the local and global levels. By the early 1990s, legal repression of raves in the U.K. contributed to the dissemination and commodification of parties and drug consumption in Ibiza and Goa. Conversely, in 2000, north Goan villagers protested the tough repression of trance parties by authorities and police, as it stifled their main source of subsistence by scaring freaks, backpackers, and party-tourists away. Goan authorities had to respond by recalibrating their actions in order to accommodate different interests. This meant that a certain degree of freak activity had to be allowed.

As we have seen, a complex dynamic of conflict and accommodation also underlies the development of the Osho meditation resort in Poona. In sum, the interconnectedness of global flows develops through tensions and disjunctures among social, political, and economic domains, and characterizes the turbulent environments through which global nomads navigate. As evinced, the co-presence of multinational backgrounds, nomadic practices, and transpersonal experiences among global nomads is central to their identity.

By exploring “limit-experiences” (Foucault) in transgressive cults of “orgiastic sensuality” (Weber), Techno and New Age provide sites for the cultivation of a cosmopolitan nomadism, by which alternative subjects attempt to make sense of their lives in contexts of high mobility and instability. As a matter of fact, countercultures have been comfortably exploring strangeness, rootlessness, and displacement much before these qualities became considered by media and academia as core predicaments of contemporary social life. The familiarity of countercultures with such predicaments illustrates the richness of Techno and New Age as advanced sites for the investigation of emerging realities.

Hence, theories claiming that alternative subjects have “dropped out” of neoliberal capitalism are unable to explain why and how they make critical decisions regarding their life strategies. Certainly material contexts introduce powerful conditions, but, as this study has sought to demonstrate, away from the alienation and routine of modern life, alternative subjects seek to rearticulate labor, leisure, and spirituality in an exquisitely meaningful way, irreducible to economic explanation. Above all, global nomads attempt to engender holistic charisma in a fragmented and disenchanted world. By assembling nomadic, digital, and spiritual apparatuses, New Age and Techno constitute a common semiotic space of subjectivity formation and social critique. Their practical strategies may diverge, as New Agers cultivate the Romantic shaping of the self as an unfolding inner substance, while techno-freaks celebrate the self-shattering shamanism of “machines for freedom.” Nevertheless, both movements congeal in the deployment of material-symbolic devices to foster alternative forms of self-identity, life strategy, and post-community. Such life experiments seek to drift away from the Western regimenting apparatuses of the nation-state and sexuality; and as long as their lines of flight—desire and creativity—are kept, Techno and New Age will remain as sites for such life experiments, notably cosmopolitan post-identities and holistic post-sexualities.

Though Deleuze and Guattari take great pains to avoid any taint of the transcendent, the Body-without-Organs, or BwO, veers ineluctably towards sacred forces. In “How to Build a Body without Organs,” the authors explore the BwO in the context of drugs and somatic spiritual praxis (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 149- 66). There is mention of Taoist arts, of Artaud’s peyote experiences in Mexico, of a Castaneda-like “egg.” The most important parallel, however, is one that they do not explicitly draw, and that is between the BwO and Hindu tantra. Loosely speaking, tantra aims, not to suppress or transcend the emotional and physical energies of the body, but to embrace and transmute those energies through a kind of internalized, psycho-ritual alchemy.? Over and. against study and reflection, tantra emphasizes procedures: mantra, visualization, hatha yoga, ritual, all geared toward the transmutation ofa fundamental cosmic energy called shakti. A serpentine store of this stuff, known as Kundalini, lies coiled at the base of the spine. This energy, which some claim is artificially stimulated by certain drugs, can be coaxed up the various etheric centers—or chakras—that lie along the central channel, or sushamna, associated with the spine. As metaphor and sometimes as practice, sexuality is key to this process, and the most paradigmatic tantric sexual procedure is the retention of orgasm in the male, an ascesis which helps transmute sexual energy into rarer and more potent elixirs. I apologize for this almost offensively oversimplified account, though at the very least it reflects notions of tantra circulating within the popular discourse of bohemian or alternative spirituality. At the moment, though, I want us to hear the tantric echoes in Deleuze and Guattari, echoes that in turn will help us understand the alchemical dynamics of the rave. Here is Deleuze himself on courtly love: Now, it is well known that courtly love implies tests which postpone pleasure, or at least postpone the ending of coitus. This is certainly not a method of deprivation. It is the constitution of a field of immanence, where desire constructs its own plane and lacks nothing.... Courtly love has two enemies which merge into one: a religious transcendence of lack and a hedonistic interruption which introduces pleasure as discharge. It is the immanent process of desire which fills itself up, the continuum of intensities, the combination of fluxes, which replace both the law-authority and the pleasure- interruption Ascesis, why not? Ascesis has always been the condition of desire, not its disciplining or prohibition. The process, whereby desire "constructs its own plane and lacks nothing," is intimately allied with the emergence of the BwO. Replacing the term "desire" with "energy" or "shakti" reveals the continuity of this construction with tantric procedures. These operations inform both Goan trance parties and the "spiritual hedonism" of the freak subculture that gave these fetes their shape.

Despite the anti-authoritarianism shared by Deleuzians and underground ravers alike, it is crucial to emphasize that the BwO, in many cases, is a product of tradition. Tradition is a consistent feature of spiritual claims, and even the most anarchic and disruptive spiritual dynamics are often couched in terms of teachers, sacred texts, and initiations. This is the case for the Taoists, the Tarahumaras Artaud met, the Sufi masters who may have inspired the tradition of courtly love, and even Castaneda's simulated studies in sorcery.

The BwO is certainly constructed, but that construction participates in transmission. Prophets of religious transcendence may proclaim novel revelations, but the closer one sticks to the powers of the earth, the more likely it is that your line of flight emerges from an abiding spiritual matrix, however mutant.

Contemporary spiritual subcultures of the West – postcolonial, technologized, thoroughly disrupted by modernity – may lack access to traditions of practice or have fabricated them out of problematic and commodified desires for continuity and "authentic wisdom." However, this condition does not obviate the fact that procedural elements of these traditions – the "algorithms" that drive the praxis of Taoist energetics, yoga, tantra, and even alchemy – have been transmitted by individual teacher-bodies into bohemian, psychedelic, New Age, and "alternative" subcultures.

These subcultures, despite their provisional and open-ended character, invariably fabricate their own lineages, traditions, and networks of transmission. The contemporary production of the BwO, at least in the context of exotic mystical practices, drugs, sacred sex, and trance dancing, constitutes a "tradition" within the West, one that, while essentially anti-authoritarian, is passed on and refined as much as it is constantly reinvented.

Goa has become the site, both mythical and historical, for a sort of tantric hand-off between an earlier generation of Western trance dancers and today's psychedelic ravers. The freak colony has emerged as a sacred birthplace, a font. The narrative surrounding Goa in itself affirms the spiritual aspirations and tantric power of today's global psy-trance scene – because, for all its rhizomatic multiplicities and cyberdelic futurism, the scene demands a backstory for its embodied illuminations, a context-building tale about initiation and transmission. For it is in invoking such a tale that tonight's BwO can encompass the eternal return of its progenitors, and that something rather ancient can find its dancing feet again. 

Profane Illumination

At the tail end of 1993, I took a one-stop hop from New York to Bombay, before transferring to one of India's recently deregulated flights to Goa. At the airport, I caught a taxi up to Anjuna Beach, which my Lonely Planet guidebook told me was one of the last hippie holdouts. We drove through broad rice patties and thick palm groves, and then into Anjuna, where the taxi dumped me onto one of the village's countless sandy paths. After scoring a room in a local villager's house for two bucks a day, I was ready to ring in the New Year.

Though I didn't know the location of the party, the auto-rickshaw driver did, and I hopped into his sputtering three-wheeled machine. The waning moon filtered through the cracked window, only a few days past the full. Soon we arrived at the party site: a tree-lined hill about a mile inland from Vagator beach. The dance area was still quiet when I wandered in, nothing but a clearing lined with black lights. A few yards away, scores of chai ladies from nearby villages had laid out rows of straw mats and piled them high with fruit and cookies and bubbling pots of syrupy brew. People flopped out on the mats by the light of kerosene, smoking, sipping chai from scalding hot glasses, awaiting the dance.

The international crowd was pretty evenly divided between furry freak brothers and hip clubbers strutting their cyberdelic stuff: incandescent sneakers, flared fractal jeans, floppy Dr. Seuss hats stitched with the bright mirrored cloth of Rajasthan. Then an ambient raga began: the bubbling tablas and droning sitar of an Orb remix. A crowd of young Indian men in dress shirts and slacks set off fireworks. Then the beats bubbled into an insistent digital pulse soon punctuated with kicking bass thumps. Computer bleeps, digital winds, and melancholic arpeggios gradually layered the incessant beat, which approached the 150 bpm mark, where dancing breaks down into jitters and tics.

The freaky dancers rode that edge, keeping the flow in their hips as they chased the looping liquid melodies with their hands. Occasionally a disembodied voice floated through the mix, triggering mindfucks left and right: "Music from the brain;" "There are doors;" "Everybody online?" I made my way to the DJ booth, squeezing between dancers spinning in exotic rags and local children begging in filthy ones. Behind the mixing table stood an old-school hippie: long dreads, black jacket, and leathery, sunburned face. The man was slapping tapes into two DAT players run through a pint-size mixer. Alongside his stacks of black-matte cassettes stood a candle, a few sticks of Nag Champa incense, and a small devotional portrait of Shiva Shankar, sitting in ardha-padmasana on a tiger skin.

"That's Gil, one of the best," one of the Indians mobbing the booth tells me. What luck. Genesis had told me about Gil: an old psychedelic warrior from the Haight Ashbury, an intense being, a heavy-set bear of a DJ. "You have to find him," Genesis had said. "He's one of the links." But Gil was too lost in his craft to talk. By 3 a.m. or so, the music grew heavier and the so-called "power dancers" took the floor: utterly absorbed, ceaselessly flowing, totally dedicated to the beat. Their bodies sought to express every oscillating pulse, every tw______ "These people were surfing the psychedelic bardo, that liminal zone that variously evokes dreamtime and death, primal rites and apocalypse. 258 GOLDEN GOA’S TRANCE TRANSMISSION

My own limbs had first plumbed that zone during Grateful Dead shows in California in the early 1980s, especially during the legendary second sets. But in contrast to the Dead’s notoriously loose if often resplendent noodling, Goan trance seemed more economically engineered for psychedelic journeying. Let’s be clear: most of the psychedelic characteristics of psy-trance are functional rather than simply representational. That is, they trigger and extend psychedelic perception as much as they signify it with characteristically “trippy” cues. Just as the combination of Fluoro-lite dyes and black lights seems to virtualize visible objects to suitably tweaked nervous systems, the music’s sonic after-images and timbre trails disintegrate conventional spacetime and allow shimmering micro-perceptions to emerge on the melting border between sound-waves and internal sensations. Portals appear, resonating geometries that seed further cognitive and somatic shifts, while the relentless and essentially invariant rhythm—what the Australian-Goan DJ Ray Castle calls “quantum quick step” (ENRG 2001:165)—at once anchors and fuels the voyage. Repetition becomes a carrier wave, the audible beats seemingly dissolving into pulsing nervous systems whose mutual entrainment brings on a collective intensity which transcends—yes, transcends—the usual dance-floor heat.

Enough of this. Seeking relaxation and discourse, I wandered over to chai land and plopped down next to a crowd of Brits. Pete was in pajama pants and an open vest, his aristocratic features oddly framed by long scraggly hair. Hunched next to him was Steve, a skinny blond rolling a spliff. “Have you seen The Time Machine?’ Steve asked me. “There’s this noise that the Morlocks use to call the Eloi underground. That’s exactly how it was five years ago when my friends and I first came to Goa. We heard this booming rhythm in the distance. We didn’t know where the fuck we were, but we just crashed through the jungle with our torches. The sound was calling us. I got real paranoid that there was some alien intelligence directing the computers, like the Morlocks, summoning us to a place where they were gonna eat our souls.” Pete nodded as if nothing his friend says could surprise him. “My first party, I just got the feeling I was in some spiritual Jane Fonda gymnasium,” he says. “Boom, boom, boom, and everyone going into trance. It was quite alienating actually”

I asked them how Goa parties differed from the raves in England. “Here people know about the history of freakdom, of free-form living,” said Steve as he passed the smoke. “That vibe is carried forward with the music. In England it’s not really freaky anymore. It’s too organized. People are wearing the right kind of T-shirts, whereas here people will rip their T-shirts apart and run down the beach.” Steve and Pete’s comments showed how Goa functioned as a locus of tradition. How “spiritual” you consider this tradition depends on your definition of the term. “Free-form living” implies sensual practices and low-commitment lifestyles at least as much as it implies supernatural notions of the Tao or spiritual practices of, say, choiceless awareness. But it is precisely this “pseudo-spiritual” mix, incoherent or even repugnant to observers but rather delicious to participants, which characterizes bohemian or freak religiosity—what I am calling its spiritual hedonism." ERIK DAVIS 259 Steve’s reference to The Time Machine also reminded me of the almost sinister edge to psy-trance’s science-fictional imaginary, an edge most visible in the thankfully fading images and lore of the Grey aliens. Such images should curb any easy attempt to sacralize the dance floor as either a utopian site or an essentially archaic one. This is a music, a consciousness, ghosted by futurity which for contemporary (post-)humans has become a great abyss, however full of marvels. In other ways, this consciousness is a testament to the seriousness of the scene’s psychedelia, because serious psychedelia plumbs many spaces far outside conventional markers of the spiritual. If more mainstream clubbers are willing to sacralize the Teletubby bliss of MDMA, then psy-trance dancers tip their hats to the cosmic reptiles that snicker eternally from the inky depths of psilocybin or DMT. Shamanspace is no walk in the park. But Steve’s technological paranoia also reflects the trickiness of freak transmission, with its anti-authoritarian and free-form biases. Instead of formalized rites of passage, it relies on happenstance, personal contacts, the vagaries of underground media, and pure synchronicity.

A defining element of this antitraditional tradition is the emphasis on the individual’s personal experience with various techniques of ecstasy, from meditation to drugs to unconventional sex. Decoupled from the cultural constraints that characterize most traditions, ecstatic technologies carry a powerful Promethean—dare we say Faustian?—ambivalence, and provide few safety nets. In rave culture, these techniques also include the technologies and technologists (DJs, musician-programmers, blinky lights) that collectively engineer the dance. Submitting one’s altered consciousness to such powerful electronic assemblages is nontrivial, because technology's great question—the question of control—is always left open. As with psychoactive substances themselves, our spiritual relation to technologies often takes on the character of a pact, an uncertain alliance. Bohemians have long recognized that such pacts imply a certain diabolism. In its very sonic logic, psy-trance suggests that the West’s colossal pact with electronic and digital technology is driving us towards a radically post-human future. The fundamental paradox of this music is that in its path towards the ancient trance and a life beyond Babylon it must march straight through the manic machines of the datapocalypse.

Enough of this. As the first hints of sunlight streaked the night sky, it was time to return to the dance. Dawn, I discovered that day, was Goa’s sweetest moment, both antithesis and reward for the night’s long darkness. The bpms slowed, and the bracing attacks gave way to a smoother, more euphoric vibe. According to Goa’s more self-consciously shamanic DJs, the change of pace had a ritual function: after “destroying the ego” with hardcore sounds, “morning music” fills the void with light. As the dawn rays floated through the dusty clearing, a crazy quilt of beautiful people slowly emerged from the gloom: Australians, Italians, Indians; Africans in designer sweatshirts, Japanese in kimonos, Israelis in polka-dot overalls. A crowd of old-time Goan hippies ringed the clearing, gray-haired and beaded creatures who dragged themselves out of bed just to taste this moment. Eyes met, and flush bodies drank in the pleasure of their mutual moves. Eros charged the air, but I felt none of the sleazy, late-night vibes common to urban clubs. I recalled something Genesis had said on the phone, when he traced Goa's mode of ecstatic dancing back to 1960s London clubs like UFO and Middle Earth. "Unlike most popular dance, trance-dances aren't about sexual encounter," he said. "Instead, you dance like a dervish to accentuate your artificially induced mental state to a point that's equal to and integrated with an ecstatic religious state. You're seeking illumination, not copulation." Now I knew what Genesis had been talking about. Gil's set was a story about illumination: after the initial hook compels you to get up and go, a gradual intensification of psychedelic effects brings the bodymind into a space at once heavy and incorporeal, an exquisite dark night of the soul that more or less matches the splintering plateaus of a drug peak. Dawn proclaims a sweet return, as the rising heat and light reconnect you to the human family, to nature and the faces of all your fellow travelers, radiating feelings at once loving and impersonal. However deterritorialized the core of the evening, its flights were mobilized inside an essentially narrative frame—a frame that, if not fixed in the archetypal basement of human consciousness, is at least hardwired by the metabolism of psychoactive substances.4

Genesis' comment also helped me realize something about the Goan beat, which to outsiders can seem inexcusably monotonous and unfunky. By minimizing syncopation and flattening any potential sinuousness in the grooves, Goan trance releases energy from the gravity well of the hips. This redirects the pelvic undulations that anchor the more sexual energies of dance, deterritorializing them across the entire frame, and especially the upper body. Such displacement has been explained in part by the action of MDMA, which is notorious for generating libidinal attractions that cannot, for men anyway, be genitally fulfilled (Reynolds 1998:246-8). But MDMA is a secondary drug within psy-trance, and even psychedelic phenomenology only takes us so far. Perhaps we need to invoke tantra's esoteric physiology. As Ray Castle noted, Goa's "sound frequency alchemy" revolves around "raising the kundalini serpent energy in the body's chakra system" (ENRG 2001:162). In addition to the frequent use of ascending arpeggios and digitized glissandi, psy-trance's quintessentially impersonal and non-copulating beats might help trigger such ascendant energies. At the very least, these highly directed vibrations serve as immediate, functional analogs for the secret life of shakti. Castle's rhetoric may simply be another example of freak appropriation of the East, alongside the Ganesha tapestries, Rajasthani handbags, and pervasive stink of Nag Champa. But I think not. In the midst of his morning mix, Gil introduced the mantra "Om Namah Shivaya," intoned over sitars and a bubbly beat. Spinning far outside of orthodoxy, East or West, Gil knew who he was invoking: Shiva, dread-headed lord of destruction and transformation, your electric drum heralds the close of the world. ERIK DAVIS 261

You dance with Shakti, refusing climax, among bands of wild youths and sneaky gnomes. Your blue throat holds the world's poisons, its toxins and psychoactive drugs. Shiva, you are stoned. Your serpents tongue our spines, fuck inside our cells. They proffer amines, the gnostic fruits that taste like no turning back.° Freak transmission Shiva, of course, is Dionysus' Eastern twin, giving Goa's patron saint an East-West doubleness that also marks the psycho-geography of the Indian state. As an Indian stoner I met in Mysore put it, “Goa isn’t India.” And Goa hasn’t exactly been India since the Portuguese first colonized the area in the 1600s. Then, “Golden Goa” provided the kind of oriental luxury that allowed an already waning imperialist power to really go to seed. Miscegenation was encouraged, and some adulterous native wives reportedly took to dosing their husbands with datura weed, rendering the men, as one early account put it, “giddy and insensible” (Collis 1943:38). Goa remained in Portuguese hands until India seized the region back in 1961, and the largely Catholic area was still deeply syncretic when beatniks like Eight-Finger Eddie discovered its beautiful beaches a few years later. By the end of the 1960s, hundreds of thousands of European and American freaks were streaming overland into South Asia.

Though Goan beaches like Calangute and Baga did not offer electricity, restaurants, or much shelter, they did provide sweet relief from the overwhelming grind of travel in the East. The impoverished locals, most of whom practiced a Western religion and were already used to Europeans, were largely accepting. Every winter a motley tribe of yoga freaks, hash-heads and art smugglers would gather, until the growing heat and the threat of the summer monsoon pushed them further on. Going to Goa was like going home for the holidays, and the freaks celebrated: Christmas, New Year's, and especially full moons. Many of these transients were seekers, willing to weather the rigors of Indian music, meditation, and yoga in order to taste sacred forces. But, as heirs to bohemia, their desires for exploration also encompassed drugs, orgies, and general freakiness. This mixed mode is what I characterize as spiritual hedonism. Here the West's secular affirmation of the body and its pleasures, most certainly including aesthetic experiences, is no longer strictly contrasted with religious forces. Instead, pleasure itself is refined beyond mere sensuality, ramping up into an outré spirituality hungry for immediacy, energy, weirdness, and unchurched gnosis. Because of its taste for intensities, spiritual hedonism even includes room for strict asceticism alongside indulgence and a variety of "middle paths."

Gil the DJ—who goes by Goa Gil in the West—was one of Goa's original spiritual hedonists. Gil grew up in Marin County in the 1960s, and fell in with Family Dog, the loose freak collective that helped spawn the San Francisco concert scene's heady sound and light shows before Bill Graham moved in. In 1969, fed up with "rip-offs and junkies and speed freaks," Gil made his way to India, where he encountered the sadhus, Hinduism's wandering holy men. Hymns in the ancient Vedas describe these "long-haired sages," living in the forest, covered in ash and drinking soma, the ancient holy brew that some scholars believe was psychedelic. Today, millions of sadhus still drift about the land, gathering at huge holy festivals, or holing up in the Himalayas to practice yoga. Some are strict ascetics, some are simply beggars, while a select group, the followers of Shiva, resemble nothing so much as Hindu Rastafarians. These Shaivite sadhus wear their hair in long dreads and find spiritual sustenance in charas, India's yummy mountain hash. Before they inhale, the Shaivites cry out "Bomm Shiva!" the way Rastas bark "Jah!" They identify the force of the herb with shakzi, the immanent power of creation the sadhu seeks to transmute back into essence. Not surprisingly, the freaks took to the sadhus. Gil went whole-hog, living in caves, wearing orange robes, and coaxing the Kundalini up his spine. But he still found his way to Goa every winter, where he banged on acoustic guitars at the firelit drum circles. When Alan Zion smuggled a Fender PA in overland, live electric jams and pre-recorded rock became their yearly soundtrack. According to Gil, these parties were the direct ancestors of raves.

The crucial transition — from guitars to electronic dance music — occurred at the impressively early date of 1983, when two French DJs named Fred and Laurent got sick of rock music and reggae. About the same time that Derrick May and Juan Atkins created the futuristic disco-funk first called “techno,” Fred and Laurent used far more primitive tech — two cassette decks — to cut-and-paste a nightlong aural journey out of industrial music, electronic rock, Euro-disco and experimental bands like Cabaret Voltaire and the Residents. Stripping out all the vocals, they designed their mixes to amplify the bacchanalia of hard-traveling psychedelic partiers, and it worked.

Soon hipsters started slipping them underground tapes from the West. When the German trance maestro Sven Vath first showed up in Goa, he was amazed to discover that Laurent admired his earliest and most obscure 16-bit recordings. Gil and his friend Swiss Ruedi quickly followed the Frenchmen, but the techno transition was not smooth. The freaks were attached to their Bob Marley, their Santana, their Stones. Once Ruedi had to enlist a bodyguard to ward off some rocker’s blows. But eventually Goa’s DJs managed to plug the functional needs of heavy psychedelic trance dancers into the emerging electronic landscape of machine beats and trippy instrumental remixes. Within a few years, a distinct sound emerged.

When I interviewed Gil, he was adamant about the spiritual core of the Goan parties. “When I was fifteen, I'd burn certain colored candles and certain incense and invoke spirits. Now I’m basically just using this whole party situation as a medium to do magic, to remake the tribal pagan ritual for the twenty-first century. It’s not just a disco under the coconut trees.” He paused to light up a Dunhill. “It’s an initiation.”

At the core of this initiation, according to Gil, is trance, an experience of psychoactive grace. Here is the description he gave to the San Francisco writer and trance DJ Michael Gosney: ‘When there’s no problem, and everything’s set up right, and the music just flows, then it can come to the point where you go into the trance, and everybody’s going in a trance. And it builds and builds. When it’s just perfect, and it’s a perfect song for the moment, perfection opens up in that moment, and it keeps sustaining itself. Then it becomes so perfect in the moment, with the trance, magic starts to happen. Everybody all at once will start to get tingling up their spinal column, and outside of their skin, like your hair’s standing on end. Everybody will be getting it all at once. It will be so perfect in the moment that that feeling just sustains It can build and build and build ‘til it comes to a point where it goes ssssssssshhhh through everybody all at once, like a bolt of lightning.”

Gil’s language lends itself equally to a Deleuzian or tantric gloss, but the real strength of his claims lies in their core appeal to experience. Besides a certain inherent ineffability, such experiences emerge as largely unspoken intensities within a cultural context that eludes and even actively undermines the usual anthropological markers of religion. The psy-trance party allows the commingling of age-old ecstatic techniques with attitudes and technologies that reject tradition in the name of an open-ended, novelty-seeking alternative techno-culture. This mixed quality helps explain how and why the pagan primitivism of psy-trance’s gnosis is also wedded to apocalyptic expectations. We return to move forward, accelerated.

As if on cue, Gil slapped on two remixes he had made while visiting San Francisco the previous summer. The original tracks were made by Kode IV, a German duo who bragged in interviews about producing techno tracks in five minutes. Gil blasted the tunes at ear-splitting volume, the first of which sampled Pope John XXIII, Aleister Crowley dropping Enochian science, and a sadhu shouting "Bum!" Then Gil played his "Anjuna" mix of "Accelerate." He towered over me as he repeated word for word the sample he cribbed from some flying-saucer movie: "People of the earth, attention." Gil's eyes bored into mine, as if he was channeling the message directly from the aliens. "This is a voice speaking to you from thousands of miles beyond your planet. This could be the beginning of the end of the human race." For a moment, I could hear the Morlocks call.

Spy in the chai shop "Goa Gil" self-consciously presented himself as a carrier of tradition, and he slagged a number of Goa's younger DJs for being on ego trips instead of cultivating the proper devotional attitude. The idea that DJs carried the burden of the tradition made me even more intrigued to speak to Laurent, the French DJ who had pioneered the electronic parties back in 1983 but, to my knowledge, didn't spin at 264 GOLDEN GOA'S TRANCE TRANSMISSION parties anymore. Gil hadn't been too encouraging: "He probably won't talk to you. He's very mysterious." He told me where Laurent could be found every day: in the last chai shop on little Vagator beach, playing backgammon.

I was not and never will be cool enough to ride an Enfield bike,® so I puttered my lame moped towards the cliffs north of Anjuna. Clamoring down bluffs packed with coconut trees and tall, pale teepees, I bumped into a Belgian I had met on New Year's Eve. He lived in one of the teepees and loved it. I told him how ironic it was that the temporary shelters of the nomads mistakenly called "Indians" by Europeans were now housing European nomads in India. This confused him.

The last chai shop on the beach was a grimy hut filled with folks as weather-beaten as the long wooden tables they hunched over. Some played backgammon, others sipped orange juice and chai, and everyone smoked. A sour-faced Indian girl serving up a bowl of porridge and honey pointed to Laurent: a scrawny guy in a Japanese print T-shirt, tossing a pair of dice. The man was gaunt and blood-shot, and his teeth were in bad shape. He looked like a hungry ghost.

Laurent gave a caustic laugh when I asked to interview him. But I took his lack of an obvious refusal for a go-ahead. He kept slapping the tiles with his partner Lenny, a balding, washed-out middle-aged Brit. "Art does not pay so I am forced to gamble," Laurent explained in a throaty Parisian accent thickened with sarcasm. He fiddled with my Sony mini-tape recorder, clearly bent on soaking this little episode for all the humor it was worth. "The spy in the chai shop," mused Lenny as he drew heavily on a cigarette. Laurent cracked up, his laugh degenerating into an asthmatic coughing fit. "You know, it used to be very bad here for spies," Laurent said, with mocking concern. Despite his sarcasm and creepy laughs, I took a liking to Laurent. He also proclaimed Goa's fundamental contribution to rave culture—"This is the source of the source"—but he was low-key about it all. No mysticism, no nostalgia. "Tama simple person," he said. He gave his friend Fred the credit for first mixing electronic tapes at the parties, but said it was too experimental for the crowds. "Nobody liked it. Then I played and made it so people liked it. And now people like it all over the world."

Laurent then let slip that he had some of his early party tapes, and I pressed to hear them. "Ah, this would be very very expensive," he mocked. "We must draw up a contract." Laurent told me he played the Residents, Cabaret Voltaire, Front 242—but only after cutting out the vocals, which irritated him. I kept pressing him about his style. He paused, and looked me in the eye. "Here you make parties for very heavy tripping people who have been traveling everywhere. You have to take drugs to understand the scene here, what people are thinking."

Laurent's comment raises a vital point: how we address the spirituality of psytrance turns significantly on how we assess the spirituality of psychedelic use, not in some half-imagined Neolithic or shamanic context, but inside Western subculture. This is not the place to hash out this question, but it is important to note that the distrust of psychedelic spirituality partly turns on the technological dimension of drugs. As Goan parties prove, some of the most exalted states of the human spirit—cosmic communion, the integration of self and other, the sense of timelessness—can be triggered with molecules, programmed beats, and electronic effects.

Even if you sacralize these elements, couching their technical power in supernatural over-beliefs or the performative power of the rave's Gestalt, there is still the problem of the morning after—which, given the psy-trance emphasis on dancing well into the next day, is more of a metaphor than usual. Think of it as a metaphysical morning after, a period of deflation, drift, and potential despair. It is during this period, which is rarely given much focused attention, that the merely hedonistic or "druggy" character of the psychedelic experience becomes most evident.

Leaving the question of somatic costs aside, bohemian scenes still fall short because they rarely provide the cultural mechanisms that, in traditional psychoactive societies, allow people to integrate their experiences into everyday life. In many ways, this resistance to over-beliefs or strict communal rituals is a good thing. Such "psychedelic agnosticism" goes a long way toward squelching authoritarian tendencies or religious delusions.

Moreover, many looser and more ad- hoc quasi-spiritual contexts have emerged in the psychedelic and_psy-trance community, as individuals and groups seek to deepen their experiences through art, environmental activism, meditation, yoga, group processing, or any number of occult techniques and interpersonal therapies. Also, the increasing popularity of ayahuasca sessions has focused attention on the spiritual intentionality surrounding serious psychedelic use. Because without the long-term transformation of the psyche and its network of embodied relationships the ecstatic trance may do little more than stage its own repetition—no longer as a meta-erotic ritual of rhythmic return, but as habit and jaded escape.

Holy Hampi

Towards the end of the 1980s, when Goa's electronic dance music had already become a distinct style, the tracks played at parties were produced in the West with the colony in mind. But some trance cuts were homemade. I met one German producer named Johan, a handsome fellow who had released tracks under the name Mandra Gora and lived in a huge house in a small inland village. His room contained little more than a bed, a batik print, and his gear: Macintosh PowerBook, Akai sampler, keyboard, DAT deck. Johan arrived in Goa in 1988, when the trance scene was totally underground. “It was like a poker game no one could follow,” he told me. Johan was not into DJing—he was one of those power dancers who treated the night as one long track. “With a combination of good music, a good spot, and good dancing, it’s like a cosmic trigger goes off,” he said of Goa’s greatest rites. After a night’s ride, Johan would return to his home studio, mix his vibes into new tracks, dump the bytes onto DAT, and pass the tape on to his DJ friends. “It was like a perfect feedback loop.”

Unlike most music-makers or DJs in Goa, Johan didn’t care about talking to a writer like me, because he knew that, in some sense, it was already too late. Goa 266 GOLDEN GOA’S TRANCE TRANSMISSION trance was just beginning to emerge as a genre in the West, and he was prepared to take advantage of the future he accurately saw coming, a future of packaged tours, label hype, and marketed identities. As he saw it, the obscurity necessary for a genuinely esoteric underground was no more. “Soon we'll have a global digital network where everyone will know where everybody is all the time.” He looked at me impassively “What you're here to write about is already dead and gone.”

It's a common story in subcultural scenes, especially musical ones: the better days were before. But in Goa this familiar hepcat tale directly recalled the religious paradigm that lurks beneath it. Though generally focused around a charismatic leader, the early days of a religious movement are typically characterized as possessing a directness and spontaneity later lost as the movement’s forms and dogmas become routinized while spreading into larger populations. In its need to generate images of Goa’s spiritual authenticity, the psy-trance scene has partly transformed the object of its desires into a simulacrum.

Johan’s comment brought on the predictable melancholy of belatedness. Anjuna now seemed to me like a freak Club Med, with yummy restaurants, “authentic” primitive digs, and a currency that might as well have been monopoly money. I grew tired of interviewing DJs, most of whom displayed the same snotty power games endemic to Western club scenes, although here they were supercharged with the esoteric withholds of a gnostic elite. And the superficiality of the scene’s purported relationship with India, either its culture or its people, grew more and more dispiriting.

I began to sympathize with one gray-haired Frenchman I met, who first came to India in the early 1970s and had become a master of sarod. “These new people have no idea,” he complained. “They didn’t come overland, they didn’t have to find their own food, and they never really got lost.” But the trance transmission was not done with me. One hazy, hot afternoon, I was hanging around the Speedy Travel agency waiting for a fax. A steady stream of freaks bought tickets for Hampi, in the neighboring state of Karnataka. “It is a very ancient place,” a bronzed Dutchman rolling a Drum told me, describing what sounded like a Hindu Stonehenge 300 kilometers to the east. “I hear some German with a bus will throw a full moon party in the temple there. "That was all I needed. A week later, a creaking local bus spat me out at Hampi bazaar. Named after Shiva’s consort Parvati, Hampi is not exactly an “ancient” place — the Hindu city fell to rampaging Moslems during Queen Elizabeth’s reign. But the ruins that spread out for miles around the small, freak-filled village exuded a haunting, archaic calm. Green parakeets roosted in silent temples encrusted with jesters and monkey gods. Rice paddies lined the nearby Tunghabhadra River, which snaked past huge mounds of desert boulders. Across the river, a number of sadhus tended Shiva shrines and passed the pipe with hearty Caucasians who had turned their backs on the minimal comforts of the village. I spent the days poking through ruins, munching cashew curry, or dozing on the mats at the Mango Tree, a simple and peaceful outdoor hash cafe on the banks of the lazy river. Local tourist regulations insisted they post an antidrug sign, but the staff kept slipping their “Smoking Psychotropic Drugs Not Allowed” announcement behind a poster, so all you could see was the word “Smoking.” Sometimes the white sadhus from across the river would show up, with their orange robes and mala beads and ancient, fading biker tattoos. They were no joke, these white sadhus, however eccentric they may have been. I heard a marvelous tale about one fellow who vowed to spend a month sitting in one of the caves that peppered the landscape. After beginning his vigil, he was so pestered by other freaks coming to gape at his feat that he wound up letting a room in the village in order to fulfill his vow.

Gil had criticized the whole idea of a Hampi rave before I left. Hampi was where you hung with sadhus, he said, not where you threw parties. His comment reminded me that, despite the supposed spirituality of a good Goan fete, their hedonic logic did not exhaust one’s spiritual life. Nor did it fit the psychogeography of “real” India, whose spiritual possibilities far outshone a mere rave. In the week leading up to the full moon, I could understand Gil’s reservations. A noticeably trendier crowd moved into Hampi: nattier threads, better cheek-bones, more cash. Rooms filled to capacity, kids slept on roofs or in temples. Finally a huge tour bus drove up and parked in the dusty bazaar. Slogans blazed across the side: Techno Tourgon, LSD 25, Shiva Space Age Technology. Jorg the DJ had arrived.

I finally caught up with Jorg on the day of the full moon. The BBC had just finished interviewing him, and the man was beaming, his blue eyes glowing with a mad lucidity. A huge bronze Shiva Nataraj danced on the dashboard, an image echoed in the Shankar tattoo on Jérg’s taut naked belly. Jérg was pure freak, too maniacally enthusiastic to cop a snobbish DJ attitude. “I used to be a typical heavy-metal rock ‘n’ roller. Now I am addicted to techno,” he said. “For five years time now I listen to nothing else. Except meditation songs in the morning.” Like many techno-freaks, Jérg’s first Goa party was nothing less than a conversion experience. “You can laugh, but it was like seeing a keyhole to God,” he said in a hoarse voice. He’d been back and forth to India ever since, selling Landcruiser parts at the Chinese border, DJing parties around Kathmandu, dipping in the Ganges with the sadhus at the holy city of Haridwar. “I’m a little bit extremist,” he admitted, grabbing a cigarette from a pack lying next to a crumpled photo of Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh. The previous year, after a month in Goa packed with drugs and dancing, and with hardly any DJ experience, Jérg set up his gear in Hampi’s underground Shiva temple and threw the______ After that party, I felt like a big hole. I sat for another month under a tree. Nothing inside anymore. He fiddled with the five-inch Sony mini-discs he uses instead of DATs. "But believe me, to be empty and open to everything is exactly the right position when you come to India. You have to improvise." Only hours before moonrise, Jérg was still improvising. After spending days finding the right official to bribe in order to throw a party, he made his case. "We talked for hours. We got to know each other very well. Then he said no." So in the fading sunlight, Jorg decided to cross the river into another district. He and his crew lugged their gear down the river's edge and loaded the equipment into 268 GOLDEN GOA'S TRANCE TRANSMISSION the same round, leather-covered basket boats the Portuguese explorer Paes noted when he passed through Hampi in the 16th century. Darkness descended, and they had no idea where they were going. Hours later, hundreds of us ferried across the river in the same leaky boats. We threaded our way past crumbling walls and along paths lined with ominous palms, following a trail of lanterns a mile or so on to a treeless plateau of moony rock. We glimpsed black lights in the distance, hear the dull thud of techno. No chai ladies tonight. We were partying in Bedrock. Jérg crouched over his machines beside a large boulder dry-painted with the appropriate icons for the night: peace, Om, anarchy. Though his music was old, his mixing rough and his generator tepid, Jorg soon sank the dancers into the groove. I started taking snapshots. Unlike Goa, where blissed-out hippies transformed into ferocious assholes at the sight of a camera, nobody here cared. An Indian sadhu passed through the crowd, joshing with a grizzled Italian in orange robes who occasionally whipped out a conch shell and blew. "Who is the holy man?" I wondered. "Who is the pothead?" After a bug-eyed Jorg led us careening through an eon's worth of cartoon wormholes, dawn arrived, dusting the rocks with pale purples and rusty reds. Fairytale temples emerged in the distant mist, but it was no hallucination. Jorg climbed up on a rock and pumped his fist, exhorting us into a supreme embrace of the moment. The shivers came, the lightning flash, the exquisite plateau: it was nighttime, daytime, alltime. As the rising sun and the setting moon touched the horizons on either side of us, the heavenly bodies seemed momentarily to align and balance the fragile, fantastic orb on which we danced. What follows such moments of pop gnosis is, as they say, another story. The great problem with experiential spirituality is that experiences pass. As I mentioned above, if there is no context or tradition of integration to work with the energies generated, then it's tough to say what will follow. We do not live by intensities alone, and destratification, particularly involving psychoactive substances, can leave quite a mess in its wake. Given the spectacle of the 1960s counterculture, we should be wary of any claims, spiritual or otherwise, that place an ineffable electronic gnosis at the heart of its global aspirations. But it's easy to grow pessimistic at this hour, and so I'll leave the final words to Gil, whose hopes about Goa's initiatic trance-dance frisson are nothing short of religious sentiment: That's when the seed is being planted in everybody's consciousness at the same time. The spirit has come and given that grace, and they've gotten something. Hopefully, they'll go home, and they'll live in truth, and improve their life. ... They'll start to be more spiritually oriented, and hopefully that seed will flower and blossom. Light a light of love in their heart and mind. Make them more sensitive and aware of themselves, their surroundings, the crossroads of humanity, and the needs of the planet. ERIK DAVIS 269 Notes 1 In late 1993, on assignment from Details magazine, I visited Goa in order to write about the psychedelic techno scene there. The piece eventually ran as “Sampling Paradise” in Option magazine. The present chapter is a reflective remix of the original article. 2 Interview with the author, December 1993. 3. A good popular introduction to tantra can be found in Feuerstein (1998), while Gopi Krishna’s personal account (1967) is fascinating for its first-person and profoundly somatic account of shakti. For a scholarly analysis of the somatic side of traditional Hindu tantra, see White’s (1996) excellent book. 4 This is a problem with the usual routine of dividing the night between various DJs, each of whom focuses on his or her own individual set: the overarching development of the night is usually lost. In this case, a little more “master narrative” may not be such a bad thing. 

Rave studies then inherited cultural studies’ reliance on poststructuralist and postmodernist philosophers to formulate not only its objects of inquiry (the deaths of the subject, the sign, identity, reality, modernity, marketing, memory, and place), but also its evaluation of rave as a subversive phenomenon. Generally speaking, this academic evaluation has been on the positive side. For most commentators, rave and club culture embodies one of the few sites in contemporary society where the cultural industry, patriarchy, bureaucracy, Oedipal family, heterosexism, surveillance, and the pettiness of community and traditional morality are effectively resisted.

They then largely reproduce rave culture’s own discourse of transcendence of social difference, a discourse of absolute newness and exteriority to both systems of domination and everyday life. Let me call this transcendence a question of spirituality. In rave studies, the usual lessons learned from poststructuralist and post-modernist analyses of Western power relations seem to be, first, that power is quasi-total and, second, that resistance only exists where power is perfectly absent; that is, resistance is self-sufficient, related to power only in terms of opposition instead of reciprocity, circularity, and ambivalence. The take on domination and resistance in this chapter will attempt to be more complicated than that, following recent work in critical geography (e.g. Atkinson 2000) to account for the possibility of resistance breeding power, and power breeding resistance.

Poststructuralism and postmodernism lend themselves quite well to an adoption in rave studies. The Nietzschean celebrations of desire, micropolitics, art, music, spontaneity, marginality, chaos, indulgence, and undecidability implicit or explicit in the work of Barthes, Baudrillard, Foucault, Irigaray, Lyotard, and especially Deleuze and Guattari, as Todd May (1994) has contended, betray a flirtation with older tropes of anarchism (see Bey 1991). We cannot, of course, conflate anarchism or the avant-garde with spirituality, but what is common to both is the self-proclaimed position outside of social reality. Poststructuralism avoids completely nihilistic conclusions from analyses of total power by exalting experiment to spiritual degrees. The close congruence of 1960s counterculture and poststructuralism in the events of 1968 and their aftermath suggests that it might not be too far off the mark to state that a certain structure of feeling of reinvented spirituality informed them both.

Now, this chapter won’t deny that there is something “spiritual” present in rave. Neither will it impede the creative possibilities for secular philosophy and cultural theory of an engagement with some sort of spirituality. Instead, it makes quite a simple point: that spirituality can never be thought of and evaluated outside its situatedness in assemblages of power. Transcendence, peace, love, resistance just aren’t the whole story. Although there are debates in religious studies about the social and cultural contexts of mystical experience (e.g. Rothberg 1990), power relations hardly ever come into the picture. Any engagement with spirituality, practical or theoretical, needs to connect to political analysis and a sense of responsibility or its claims of transcendence remain hollow, possibly hypocritical. The case study through which I will reach this conclusion is the rave scene in Goa, India, which might seem an extreme case, but I hope similar arguments about the dynamics of spirituality and power can be made elsewhere." Goa trance

The former Portuguese enclave of Goa, 400 kilometers to the south of Bombay, with a third of its population Catholic, started attracting white travelers at the end of the 1960s (see Chapters 12 and 13). The palm-fringed beaches and simple fisher villages of Calangute and Colva soon harbored small communities of hippies. When more and more "straight" Western and domestic tourists flooded in, some hippies left for the northern villages of Anjuna and Vagator, where to this day the tourism sector is largely in the hands of local people and many foreigners stay for a few months.

The hippies' lives centered around nude bathing, smoking hash in copious quantities, and holding full moon parties on the beach. Electricity arrived in 1975, and the amplification of music became possible. The late Cleo Odzer's unique account of Anjuna's hedonistic heydays in the 1970s, Goa Freaks: My Hippie Years in India (1995), has to be read with caution, as her experience, say many generational survivors, cannot be transposed to all foreigners then present.

Indeed, Anjuna has always had close connections with the Osho Commune in Poona (see Chapter 12), sadhus (wandering Hindu holy men), yoga, Ayurveda, meditation and New Age practices such as Reiki and palm-reading. Karma, mandalas, auras, and chakras figure in everyday conversations. Anjuna's hedonism and spiritualism have always existed, not side by side, but implicated in each other, thereby together propelling the scene forward.

By the early 1980s, despite the heroin deaths, smuggling scandals, and widespread paranoia, Anjuna had become a must-see place for all sorts of punks, New Agers, musicians, bohemians, Rastafaris, and globetrotters from Europe, North America, Latin America, and Oceania. Thousands attended full moon and end-of-the-year parties on the beach and in the forests. By this time, the urban middle classes of Bombay, Poona, Delhi, and Bangalore had heard of not only the naked or semi-naked white women on the beach, but also the fun to be had at the huge parties, and domestic tourism to Goa was institutionalized, with much of the marketing firmly confirming Indian sexist stereotypes of white women.

The supply of all sorts of narcotics was secure, the sound systems were powerful, the Goan cops and politicians were routinely bribed, the locals made money through selling chai (tea) and snacks at parties and on the beach, and some of the newest dance music from Europe and the U.S. was played at the parties, which are traditionally free. It was this fertile ground that led to Goa trance.

Between 1982 and 1985, Goa's DJs were gradually abandoning psychedelic rock music and reggae and started playing exclusively electronic sets, taking a strong liking to industrial new wave, electro pop, and proto-techno like Front 242. DJs like Goa Gil looked for the weirdest bits of the tracks and looped them. Music lovers would bring back tapes from Goa and try to recreate the exciting LSD-induced atmosphere of Anjuna's open-air parties in their studio. The resulting tracks would become Goa hits during the following season. Thus "Goa trance" was born by the closing of the decade, in a circuit of tapes, acid, and travelers. Neither techno nor house, Goa trance meticulously simulates the neurological effects of LSD with the help of a steady kick drum, swirling layers of staccato sounds often in Eastern scales, outworldly samples and hypnotic alterations in timbre. By 1994 or so, the distinct sound and fluorescent Hindu-kitsch-meets-fractals imagery of the genre was consolidated and available on CD. Goa trance raves subsequently spread all over the world, not only to Germany, France, Britain, and Sweden, but also Israel, Thailand, Japan, Australia, Portugal, South Africa, Brazil, Hungary, and Russia (see Chaishop 2002). Meanwhile in Anjuna, there were regular outbursts in the local press about the decadence and profound corruption of the trance scene, and often the police would crack down on the parties (cf. Saldanha 2002a). The season of 1999-2000 saw the definite commercialization of Anjuna's party scene, with Rupert Murdoch's Channel V hosting the last of a series of cosmopolitan parties for the Indian rich in the tiny village. Sponsorship, entry charge, magazine and documentary reports, London club hosts, and growing numbers of charter and domestic tourists are now increasingly turning Goa into a new sort of Ibiza (see Chapter 12).

274 ARUN SALDANHA Faces and bodies To offer a sense of how poststructuralism relates to spirituality, let me focus on the collaborative work of Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari. In Plateau 7 of their A Thousand Plateaus (1987:167—91), they introduce the concept of faciality. In brief, it refers to the machinic, as opposed to ideological, phenomenological, or psychoanalytical system whereby bodies become differentiated in (Western) social formations. "Machinic" means that we have to look at how bodies work. We can then see that bodies are "facialized" through the material connections that they make with environments, signs, sounds, and objects such as clothes, all of which become facialized themselves. But calling this process "facialization" points to the fact that identification occurs primarily through vision and emotion. The "black hole" of subjectivity libidinally invests in a grid of social identities (man 07 woman, rich or poor, white or black, etc.); the "white wall" of signification imposes limits to what can be represented. The black hole/white wall system of faciality, Deleuze and Guattari say, is particularly vehement in the Judeo-Christian and colonial structures of Europe. This is because it succeeds in abstracting itself from concrete bodies and places, lending itself the possibility of becoming actualized elsewhere. More and more bodies and places can then be accommodated in a grid which becomes increasingly fine. The white European faciality machine is therefore self-replicating and expanding. René ten Bos and Ruud Kaulingfreks (2002) rightly assert that the concept of faciality is rather determinist and isolationist, as if faces are fixed once and for all and do not interact with each other. If we compare Plateau 7 with Erving Goffman's writing on the face (1972), we see that while subjectivity and signification do reproduce power relations, it is not that bodies remain passive when they are facialized. Bodies are simultaneously capable of supporting faces and reworking them in the improvisatory mutual involvements of everyday life. If Deleuze and Guattari choose to think about the social in "cybernetic" terms (1987:177, 179), the only "way out" for them seems to be necessarily crypto-anarchic: all facialization is bad, and all corporeality good. Thus, face and body in Plateau 7 are dichotomously positioned in relation to each other. There is a homology with other well-known Deleuzo—Guattarian binaries: the "arborescent" thought of "state philosophy" against the "rhizomatic" thought of "nomadology"; "reterritorialization" versus "deterritorialization," "molar" versus "molecular," "majoritarian" versus "minoritarian," and "organism" versus "Body- without-Organs." Deleuze and Guattari argue that an organism is only one way of organizing the organs of a body (limbs, mouth, skin, genitals, eyes), making them function in relation to each other, to other bodies, and to spacetime in particularly fixed ways. They call the Body-without-Organs (BwO) the entire immanent range of potential actions a body is capable of, prior to any social organization (see Plateau 6). While faciality is only possible by tapping from the BwO, Deleuze and Guattari believe that certain bodies, like artists, sadomasochists, musicians, drug-takers, and anorexics, are more "in tune" with the BwO than others (provided they go about their experimentation in a careful manner).

In the passage, Deleuze and Guattari discuss the importance of dismantling faciality and becoming imperceptible. They describe the bodies freed from faciality as "probe-heads," which exist in spaces where bodies intermingle without the faciality machine operating. The concept of PLUR (peace, love, unity, respect) is mentioned in rave and club culture discourse, with the BwO of raving being the undifferentiated state that supports the connections that the rave-machine makes between its different elements.

In Anjuna, participants often note that nationality, skin color, class, and language cease to matter once everyone is dancing in unison to the forces of music and psychotropic drugs. Alan Watts has described his experiences on LSD as properly Zen-Buddhist, as he understood that he and his surroundings were essentially made of the same stuff. (Watts 1960:138) It is striking to see how many points connect Watts' philosophy to that of Deleuze and Guattari: against duality, against representation, against social conditioning, and for the pure "eventness" of the event. When, therefore, our selection of sense-impression is not organized with respect to any particular purpose, all the surrounding details of the world must appear to be equally meaningful or equally meaningless. Logically, these are two ways of saying the same thing, but the overwhelming feeling of my own LSD experiences is that all aspects of the world become meaningful rather than meaningless. This is not to say that they acquire meaning in the sense of signs, by virtue of pointing to something else, but that all things appear to be their own point.... A chicken is one egg's way of producing others. In our normal experience, something of the same kind takes place in music and the dance, where the point of the action is each moment of its unfolding and not just the temporal end of the performance.

(Watts 1960:135) Timothy Leary (1980) famously researched the psychedelic experience and concludes not only that it meets all requirements of a truly religious revelation, but that revelation is also comparable to any scientific discovery of cosmic, biological, and sociological order. Slightly more sober than Leary's is Dan Merkur's Freudian view (1998) of the self-actualization process through the intake of psychoactive drugs. Gilbert Rouget (1980) provides a survey of the anthropology of shamanism and ecstasy. It does seem that rock concerts and Taves share certain musical, psychical, technical, and social aspects with trance situations in non-Western cultures. And Régis Airault (2000) uses Jung's concept of "oceanic feeling" to explain why young people wish to "lose it" and prolong their infancy in Goa's "never-neverland." The dance floor, the LSD trip, globetrotting, trance, and meditation then acquire the characteristics of what Deleuze and Guattari call "smooth space," the space of truly creative connections, fractalization, and flight. The space of faciality is by contrast "striated," the quantified and segregated spaces of capitalism, colonialism, the city and the state (see Plateau 14).

Following Watts, Leary, Merkur, and Airault, we'd think Goa trance and trance in Goa a particularly intense instantiation of smooth space. Well, it is. As said, I do not question the existence of smooth spaces and the truly religious aspect of rave, but their ontological primacy and oppositionality to domination, faciality, striation. Tim Jordan warns that "[t]here is nothing in the BwO of raving that would prevent rave-events incorporating, for example, sexism or racism" (1995:139), and Maria Pini (1998) is one of the few who have empirically shown that ravers can be inconsiderate, feel pain, feel fear, be broke. Although Plateau 14 is at pains to show that the smooth and the striated presuppose each other and can only exist in their concrete combinations, the feeling remains that Deleuze and Guattari, a little like Timothy Leary, unduly celebrate any smoothness above any striation. What if probe-heads are the ones striating? What if dance floors are themselves segregated? What if PLUR becomes exclusionary? What if tripping doesn't take you further from, but closer into politics?

In the remainder of this chapter, I will use some ethnographic evidence from Anjuna to show how mystical experience can be connected to exclusionary politics (see also Saldanha 2002b). It is important to know that there are many individual differences among the hippies and ravers of Goa. I will be making generalizing statements about tendencies inherent in the psychedelic trance scene as a whole. Those who are familiar with Goa's rave scene may find my reading idiosyncratic, but during my fieldwork, I have found many participants themselves formulating similar critiques.

Chillum ritual and clique formation

A practice that has been central to the culture of Western travelers in India since the end of the 1960s is the smoking of chillums. The chillum is a simple cylindrical terracotta pipe that has been used for thousands of years by Hindu sadhus for smoking charas (hashish) and ganja (marijuana) and is now a central object in psy-trance culture. In Anjuna, an arrival at a rave or bar, a good track, a sunset or a sunrise is rarely unmarked by a chillum. It is practically impossible to smoke alone. Circles of smokers lighting or receiving the chillum often mutter praises to Shiva like "Bom Shankar."

The smoking itself is a little more tricky than smoking a joint. Richard Neville instructs, back in 1970: "Hold between thumb and four fingers (pointing straight up and bunched together at tips) of left hand. Wrap right hand around the back of left hand, leaving a hole for mouth between thumb and first finger on left hand, closing any other gaps by holding more tightly and adjusting grip. Test by drawing strongly before lighting. Keep chillum upright, head to one side and get someone else to light it. Beware of hair going up in flames. Constant strong drawing is necessary to keep it alight." (Neville 1970:248-9)

A similar purposeful attention to ritual detail characterizes chillum preparation and cleaning. Cigarette tobacco is dry-heated and emptied in a mixing bowl, often a shaved piece of coconut shell; hash is added and the mixture is kneaded while maintaining conversation, staring, or dancing. During chillum-making, friends, and friends of friends, eagerly appear around the chillum-maker. There are only six to 278 ARUN SALDANHA ten hits from a chillum, and not every psytrancer assumes the role of chillum-maker. There can be irritation about "chillum hoppers" who use their popularity to grab hits everywhere around the rave or bar without making any chillums themselves.

After the last smoldering bits are skillfully blown out of the top, the stone inside is removed, and a friend holds one end of a safi* as it is pulled and rubbed through the chillum to clean it. By peeping through the hole in the direction of a light source, the smoothness of the shaft is checked; if the chillum is sufficiently expensive not a particle should remain. Then the whole process starts anew. Goa freaks can do this the whole day long: heating, mixing, filling, lighting, smoking, cleaning, peeping.

The amount of smoke one obtains from a chillum is much tougher for the lungs to digest than is the case with joints. The idea is, moreover, to impress with the sheer volume of smoke ingested. If the first smoker's head is clouded by fumes, one can hear encouraging laughs and cries of "Bom Shankar!" No wonder, then, that one can hear coughing everywhere in Anjuna, especially during the morning. The thicker the cough, the cooler. But no matter how frequent the smoking or how potent the hash, you're not supposed to get stoned in Anjuna. The giggles, talking bullshit or philosophy, sleepiness, sluggishness, munchies, and staring into space that are often associated with cannabis are very much avoided amongst Goa's regulars. One is to keep one's cool, manage the THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) in the blood, keep talking and walking straight. The practical knowledge of coordinating hands, lungs, mouth, brain, legs, and eyes necessary to successfully smoke the chillum has to be acquired, of course. And those who have acquired it tend to stick together. This is what Sarah Thornton (1995), following Bourdieu, calls "subcultural capital." She argues that subcultural capital leads to hipness as an exclusionary identification. If a somewhat naive tourist at a rave attempts to open up a chillum circle and asks for a hit, it will be only with the greatest reluctance that the thing is shared. Being admitted into the most privileged of chillum circles—the "posse" around the DJ and organizers of raves (restaurant owners, drug dealers, and some local men)— is little short of a blessing. And so, the chillum produces cliques of Italians and Israelis, French speakers and English speakers, old-timers and newcomers. Within the cliques, there is a certain degree of smooth space, communion, spiritual becomings-smoke, becomings-sadhu, becomings-Shiva. But every organ still does what it does in other situations. In fact, effectively denying the chemical impact on the brain, there is even more organization required than if one didn't smoke; it is the discipline which makes chillum space hermetic. And outside the chillum circle there roam the package deal tourists, domestic tourists, and backpackers passing through Anjuna who can't manage the hash, don't even know where to buy it, and might find all the ritualism quite silly or else intimidating.

GOA TRANCE AND TRANCE IN GOA

Sunrise politics
Since about 1997, Goa trance music has become progressively darker and more minimal. The old type of multi-layered, twinkling, and spiraling trance gave way to a predominance of a frighteningly deep kick drum and industrial percussive noises, sometimes getting very close to some Detroit techno and hard electro, with the only reminder of the old Goa sound located in the bass riff and some weird pad sweeps. Many no longer speak of "Goa" but psychedelic trance (abbreviated to psy-trance), "progressive" trance, psy-tech, or acid techno (cf. Chaishop 2002). In Anjuna, this musical evolution had a strange impact. Many of the older hippies and local boys prefer the older, happier Goa trance, while the younger generation of ravers now finds Goa trance tacky, "too hippie." Most of the charter and domestic tourists, too, find the new minimal trance too heavy and depressing. As I will argue, this fissure in tastes has made the striation of smooth dance-floor space possible. At parties, especially those of late December, the presence of charter and domestic tourists was always resented by the hard core of hippies and ravers. It is felt that especially Indians are dressed stupidly, can't dance, become drunk, and constantly ask for chillum hits and harass white women. Freaks always tended to arrive a bit later to ensure that domestic tourists wouldn't be too plentiful. Moreover, already in the 1970s, sunrise had attained intense subcultural significance in Anjuna's party culture, inciting, through its warmth and light, the feeling of being visible again, alive again. Still, to get as much out of the acid and music trip as possible, most freaks in Goa's early rave scene would get to the party by midnight and often start dancing straightaway. In 1998, I visited Goa for my first research trip. While it was already apparent that the hard core were arriving later, at 4 or 5 a.m., the now-established ritual of "after-partying" in someone's house or on the beach was just beginning to emerge. People would often have a nap and then go to the beach at around 8 a.m. or even later. 

During the night, the majority of the dancers are middle-class males from Bombay, plus a handful of local boys and some white package-deal tourists. The hippies and ravers who stay in Anjuna for much longer periods of time sit patiently, smoke chillums, and drink chai. “Too many Indians” was by then a much-heard justification for going through such pains. This was even more apparent during the 2001-2002 season: a few dozen domestic tourists trying to make the best of it until the party would properly take off at dawn, when the freaks started streaming in, most of whom had just awoken. It is a self-replicating process: the zhinner the presence of the freaks at night, the more massive the Indian presence, the duller the party, the later other freaks arrive. Under the sun, the reverse: the sheer visibility of the few domestic tourists left on a dance floor full of whites makes them uncomfortable enough to leave.

When prompted about it, a DJ admitted he intentionally plays the very dark trance at night to make “the Indians” leave. The hardest tracks are reserved for the period just before dawn. Then, epic “morning trance” is played, after which DJs will switch back to progressive and psychedelic trance till noon or later. By this time, however, the dance floor is full of spirit, smiles, togetherness, sociability, and mystical connections with sun, music, earth, hash, and acid. And thus the music, so monotonous before, makes sense now. But all this smoothness is only achieved by a subtly concerted form of excluding others from the primary moment of the party—the morning session. During the night, the whole village of Anjuna is kept awake just for the build-up of the party—and this, in high season, several times a week.

In Anjuna, there is an enormous difference between the sonic landscape during winter and during summer and monsoon. Goan villages of comparable size serve as a test case. There, life is rather slow, traffic consists of a few motorbikes an hour, perhaps one can hear TVs and Bollywood music, and most of the noise is made by crows and dogs. But from November to March Anjuna is completely transformed, doubling or tripling its population, and harboring hundreds of rented motorbikes and scooters, domestic tourism buses, taxi vans, auto-rickshaws, private cars, jeeps, and Land Rovers. On Wednesdays, with Anjuna’s flea market, and during high season in the end of December, there are veritable traffic jams, with all the four-wheelers and their car stereos and horns—even at night. The favorite bike amongst Goa freaks is the Enfield 350cc (some are 500cc), an old-fashioned, heavy motorcycle whose exhaust pipes produce a distinct thud discernible from up to a kilometer away. There is a hierarchy in the hipness to be attained by riding specific bikes—from the rare TVS moped, through the popular Honda Kinetic scooter and the Yamaha 100, to the Enfield (only diehard health freaks cycle). The worst thing for one’s cool in Anjuna is walking—only backpackers who stay for a few days do that. The warm sea breeze (the helmet law is not yet implemented in Goa), the narrow roads through paddy fields, the palm-tree shadows, the dodging of cows and buffaloes and potholes and schoolchildren, perpetually stoned: all add to the smooth-space experience of riding. The Goa freaks sit proudly saddled, shirtless (if they're men), looking straight ahead through their sunglasses as they ride through the coastal villages. Given the charming stubbornness of its engine, many males who have bought an Enfield for the season learn the art of motorcycle maintenance—spending days or weeks in the garage. Amongst all the object-signs of India incorporated in Anjuna’s hippie and rave scene, the Enfield must be the one most spiritualized. Then there are the hazards. Every year in Goa there are at least a dozen road deaths and many more minor injuries to riders (often due to LSD and/or Ecstasy), pedestrians and cattle. The air pollution may be slight, but yet so are most distances covered. I have mentioned the racket Enfields create. When a bar like Ninebar in Vagator closes, there is a cacophony of exhaust pipes. Some Goa freaks enjoy the thud so much they get their exhaust altered to increase the volume. It seems as if they want to trace their ego in thuds wherever they go. So the smoothness of the experience of riding goes hand in hand with the striations of noise, accidents, ego, and sleeplessness. This is of course more so with the raves themselves, which are always open air and never far from houses. The older inhabitants complain about the noise of Goa trance, carried all the way to the surrounding villages. The big New Year raves go on for days. It would be impossible to mount raves of this scale in the home countries of the Goa freaks. But most of Anjuna’s inhabitants are tourism dependent and therefore co-organizers of the scene, at least in the indirect way of providing rooms, food, bikes, internet access, drugs, etc. Only sometimes will they lobby to cancel a rave, for example when school exams are due. Those Goans who do not make any money from tourism, mostly middle-class Catholics, have vehemently opposed Anjuna’s hippie and rave scene. Following successive moral panics in the press (e.g. “Beach parties raise a rumpus,” Goa Today, February 1996; theme issue on the rave scene), the Goan government and High Court imposed a ban on loud music in 2000. Though quite consistently implemented during the first months of 2001 and 2002, the ban is often breached—bribes reach government officials too. Anjuna without loud music (in bars, at raves, in restaurants) agitates Goa freaks. Frustration increases as nearly every day there are rumors of parties, which are then inexplicably cancelled. Many foreigners feel they have an indisputable right to party, justifying their presence with the income the parties bring to Goa. Over the last few years many disappointed ravers have stopped coming to Goa, going instead to Koh Phangan in Thailand, or Bahia in Brazil, or Madagascar, or trying to organize parties elsewhere in India. Any place in the sun where living is relatively cheap would do for psy-trancers. Ultimately it is not exotic Indian spirituality (for some people I spoke to, not even the beach) but the psychotropic chemicals and trance music which attracted them to Goa. While Goa remains, of course, the “mother scene,” psy-trance’s smooth space could be created in any Third World village. However, it seems that at least for another decade or so no other place on earth will be able to boast as many eager DJs, dealers, and locals, and a legal and economic infrastructure corrupt and dependent enough to supply psy-trance parties for foreigners at the scale and frequency of Anjuna. It remains to be seen whether the party bans imposed by the courts and police will stop new freaks from coming to reconstitute the scene.

Conclusion
Poststructuralists, particularly Deleuze and Guattari, are the "natural" theorists for studying the spiritualities of rave. This is due to the strong correspondence between the self-proclaimed freedom and transcendence of social difference in rave and club discourse, and the anarchic celebration of desire, disorder, and flight evident in poststructuralism. However, many ravers and poststructuralists don't realize that power and desire, domination and resistance, regulation and freedom, discipline and trance, habit and transcendence cannot be easily disentangled in social reality.

There is a flipside to any "smooth space." Coining the term "smooth striations" showed that many practices and spaces in rave can actually reproduce striations (of capitalism, state regulation, patriarchy, heterosexism, classism, nationalism, and racism) because they center around music and drugs. In Goa, the trance state, the Enfield experience, ritual togetherness through smoking chillums, enjoying loud music, being cool, PLUR on the dance floor, and reverence for the sun all entailed exclusions or at least some sort of arrogance towards others.

The Indian tourists ultimately feel they belong least to the rave scene due to the specific subcultural dynamics of the rave scene. When moral panics lead the Goan government and police to crack down on the parties, mainly for electoral or ideological purposes, the tourism-dependent inhabitants of Anjuna become the dupes. The 2001-2002 season was a bad season for business, partly due to the events of September 11, 2001, but primarily because of the erosion of Anjuna's reputation as a party Mecca through word-of-mouth and email reports about the zero-tolerance noise-pollution policy.

The simple solution—legalizing the parties but regulating them between villages or on the beach—is increasingly difficult to realize as corruption becomes more profound, venue owners and drug dealers become greedier, competition fiercer, ravers more arrogant, and Goans more conservative about their local identity.

My criticisms of Deleuze and Guattari attended to their dichotomizing of the smooth and the striated. However, their materialist philosophy of social identification, revolving around the concept of faciality (amongst others), remains preferable to psychoanalytical, Marxist, or existentialist alternatives. Their materialism might not be materialist enough; adding more flesh, terracotta, sunlight, exhaust pipes, and sleeplessness to my ethnography allowed me to argue that spiritual becomings and power relations are not so diametrically opposed as Deleuze and Guattari's cybernetic model suggests.

If there is something to be done about things going awry in rave (as is obviously happening in Goa), we will need sophisticated methods of imagining the smooth and the striated, admitting to the spiritual force of music and drugs, but also to their less benign effects, and, crucially, the empirical relations between the two.

Dancing on common ground
Exploring the sacred at Burning Man
Robert V. Kozinets and John F. Sherry, Jr

Where on Earth can you find tens of thousands of people gathering in a gigantic festival intended to provide a huge variety of entertainment? Where can you find people costumed, covered in glitter, or in feathers, riding unicycles, wearing funny hats, body paint of every color, or nothing at all? Hundreds of art cars and extraordinary vehicles, from starlit UFO taxi cabs to mobile taxidermied horses, giant glowing lobsters, Viking ships, or enormous flame-belching dragons? Endless miles of participatory "theme camps"—with names like Astral Headwash, Lingerie Planet, Mad Cow Country Club, Technofartz Camp, Porn Star Lounge, and the Temple of Atonement—where festival-goers artfully offer up to one another a bizarre concatenation of spiritual and carnal sustenance and smart, regressive, pop-culture-inundated, ironic fun? Dozens of radio stations? An immense range of art, from massive sculpt______ While it began in 1985 in San Francisco with Larry Harvey, Jerry James, and a small group of effigy-burning bohemians, Burning Man now hosts over 29,000 people, temporarily becoming Nevada’s fourth largest city. In colonizing fashion, for one week the event’s participants inhabit the bleak Black Rock Desert, transforming it into “Black Rock City.” Burning Man also transforms social space, blending a “no spectators” experiential ethos with a variety of other important rules, such as “no vending” and “radical self-expression.” For one week, participants come to live, celebrate, and co-create a utopian play space on the blank canvas of the desert floor, which is called the “playa.”

With its pioneering, endlessly experimental, libertarian, individualist, flag-flying, diversity-seeking, hardworking ethos, Burning Man could be considered a quintessentially American event. Burning Man shares common ground with rave and post-rave phenomena, and with other contemporary events like neo-pagan festivals, women’s music festivals such as the Lilith Fair, Oregon’s Country Fair, and Rainbow Family gatherings. A variety of commonalities between these events can be ascertained.

Burning Man shares ideologies drawn from the human potential movement and New Age philosophies, invoking primitivist, techno-shamanic and neo-pagan myths, ideologies, and literatures. Although not exclusively a neo-pagan event (or any other distinctive or exclusive kind of event), it contains many neo-pagan and sacred elements that we will explore within this chapter. It is a temporary spatial phenomenon that its participants construct as sacred and even utopian. Burning Man focuses on the ecstatic creation of community. It urges participants to celebrate embodiment and features radical inversions of social norms. It embraces the exploration and use of ritual. It is deeply entwined with the participative ethos of DIY (do-it-yourself) culture and politics (McKay 1998).

It embraces contemporary technology, extensively using the internet as a recruitment, organizational, and communication medium (Gibson 1999). Like the “doof’—an important post-rave manifestation (see St. John 2001; Tramacchi 2000)—it is opposed to commercialism and commercial sponsorship, seeks a participative ethos, and follows an environmental “leave no trace” ethic.! Finally, music (electronic and otherwise) plays a key role within the event.

Due to its importance within this volume, we will introduce the role of music before turning to our central exploration. To demonstrate how a Burning Man participant’s experience of the event is shaped by music, we will begin by considering and analyzing “Alexander’s” recounting of his experiences after he entered Burning Man for the first time.

“We stopped at another gate for info on where to set-up camp. Apparently there was a “quiet” side (South) and a “loud” side (North). We picked the “loud” side.... There weren’t many signs of people, just a million tents and wisps of smoke slowly rising in the distance. In contrast, the spacey sounds of techno music were pounding the desert sky. It added to the surreal ambiance of this strange new world we had entered...Burning Man had lots of music. Yeah there was plenty of electronica in the air, but I also saw rock and reggae bands. One afternoon, I grooved for hours to a Latin band in the neighboring camp. Some complained of the constant techno dance music. The techno did seem to play 24/7 here. There are several important points to note in Alexander's account that link our examination of Burning Man to the investigation of post-rave techno culture. First, Alexander begins by telling us how, from the very first moments of their Burning Man experience, the sound of music spatially orients participants within Burning Man. The volume of music unites and divides Burning Man communities, as people arrange themselves preferentially in response to it. Alexander's experience of his social reality is also shaped by his interpretation of sonic reality at the event. Diversity in music can be seen as an expression of tolerance for diversity in culture and way of life. Grooving for hours to Latin music can be construed in some sense as an accepting experience of another culture, a signal of the expansive inclusiveness of Burning Man's culture. The ubiquity of the beat seems to signal a different type of social space, and perhaps the phase-shifting to a different timing for everyday life.

The presence of 24/7 techno, rather than signaling a rave, therefore signals a liminal space (Turner 1967), a place that is betwixt and between, a site where the party is intense and ongoing. The techno beats also signify a sonic transcendence, a uniting of primal drumming with digital waveforms. Drum-dominated music plays an important ritual role in Burning Man, as it does in post-rave. It grounds techno in the primitive, energizing the modern by rooting it in a tribal past.

In another part of his online recounting, Alexander describes the music as the "spacey sound of techno music" which adds to "the surreal ambiance of this strange new world." His use of the term "spacey" is doubly fitting. For music, by its sonic nature, defines a particular space. Multiple musics demarcate, blend, and merge on geographic boundaries, spilling into one another. At Burning Man, music defines and is owned, pooling into pure concentrations near encamped banks of speakers. Techno music's drum and bass heavy pulsing also has reputed abilities to induce altered states in listeners, creating a sensation of floating in space.

Adding to the vastness of Burning Man's desert setting, dominated by sand, wind, and sky, the loud, pulsating music can seem to push the horizon—communal, geographical, and personal—to infinity. The "techno" culture explored in this volume relates directly to the meanings and rituals of youth milieus orbiting around styles of music often referred to as "techno" or "electronica," manifesting in, for example, house, hard house, trip hop, trance, happy hardcore, drum 'n' bass, big beat and speed garage. This music is as unavoidable at Burning Man as it is at any dance party. Techno is the soundtrack to many Burning Man experiences, the unifying soundscape auguring the breakdown of old divisions and ringing in new forms of communality.

Music is a key element in the expression of identity, and in the intensification of ecstatic sacred moments at Burning Man—as it is at neo-pagan festivals (Pike 2001:5) and raves. As with these other gatherings, Burning Man participants—especially those in the many drum circles and at the multitudinous dance camps—often "immerse themselves in the performance of dancing and drumming, releasing their bodies in ways unique to the festival setting" (ibid.: 191). Music also has deep ties to the sacred, existing in a timeless biocultural nexus where popular culture, emotion, and bio-basic responses collide. Throughout the chapter, we explore the common elements of Burning Man and rave culture, focusing on the construction of the sacred, its therapeutics, and its relation to neo-pagan, New Age, and techno-pagan practices and discourses. We begin our analysis with a story from an inhabitant of the Burning Man event.

The story was reported through email, an uncertain medium, and was chosen by the Burning Man organizers as laudable and worthy of distribution in their mass email newsletter. Many people consider Burning Man to be a terrific place to celebrate, gawk, or meet people, but an undeniable quest for self-transformation also transpires. In interviews, some informants compared Burning Man with other ritual therapeutic events they experienced, such as personal growth seminars, dream quests, and sweat lodges.

Friends played a major role in encouraging participants to attend the event, often serving as the source of urging that culminated in the desert adventure: "you just have to go; it would be so good for you." The story we present is typical of many other types of tales heard while at Burning Man about the event's transformative properties.

The story is as follows:

For 11 or so years, I've been in vague anticipation of The Event. First hearing of it on one of the variety shows that come on late night/Saturday night, so many years ago. It took me so long because I really didn't know what I could have—what exactly was missing in me. On the playa, 2001 my first time, like the first time in my life, I felt a freedom and a sense of being alive so intense that I never felt before, overwhelmed and strong. For an entire week, I had goose bumps. And I realized many, many things that week. The meaning of life, and how it's not the same for everyone. That there are places that people can truly be happy and free. That I exist, I just need to know where to look. And beauty. Pleasure and beauty, the two most important things in Living. Beauty in all things. My dream for re-entry is my reality. To live for personal freedom and excavate all the bindings that for a while, I thought I needed in life to be happy. My entire life, I've felt a sadness within me. A constant non-existence of meaning. Fearful of any good feelings, fearful that they may end. I've been in search of something I couldn't quite put my finger on. Organized religion always made me gag, and people in general arrrrgghh-ed me. But now, things are different. It's been over a month since The Event, and there exists in me a constant dust-covered happiness. I found myself in the desert, dreaming of living freedom. I'm a little new at it, but in my dream, I get better. My dream is of beauty and experience, my dream is of the outrageous and chaotic, my dream is of opening my eyes and waking up.

In this tale, Zelga articulates a kind of nomadic archaeology of self-realization, a kind of ceramic theory of the vision quest, wherein the dust of the journey (and the absent inventory of binding things) bears witness to one's transfiguration. She hints to us that one may see truly only with playa dust in the eyes. She gains holism. But most important of all is the nature of this story as a tale of healing.

For Zelga, [EXPLORING THE SACRED AT BURNING MAN 289] Burning Man was therapy of the highest order. She was sick, sad, depressed, mentally ill by most standards. There was an emptiness, a hollowness that she couldn't fill. Religion didn't help. Even people in general could not help with the ailment. "The Event"—blessed, perhaps, as in rebirth or resurrection—is attended, and Zelga is cured. In terms that sound as if they describe a cure or a remission, Zelga notes that it has been a month and she is still well. She sees the vast web of connections, the beauty of all things in life. She dreams of being permanently healed: of getting better.

Zelga's sense of spiritual therapeutics is crucial to our understanding of Burning Man and many other contemporary festivals. Whether it is loneliness, inhibitions, repressions, guilt, pyromania, or any of a vast number of obsessions, participants view these events as places where healing happens.

In 1999, we witnessed an obese and hirsute middle-aged man lying naked and outstretched in his tent while crowds walked by. Someone remarked as we walked by that his behavior was healthy. "Imagine," they said to us, "what this guy might do in the outside world if he didn't have this place." Thinking about this gave us a shiver, as the thought echoed with wider social ramifications and responsibilities.

At festivals such as Burning Man, healing is emplaced in permissive events that allow the expression of bottled-up desires. They may seek to cure an emptiness and sense of lack of meaning in life, replacing it with a holistic emphasis on vast and important connections between the personal, the social, and the transcendent.

Healing and holism are central concerns within the New Age and Neo-Pagan movements. According to York (1995:8), it is in their healing and holistic emphases that these movements are in part outgrowths from the broader human potential movement. Viewed as part of a broader alternative spiritual movement, events like Burning Man, post-raves, and many other festivals might be seen to contribute to personal and collective development. They offer particular, dynamic, contemporary, sacralized, therapeutic, holistic flavors to their utopias.

For instance, Hutson concludes that raves increase self-esteem, release fears and anxieties, bring inner peace and improve consciousness, among other things. Raves don't cure disease, but when someone claims that "last night a DJ saved my life", it is reasonable to suspect that at least some form of healing takes place. (Hutson 1999:71)

Beckford (1984) recognizes the way in which groups and events involved in healing tend to relativize the institutional boundaries around practices usually confined to religion and psychiatry. In the discourse and practice of many New Age groups, spiritual belief and psychotherapy commingle. Yet, despite this commonality, we should acknowledge the immense pluralism and diversity existing within the New Age movement. As York (1995) indicates, New Age is an umbrella term, which overlaps in places with Neo-Paganism, itself highly pluralistic and diverse. Both movements exhibit what is often called the “American metaphysical tradition” (York 1995:33), but Neo-Pagans tend to place greater emphasis on embodiment, earth religions, ecology, and magic. While there are other differences and similarities, Neo-Pagans tend to stress ceremony and ritual. It is thus in their ceremonialism that post-raves and Burning Man relate most closely to Neo-Paganism.

An important link between New Age and Neo-Pagan discourse and practices and those of Burning Man and other post-raves is the centrality of ritual within the healing practices of these groups and gatherings. York contends that “self-improvement and self-growth orientations” constitute the raison d'être behind the rituals of New Age and Neo-Pagan practitioners (York 1995:11). To this, we would add many of the various rituals performed at festivals and post-rave affairs, from ritual drug use, dance, trance-invocation, to ceremonial social bonding. Outside critics often decry the Bacchanalian aspects of these events as mindless intoxication. Yet the institutional equivalents of many festival actions are recognized to be therapeutic: confessions, group therapies, exercise, prescription drugs. Regarding the latter, altered states of consciousness are widely understood within the New Age movement as legitimate forms of questing for meaning and spiritual experience (see Ferguson 1987:31).

For participants at events like raves and Burning Man, New Age and Neo-Pagan philosophies provide an ideological wedge allowing them to insert rituals into a sophisticated and individually (rather than institutionally) driven process of healing the self. In the next section, we explore the specific role that Neo-Pagan rituals and discourses play in this process.

Neo-Pagan connections
The central and culminating event of Burning Man has probably done the most to give the event a pagan profile—although we, along with the erudite organizers of the event, would contest singular and constricting assignments of meaning to the ritual or the event itself (see Black 1998). A Neo-Pagan reading is only one potential interpretation among many. Yet it is also important to realize that this open-endedness is an important hallmark of New Age and Neo-Pagan philosophies, and indeed of many American religious movements that followed the countercultural period of the 1960s. “With no central authority, New Age is not doctrinaire and consequently means many things to many people” (York 1995: 35).

Communications on Burning Man's website emphasize the open-endedness and individualism of the event. Here is a small section from an article entitled "What is Burning Man" that blends this open-endedness of ritual interpretation with distinct promises of sacred, transformational experience:

On Saturday night, we'll burn the Man. As the procession starts, the circle forms, and the man ignites, you experience something personal, something new to yourself, something you've never felt before. It’s an epiphany, it’s primal, it’s newborn. And it’s completely individual. The effigy of the Man blends past and future, science and religion, high technology and the primal: a gigantic 50-foot tall figure, reminiscent of the statuary and sanctuary of old times, a symbol of humanity raised up from the ground to reach the sky. He is constructed of wood, of trees, of ground, of nature, combined with technological contraptions harnessing fire and electronics, with two brilliant colors of neon tubing. The Man hums with electricity and is in this sense alive. Before being burned, he will raise his hands skyward, exhorting the crowd, possessing motion. He is duplicated every year. Like the seasons, like the sun, like life itself, he returns from the fire and dust, resurrected. The ritual and the ritualists vivify him.

As the time for the burning draws closer, a wild spectacle is enacted. The stage is filled with fire-twirlers. Masses of drummers unite in a thrumming, pounding, amplified throb of rhythm. Glowing decorations and desert-wear finery abound as the onlookers gather to celebrate the epiphanic and eponymous moment of the gathering. Orbs of fire and gigantic flamethrowers pour heat into the quickly cooling night air. Screams of joy and thrills of awe ring out. Dozens upon dozens of twirlers and drummers perform their hearts out, and the effects are nothing short of hypnotic. The exuberant crowd presses in upon you from every side. Just like it does at a rock concert, the scent of ritual burnings and smoking fills the air. Cameras are everywhere. Documentaries are filmed. Radio shows and webcasts broadcast the event live.

As the crowd gasps, the Man’s arms are raised skyward. He is readied to be burned. As the tension mounts, the Man is set ablaze. Filled with pyrotechnics, he blasts from inside and shoots out flame, expressing (for us) his mortality, his sacrificial power, the value of the moment, of this moment, of all moments. Fire becomes the central all-consuming symbol of the moment, a symbol that stands for both the technological and the primitive, heavily invested with linkages to central social concepts, from community to technology.

The Man falls, his essence rising finally to the sky in a heaving puff of smoke. He is a tired idol, a toppled god. After the crashing descent of his remains, the audience is then free to rush around his fire, to throw their own artworks and creations into it, to circle it and drum, sing, and dance orgiastically until the dawn—and, of course, to debate the ever changing meaning of it all, as they await the rising of the Man from these ashes in the coming year.

Like many elements of post-rave, the burning of the Man opens up opportunities to embody a popular dance orgiasm facilitated by modern technologies. It also stands as a fiery experiential canvas on which new ideologies and new selves are written, perhaps to be blown away like dust, perhaps to be sealed in stone. For the purposes of this exploration, the giant Man burning ritual opens up opportunities to discuss the relevance of Neo-Pagan interpretation of the events, and to use these to open up discussions of techno-paganism.

292 ROBERT V.KOZINETS AND JOHN F.SHERRY, JR

What exactly are Neo-Pagans and how do they relate to festivals such as Burning Man? Pike considers “Neo-Pagans” to be people who are “reinventing ancient pagan traditions or creating new ones,” shaping those traditions “to meet the needs of contemporary Americans and Europeans” (2001:27). Pearson et al. similarly define “contemporary Paganism” as a general and inclusive category for a range of specific traditions, all of which may in varying degrees be described as nature religions in the sense that they involve a reorientation towards, and a resacralization of, both external nature and our own physical embodiment. (Pearson et al. 1998:1; italics mine) York offers a more detailed definition. He sees Neo-Paganism as comprising an animistic, pantheistic, and pluralistic religious orientation that is non-dogmatic but employs traditional pagan metaphors (myths, foci, and rituals) or modern reconstructions of them as a means of celebrating a this-worldly emphasis. Neopagans stress self-responsibility, self-development, individual exegesis and full freedom of self-determination, the experience of ritual and ecstasy, and an ecological preoccupation. (York 1995:136)

In the next section, we continue to explore these Neo-Pagan aspects of Burning Man and related events, and relate these aspects to the incorporation and utilization of modern technologies. Invasion of the techno-pagans

The idea of building an anthropomorphic figure, animating it with electricity, pyrotechnics, and wire, referring to it as “the Man,” allowing multiple interpretations of the event, and offering it as a central sacrificial rite for celebrants resonates with ineluctably pagan, especially animist, implications. As well as a call for community and an invocation of ecstasy, it expresses a need to fashion the natural world into images of living things, ensouling or reanimating the world of nature. The urge is both primal—widely ascribed to children and to non-industrial cultures—and postmodern.

A complaint about contemporary society holds that “the common urban and suburban experience of our [American and Western] culture as ‘impersonal’, ‘neutral’, or "dead’" (Adler 1986:25). Re-enchanting the world of things is the common ground of advertising agencies and Neo-Pagan rituals, which, despite their different motives and foci, seek to make material things seem alive and filled with delight.

Some of the practices and performances at Burning Man have elements that evoke Neo-Pagan rituals. The form of the circle is central and sacred in Neo-Pagan rituals, with Burning Man’s enormous campsite laid out as a series of named concentric circles which act as streets, for example. Later in this chapter, we will also explore the common elements of fire rituals and drum-dominated music and dance.

We can also see ritual, ideological, and discursive elements of Neo-Paganism in practice in many “theme camps” constructed by participants. Theme camps are group campsites that are organized around a guiding, organizing theme and through which Burning Man participants co-create the Burning Man experience. Similar to the “villages” at ConFest (St. John 1997), Burning Man provides theme camps, community, and a set of widely distributed rules to support participants’ experimentation with a vast range of personal forms of expression.

Theme camps provide an entertaining and enlightening experience for other participants. Many of them play with notions of the sacred and seek, with varying levels of seriousness and satire, to pierce fundamental mysteries of human and social existence. Indeed, on the central Burning Man website theme camps are described in playful, but distinctly religious, terms, as “your chance to be a god or a worshiper.”” Although there are major differences in motivation for participation in the event and for the construction of theme camps, we can definitely see many connections to Neo-Paganism in the descriptions participants provide of their theme camps.

Consider a group that calls itself TOTEM: Temple of the Eternal Mysteries. TOTEM is “an organization dedicated to community, philosophical inquiry, the arts, and celebrating the joy of life. This group of friends from San Francisco has created several different kinds of theme camp at Burning Man. They began with a simple, but popular, mud-pit. They created a larger mud-pit, then a party room, followed by a large "sound-art" system that played "non-rave" music. In 2001, they changed their theme into a large-scale massage tent. The TOTEM group is apparently motivated by some of the same philosophies and ideologies that animate Neo-Pagan gatherings.

Consider the relationship between Neo-Pagan discourse and ritual and Burning Man in TOTEM's web-page descriptions:

"The mysteries and our fascination with them [the eternal mysteries] are built into us at a very deep level. If we were to strip away all one-god ideology, all religious institutions and religious literature, and return to our tribal primitivism, the eternal mysteries would remain, to burn like the brightest sun above us all. Thus the Burning Man connection. Each year at Burning Man, we leave behind the baffling bureaucracies of Babylon, and return to our primal state. Stripped of our usual sources of institutionalized inspiration, we must search within ourselves for ultimate meaning. Only the truth and relevance of the eternal mysteries are stunning enough to command the attention of our modern primitive culture, newly arisen from the mud. We are at Burning Man because our participation in the festival restores our awareness of our tribal roots, of the mysteries within."

The emphasis in this description is on the tribal, the primal, the primitive—on the regaining of the lost. Appearances must be stripped away, roots must be restored, mysteries must be returned to, people must be reborn from the mud. These inclinations are present in many other theme camps besides TOTEM. For example, consider the Sacred Playground theme camp, which provides "a sacred, grounding dome, sunset healing circles, and elemental rituals to give Burners the opportunity to recharge their energy and come back to their centers."

Just as the key definitions of Neo-Paganism stress its adaptation to modern contexts, rather than dogmatically attempting to remain faithful to specific ancient religions (Pike 2001:227), some contemporary pagan groups or adherents also attempt to reinvent pagan traditions that utilize, to varying degrees, contemporary technology. At Burning Man, it is easy to observe that the search for the sacred is often colored by a blending of aboriginal sensibilities with the high-tech leanings of Silicon Valley dotcommers.

As in tales of old, stilted giants walk the Earth. As in the Garden (and National Geographic pictures of authentic, distant cultures), nudity beckons. A mountain of television screens showing digital art glows in the distance like a midnight desert oasis. Trees made of bones shamble about on motorized bases. Carefully coiffed and sun-screened people shove bones through their noses, and are branded en masse. Computerized pyrotechnics explode a postmodern Wicker Man, ending in fitful fire dancing, drumming and the wild shrieks of huddled digerati.

The cultural critic Erik Davis calls Burning Man an "avant-garde Neo-Pagan flame-bake" (1997: unpaginated) but also captures the important distinction between the event and more ecologically centered events like the Rainbow Gathering or many Neo-Pagan festivals. "The tweaked video, the cellular modems spitting digits to a router back in Gerlach [Nevada, the nearest permanent town to Black Rock City], the fiber-optic special effects—out here they speak the truth of our condition far more than any drum circle" (ibid). 

Putting the rituals in context, combining the drum circles with techno music, the body paint with digital art, is what Davis suggests gives the Burning Man experience much of its originality and (sub)cultural power. It speaks of a potent polytheism—a long-sought fusing and collective embrace of techno-science, art, and the sacred. Bubbling in Burning Man’s endlessly diverse cauldron (as in the subcultures of post-rave), the spirit of shamanism and paganism is refracted by the cyborgasms of techno-fetishism and digital lust. Some participants and cultural observers, eager to identify and partake in new, differentiating trends, have used the term "techno-pagan" to describe those Neo-Pagan practitioners who embrace technology as a core element of their ritual life. Dery defines techno-paganism as "the convergence of Neo-Paganism (the umbrella term for a host of contemporary polytheistic nature religions) and the New Age with digital technology and fringe computer culture" (1996:50). He considers techno-paganism to be an existential response to the "widespread yearning to find a place for the sacred in our ever more secular, technological society" (ibid.:50). These are very similar motives indeed to those often ascribed to the growth of Neo-Paganism and New Age groups and philosophies. According to Dery, techno-paganism also "surfaces in the electro-bacchanalian urges that animate raves" (ibid.:52), where social norms are suspended in the context of dancing to loud, pounding techno music and psychedelics. The culture of rave also adopts terms and figures from Neo-Pagan literature, referencing influential high priests of modern chaos magick such as Aleister Crowley, along with psychedelic shamanic philosophers like Terence McKenna (ibid.: Tramacchi 2000). So although the "techno" in "techno-pagan" is widely considered to refer to technology, it might also (for the purposes of this volume at least) index post-rave techno culture, which appears to be important in incubating a nascent Neo-Paganism. As Hutson explains, "'techno' is a catch-all term for any type of 'electronic music' dominated by percussion rhythms" (1999:53). The "electronic" element of techno "refers to the fact that most techno (in the catch-all sense) is produced synthetically by mixing beats from drum machines with other pre-recorded sounds" (ibid.:53). Providing a key link between all of these gatherings, music and dance are important to the rites of Neo-Pagans as well. As Pike notes, "Neopagan identity is primarily expressed at festivals through music and dance" (2001:5). Drumming defines festival space at Neo-Pagan events, inspiring festal dance and movement as techno music does during raves. Burning Man, stubbornly pluralistic, inclusive, and diverse, summons all of these forms of musical expression to coexistence and interpenetration. The result is a music oeuvre that is ineffably diverse, but in which strong beats (percussive sounds) predominate. These strong beats, located in important meeting places like the Center Camp, barrel fires, dance camps, and at the burning of the Man, successfully signal ritual occasions when people gather and a more auto-expressive, improvisational, and uninhibited style of dance can take shape. The form of the music and the context of the dance both provide elements that can contribute to our understanding of the modern contradiction between the material world and the spiritual, between science and the sacred, between faith and reason. Hutson suggests that the DJ can be seen as a "techno-shaman" who is a "mixed symbol of human and machine" (1999:71). The techno-shamanic DJ spins "tribal" beats on sophisticated equipment, synthesizing our desire to be spiritual with our rootedness and dependence on the material. The DJ serves as a model for the place of machines in the world and a model for how the soul can be integrated with them.

Hutson's emphasis on the DJ as a role model is overly institutional and authoritarian, considering the self-directed and idiosyncratic types of experiences emerging at Burning Man and Neo-Pagan gatherings. However, Hutson's analysis begins to suggest the type of interesting explorations that can be germinated from a closer analysis of the energetic and creative outcomes resulting from the interplay of culturally charged opposite categories such as natural and artificial, human and machine, animal and human, and science and religion.

The fact that these cultural paradoxes—and the resultant need to negotiate or somehow resolve them—are in some sense widespread or even universal points to an important realization about techno-paganism as it has previously been defined.

Dery's (1996) use of the term infers that technology is only or mainly important to a certain subsect of Neo-Pagans. Yet this inference that other Neo-Pagans avoid modern contrivances needs to be dispelled. Davis (1998) assumes a more supportable position vis-a-vis the relation of technology to contemporary paganism. In contrast with Dery's more exclusive definition, Davis notes how technology has become intertwined with the lives and identities of Neo-Pagans.

For instance, he cites studies suggesting that an "amazingly" high percentage of Neo-Pagans are employed in technical and technological fields (ébid.:180). Their "experimental spiritual pragmatism" has enabled Neo-Pagans to embrace new technologies that relate to their practices and rituals, such as astrological or Tarot card software, and the online community that enables them to communicate and plan gatherings (bid.:186).

Pike (2001:2-3) also notes the central role of email and websites in planning Neo-Pagan events, which relates them yet again to Burning Man!" and raves (e.g. Gibson 1999). While revealing some very interesting developments in contemporary Neo-Paganism, the term "techno-pagan" may not necessarily distinguish between different groups and practices, as many groups utilize and embrace technology in their organization, communication, and rites.

We might, therefore, consider that Burning Man and post-raves share elements in common with Neo-Paganism, and resist the oversimplification that these events are technology-embracing "techno-pagan" events, casting other Neo-Pagans in the inaccurate role of dogmatic, electricity-shunning purists, akin to some sort of Wiccan Amish. Instead, we must recognize the technology-savvy consumer who stands behind many contemporary pagan altars.

While we are doing this, we might also recognize the premodern, born-to-be-wild spirit that lies, perhaps tightly coiled, like a pre-strike rattlesnake, within the computer-using, cell phonetoting, high-tech contemporary Western consumer (Davis 1998).

Common ground: post-raves, Burning Man, and Neo-Pagan festivals

There are many important elements shared by Burning Man, post-raves like the Australian outdoor doof, and Neo-Pagan festivals. Many of these commonalities are rooted in the Neo-Pagan emphasis on embodiment and the Earth, and enhanced by an ethos of anti-authoritarian, spontaneous participation. Evocative of the role of the doof dance floor and the burning of the Man, Pike (2001) describes the centrality and importance of the frenetic drumming and dancing that surround the Neo-Pagan “festival fire” at such gatherings as the Starwood festival. She describes dancers dressed in dark capes and gauze gowns, wearing costumes or masks, naked and “adorned only with jewelry or tattoos” or feathers, holding fluorescent wands, candles, or sparklers (#bid.:182). Although the site is carefully prepared, the fire event planned and beginning with a choreographed dance and procession, “once the fire is lit there is no leader, no orchestration, no focus of attention, and the ritual develops EXPLORING THE SACRED AT BURNING MAN 297 its own organic forms” (zbid.:183). Exactly the same is true of the burning of the Man. Describing the Australian post-rave doof phenomenon, Tramacchi (2000: 207, 210) regards fire, music, nature, and a mystical worldview to be central: Fire provides an appropriate symbol for the psychedelic movement: powerfully transformative, and most beautiful and useful as a tool when it is handled with care and respect. The music and the cycles of fire-twirling seem to draw out the moments of sunrise, golden beams dragging their way through the branches of the rainforest trees. The music complemented the sense of a single sacred moment being replayed again and again, eternity on display. (Tramacchi 2000:207) All of these events—doofs, Neo-Pagan fire festivals, Burning Man’s central burn— proceed in a spontaneous manner. “Emerging structures and patterns are unplanned and unspoken, taking shape in the interplay of drums and movement” (Pike 2001: 183). It is in this sense that drum and dance become recognized at Neo-Pagan events, as they are at raves, as the heart of these gatherings. The ritual fire, like the secret dance floor, is a place to transport participants to a higher state of consciousness, a place that is particularly sacred, a place where self-transformation can occur. Music, drumming, lights, fire—these are places where participants at these events and festivals gain an experience, and a bodily knowing of loss of control and freedom. With an ancient language, the percussive beats tell the body what to do. The sensual and erotic surroundings of writhing human beings (dressed or undressed in enchanting and enticing wear) and the flashing lights or fire siphon off the distractions of the past and the future and root the mind in the moment. The dancers become less inhibited, more comfortable with their bodies, with the dance, with others, with the idea of others watching them dance. In the self-reflection of social performance, they learn something about who they are, what they want, what their place is. They gain momentary glimpses of a better world for themselves, the potentiality of a personally better place, that which Kozinets (2002b) has called a “youtopia.” The creation of a sense of sacred space is, we assert, vitally important to this transformational ability. For participants will only agree to loss of control and freedom in a space that they feel is safe and special. Neo-Pagans define a ritual space as a safe place “when they are able to identify their personal boundaries in a collective context” (Pike 2001:190). The ritual fire becomes one important context for self-expression. At ConFest, St. John (1997) described the ludic spaces which provided a safe place for celebrants to experiment with the primitivity discovered on site, for example in "feral" practices like going nude, covering one's body with mud, or body-painting. The desert environment plays an important role here, just as the forest or rainforest does for forest raves and Neo-Pagan festivals. Emphasizing place refocuses the mind upon the body. In the Black Rock desert, the daytime heat can easily surpass 100° Fahrenheit during the day, and plunge to 40° in the evening. Constant rehydration is required: "piss clear" is a maxim of the event. Sunlight and desert dryness expose the body's needs, and its fluids become suddenly (and literally) salient.

These realities of daily existence are often related in informant interview and dialog to a more primitive state articulated as "back to nature" or more "authentic" than ordinary lived experience. A number of scholars have focused on the commercialized and commodification-ridden elements of modern raves. In a popular statement on this perspective, Thornton locates rave "subculture" within commercial industries such as publishing and recording which "specialize in the manufacture and promotion of 'anti-commercial' culture" (1996:157). Her study traces multiple instances of the commercial co-creation of the rave subculture to argue the important involvement of culture industries in subcultures such as rave and to critique the popular notion that raves are subversive acts of resistance (see ibid.: 116-62).

The commodification rap is perhaps the main reason Burning Man's organizers and participants tend to distance their community from rave, for they seek to position their event as unsponsored, uncommodified and non-commercial. Yet it is in this critique that our study of Burning Man can add much to our understanding of the qualities of raves or, most accurately, post-rave phenomena. For, as St. John (2001:14-16) emphasizes, doof culture in Australia emphasizes volunteerism and freedom from corporate influences. As Kozinets (2002b) details, through its rules (such as "no vending"), Burning Man attempts ideologically and ritually to distance itself from the mainstream marketplace, offering consumers a place they can imagine they have suspended authoritarian market logics.

The result is the freedom from social distancing in which participants build community, and the freedom from passivity in which they express and transform themselves. As Belk et al. (1989) and Kozinets (2001) have pointed out, the sacred and the commercial exist in an uneasy cultural tension with one another throughout contemporary 'Western society. The anti-market and anti-organized religious elements are classic characteristics of festivals and other carnivalesque events, with their ritual inversions and anti-authoritarian discourses and themes (Duvignaud 1976; Falassi 1987). Festivals provide ritual power for inverting, temporarily overturning, and denying currently dominant social orders.

In this exploration, we begin to discover the way in which sacred experiences at events such as doofs, Neo-Pagan festivals, and Burning Man carve out sacred times and spaces for participants to define themselves in commercial society. Conclusions

This chapter stands as a teaser to substantial explorations of the theme of the sacred at Burning Man. We can only hint at the future possibilities of exploring this stance further. We suggest as a provisional conclusion that Neo-Pagan sensibilities and discourse, and the cultural imperatives that underlie them, can contribute much to our understanding of many contemporary festivals, such as post-rave events and Burning Man. We further suggest that these spaces are rich sites from which scholars and students can formulate important new ideas about identity and society in the early 21st century. Consider some questions. What is the role of commercial culture and the marketplace in these sacred spaces? What is the role of organized religion? Why do so many of these adherents feel that they need to suspend the logics of the market and of their inherited religion in order to engage in self-transformative practices? How do Neo-Pagan rituals and New Age philosophies relate to these anti-market and anti-religion connections? How do the psychotherapeutics of these events help to inform our understanding of contemporary consumer society and the deficiencies that it might have? What changes—if any—do these events make in people’s lives outside of the events? What shapes and forms of utopia do events such as Burning Man portend? What are the wider implications of movements such as the spiritual-ecological elaboration of “techno-pagan” beliefs and its trickledown into multifarious festivals?

We believe that this research suggests that these are important questions that may be investigated at places such as forest raves, doofs, other rave-derived events, Neo-Pagan festivals, and Burning Man. On a deeply personal level, these events call on us to burn within ancient and ever-new fires. The fire and the drumming, the lights and the music, they urge us to sacrifice what we were for what we can be, to burn in the glory of seeking better ways, new realizations, intimations of infinite being. As contemporary sacred spaces, they hold fascinating promise for the ongoing and positive transformation of our selves and our society.





===============================================================\n\n\n





Rethinking the Dancing Mania

While medieval dance frenzies have long been regarded as a classic example of stress-induced mental disorder affecting mostly women, there is much evidence to the contrary. ROBERT E. BARTHOLOMEW examines the phenomenon, debunking the myths and misconceptions surrounding the dance manias.

The dance manias, also known as St. Vitus's dance, occurred between the eleventh and seventeenth centuries. Tens of thousands of people participated in frenzied public orgies and wild dances lasting for days or even weeks. It is no wonder that psychiatrists and medical historians classified these episodes as group mental disorders, affecting those overwhelmed by the stresses of the period.

During outbreaks, participants would often strip off their clothing and prance naked through the streets. Some screamed and beckoned to be tossed into the air, while others danced furiously in strange, colorful attire. Women howled and made obscene gestures, while others squealed like animals. Some rolled themselves in the dirt or relished being struck on the soles of their feet.

An Italian variant, tarantism, was believed to be caused by the bites of the tarantula spider. The only cure was thought to be frenetic dancing to certain music, which supposedly dissipated the "poison" from their blood. The term "dancing mania" is derived from the Greek word "choras," meaning dance, and "mania," meaning madness. The literal translation of "choros mania" is dancing madness.

The name was adopted after a group of about 200 people danced so spiritedly on a bridge above the Maas River in Germany during 1278 that it collapsed, killing many participants. Survivors were treated in a nearby chapel dedicated to St. Vitus, and many were reportedly restored to full health.

Prior to the twentieth century, it was commonly referred to as epidemic chorea or choreomania. The word "chorea" was erroneously evoked to describe these behaviors, as participants were often thought to be exhibiting symptoms of chorea, a central nervous system disorder characterized by brief irregular jerking movements that can resemble dancing.

The terms "tarantism" and "dancing mania" are often used interchangeably, as they share overlapping features. Tarantism was mainly confined to southern Italy. Gloyne (1950, 29) describes it as the "mass hysterical reaction" to perceived bites of the tarantula spider. The first recorded episodes appeared during the thirteenth century and persisted on a widespread scale in southern Europe for 400 years, reaching a peak in the seventeenth century, after which it virtually disappeared. Small annual episodes have persisted in southern Italy well into the twentieth century.

Hans Schadewaldt (1971) investigated an outbreak in Wardo during 1957. Italian religious history professor Ernesto de Martino (1966) identifies thirty-five cases of tarantism near Galatina in 1959. De Martino conducted his survey between June 28 and 30, as June 29 is the festival day of St. Peter and St. Paul. On that day, it is customary for the "victims" to travel from regional villages to the chapel of St. Paul to obtain a cure for various ailments. More recently, it has been observed near Sardinia, Italy (Gallini 1988). Medieval tarantism was reported almost exclusively during the height of the hot, dry summer months of July and August. People, asleep or awake, would suddenly jump up, feeling an acute pain like the sting of a bee. Some saw the spider, others did not, but they knew that it must be the tarantula. They ran out of the house into the street, to the market place dancing in great excitement. Soon they were joined by others who like them had just been bitten, or by people who had been stung in previous years, for the disease was never quite cured. The poison remained in the body and was reactivated every year by the heat of summer.

Music and dancing were the only effective remedies, and people were known to have died within an hour or in a few days because music was not available (Sigerist 1943, 218-219). Symptoms included headache, giddiness, breathlessness, faintness, trembling, twitching, appetite loss, general soreness, and delusions. Sometimes it was claimed that a sore or swelling was caused by a tarantula bite, but such assertions were difficult to verify because the bite resembled those of insects. The dance frenzy symptoms resemble typical modern episodes of epidemic hysteria, in addition to expected reactions from exhaustive physical activity and excessive alcohol consumption. Psychiatrists classify tarantism as a form of epidemic hysteria due to its psychological character and claims that most of those affected were females (Sigerist 1943, 218; Rosen 1968, 204).

Early medical observers theorized that a venomous species of tarantula found only near the Italian state of Apulia was capable of producing sporadic tarantism symptoms each summer, but tests on spiders of the region have failed to substantiate these suspicions (Gloyne 1950, 35). Latrodectus tarantula is a nonaggressive, slow-moving spider common in Apulia that can produce psychoactive effects in people it bites. In severe cases, it may temporarily mimic many tarantism symptoms, including twitching and shaking of limbs, weakness, nausea, and muscular pain (Lewis 1991, 514). Ironically, Lycosa tarantula was typically blamed for tarantism symptoms, as it is larger, more aggressive, ferocious in appearance and has a painful bite. Yet neither spider can account for the predominantly symbolic and psychogenic character of tarantism attacks. Latrodectus tarantula is also found in other countries where tarantism does not occur (Russell 1979, 416), including the United States (Lewis 1991, 517). There is no evidence that a venomous species of tarantula, native only to Apulia, may have existed during this period and later died out. As Sigerist (1943, 221) remarks: “The same tarantula shipped to other parts of the country seemed to lose most of its venom, and what remained acted differently.” It is also doubtful that some insect or other agent was responsible for causing “attacks,” as most participants did not even claim to have been bitten, and would only participate in tarantism episodes at designated times. Clearly most cases were unrelated to spider bites. Other psychological aspects include the only reliable cure: dancing to certain types of music. “Victims” would typically perform one of numerous versions of the tarantella, a rapid tempo score characterized by brief, repetitive phrases which escalate in intensity. Dancing Manias: A variation of tarantism spread throughout much of Europe between the thirteenth and seventeenth centuries, where it was known as the dancing mania or St. Vitus's dance. Participants engaged in frenzied dancing that lasted intermittently for days or weeks. Social scientists typically characterized the "victims" as females who were maladjusted, deviant, irrational, or mentally disturbed. These activities were accompanied by symptoms similar to tarantism, including screaming, hallucinations, convulsive movements, chest pains, hyperventilation, crude sexual gestures, and outright intercourse.

Instead of spider bites as the cause, participants usually claimed that they were possessed by demons who had induced an uncontrollable urge to dance. Music was typically played during episodes and was considered an effective remedy. Detailed accounts of many episodes appear in a classic book by German physician Justus Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages (1844). He attributed the origin of these "epidemics" to "morbid sympathy," as they often coincided with periods of severe disease, such as widespread pessimism and despair after the Black Death.

The dance mania spread from Italy to Prussia, with participants dancing ceaselessly for hours or days. They would collapse and fall to the ground exhausted, groaning and sighing as if in the agonies of death. After recuperating, they would resume their convulsive movements, contorting their bodies, writhing, screaming, and jumping in a mad frenzy. Many claimed to have seen the walls of heaven split open and Jesus and the Virgin Mary appearing before them. Dance manias are considered to have occurred spontaneously, with participants unable to control their actions, and primarily exhibited by mentally disturbed females.

Influential New York University psychiatrists Harold Kaplan and Benjamin Sadock (1985, 1227) state that they represent "collective mental disorder." Carson et al. (1998, 37) view St. Vitus's dance and tarantism as collective hysterical disorders, while abnormal psychologist Ronald Comer of Princeton University uses the term "mass madness" (1996, 9). Let us examine these claims based on several dozen period chronicles translated by E. Louis Backman (1952) in his seminal study of religious dances. Few if any modern textbooks on psychiatry and abnormal psychology cite these early chronicles. Instead, they rely on a handful of often-cited influential medical historians of the early twentieth century, using their assessments and well-worn quotations.

Medical historians such as Henry Sigerist, George Mora, and George Rosen were giants in their field and astute enough to acknowledge Greek or Roman ritualistic elements in the dance manias, but each assumes that the participants used these rites to work themselves into frenzied states of physical and mental disturbance in order to experience cathartic reactions to intolerable social conditions. They also assume that most participants were hysterics.

Mora (1963, 436-438) writes that tarantism and dance manias used rituals as psychotherapeutic attempts to cope with either individual or societal maladjustments which fostered mental disturbances. Sigerist held a similar view. An abnormal psychology text written by Robert Carson of Duke University and his colleagues (1998, 37) cites Sigerist to support the view that St. Vitus's dance and tarantism were similar to ancient Greek orgiastic rites which had been outlawed by Christian authorities but were secretly practiced anyway. The authors assume that these “secret gatherings . . . probably led to considerable guilt and conflict” which triggered collective hysterical disorders.

Dance frenzies appeared most often during periods of crop failures, famine, epidemics, and social upheaval, leading Rosen (1968) to conclude that this stress triggered widespread hysteria. Yet these same disasters prompted attempts at divine intervention through ritualized dancing, and often produced trance and possession states. Consistent with this latter view, many symptoms associated with tarantism and dancing mania are consistent with sleep deprivation, excessive alcohol consumption, emotional excitement, and vigorous, prolonged physical activity.

A German chronicle reports that during a dance frenzy at Strasbourg in 1418, “many of them went without food for days and nights” (Rust 1969, 20). The European “dancing manias” and its Italian variant tarantism are portrayed within the psychiatric literature as spontaneous, stress-induced outbursts of psychological disturbance that primarily affected females. This depiction is based on the selective use of period quotations by medical historians such as George Rosen and Henry Sigerist, who were reflecting popular stereotypes of female susceptibility to mental disorders.

However, based on a series of translations of medieval European chronicles describing these events, many of them first-hand, and by scrutinizing other historical sources which provide a degree of social, cultural, historical, and political perspective, it is evident that contemporary depictions of “dancing manias” have been misrepresented. Contrary to popular psychiatric portrayals, females were not overrepresented among participants, episodes were not spontaneous but highly structured, and they involved unfamiliar religious sects engaging in strange or foreign customs that were redefined as a behavioral abnormality (Bartholomew 1998). Let us examine the evidence. Fallacy #1: Most “Dancers” Were Crazy As a result, they would naturally have had unfamiliar customs. The largest and best documented dance plague, that of 1374 involving throngs of “dancers” in Germany and Holland, were “pilgrims” who traveled, “according to Beka’s chronicle, from Bohemia, but also from Hungary, Poland, Carinthia, Austria, and Germany. Great hosts from the Netherlands and France joined them” (Backman 1952, 331). The behavior of these dancers was described as strange, because while exhibiting actions that were part of the Christian tradition, and paying homage to Jesus, Mary, and various saints at chapels and shrines, other elements were foreign. Radulphus de Rivo's chronicle Decani Tongrensis states that “in their songs they uttered the names of devils never before heard of ... this strange sect.” Petrus de Herenthal writes in Vita Gregorii XI: “There came to Aachen , . . a curious sect.” The Chronicon Belgicum Magnum describes the participants as “a sect of dancers.” The actions of dancers were often depicted as immoral, as there was much uninhibited sexual intercourse. The chronicle of C, Browerus (Abtiquitatum et Annalium Trevirensium) states: “They indulged in disgraceful immodesty, for many women, during this shameless dance and mock-bridal singing, bared their bosoms, while others of their own accord offered their virtue.” In A Chronicle of Early Roman Kings and Emperors, it states that a number of participants engaged in “loose living with the women and young girls who shamelessly wandered about in remote places under the cover of night.” If most of the participants were pilgrims of Bohemian and Czech origin as Backman asserts, during this period Czechs and Bohemians were noted for a high incidence of perceived immorality, especially sexual, including prostitution and annual festivals involving the free partaking of sex (Backman 1952, 290).

Fallacy #2: There Was a Spontaneous, Uncontrollable Urge to Dance

Period chronicles reveal that dance manias were mainly composed of pilgrims engaging in emotionally charged, highly structured displays of worship that occasionally attracted locals. This social patterning is evident in a first-hand account on September 11, 1374, by Jean d’Outremeuse in his chronicle La Geste de Liege, who states that “there came from the north to Liege . . . a company of persons who all danced continually. They were linked with clothes, and they jumped and leaped. ... They called loudly on St. John the Baptist and fiercely clapped their hands.” Slichtenhorst (cited in Backman 1952, 210), in describing the dance frenzy of 1375 and 1376 in France, Germany, and Gelderland (now southwestern Holland), notes that participants “went in couples, and with every couple was another single person ... they danced, leaped and sang, and embraced each other in friendly fashion.” A similar pattern is evident in tarantism. While taranti (as victims were known) are typically described as participating in uncontrollable behaviors in chaotic, frenzied throngs, adherents worshiped in a set pattern, much like modern-day ecstatic religious sects. Australian medical historian and tarantism expert Jean Russell states that taranti would typically commence dancing at sunrise, stop during midday to sleep and sweat, then bathe before the resumption of dancing until evening, when they would again sleep and sweat, consume a light meal, then sleep until sunrise. This ritual was usually repeated over four or five days, and sometimes for weeks (Russell 1979, 413). Clearly, tarantism episodes were not spontaneous, and the same is true of dance manias. German magistrates even contracted musicians to play for participants and serve as dancing companions. The latter was intended to reduce injuries and mischief during the procession to the St. Vitus chapel (Hecker 1970 [1837], 4). Hecker states that the dancing mania was a “half-heathen, half-Christian festival” which incorporated into the festival of St. John’s day as early as the fourth century, “the kindling of the ‘Nodfyr,’ which was forbidden them by St. Boniface.” This ritual involved the leaping through smoke or flames, which was believed to protect participants from various diseases over the ensuing year. A central feature of the dance frenzy was leaping or jumping continuously for up to several hours through what they claimed were invisible fires, until collapsing in exhaustion. Not only were episodes scripted, but dance processions were swollen by spectators (Hecker 1970 [1837], 4), including children searching for parents who were among the dancers, and vice versa (Haggard 1934, 187). Some onlookers were threatened with harm for refusing to dance (Backman 1952, 147). Many took part out of loneliness and carnal pleasures; others were curious or sought exhilaration (Rust 1969, 22). Hecker remarks that “numerous beggars, stimulated by vice and misery, availed themselves of this new complaint to gain a temporary livelihood,” while gangs of vagabonds imitated the dance, roving “from place to place seeking maintenance and adventures.” Similar observations have been noted of tarantism episodes.

Fallacy #3: Most “Dancers” Were Hysterical Females

A revisiting of the descriptions of dancing manias based on early chronicles of these events shows that both men and women were equally affected. Where the gender of the participants was noted, the following comments are representative: Petrus de Herenthal’s chronicle Vita Gregorii XI remarks that “Persons of both sexes ... danced”; Radulpho de Rivo's Decani Tongrensis states, “persons of both sexes, possessed by devils and half naked, set wreathes on their heads, and began their dances”; Johannes de Beka’s Canonicus Ultrajectinus et Heda, Wilhelmus, Praepositus Arnhemensis: De Episcopis Ultraiectinis, Recogniti, states that in 1385, “there spread along the Rhine ... a strange plague ... whereby persons of both sexes, in great crowds... danced and sang, both inside and outside of churches, till they were so weary that they fell to the ground”; according to Koelhoff’s Chronicle published in 1499, “Many people, men and women, old and young, had the disease [of dancing mania]”; Casper Hedion in Ein Ausserlessne Chronik von Anfang der Welt bis auff das iar nach Christi unsers Eynigen Heylands Gepurt M.D. writes that in 1374 “a terrible disease, called St. John’s dance . . . attacked many women and girls, men and boys”; A. Slichtenhorst’s Gelsersee Geschiedenissen states that “men and women were smitten by the fantastic frenzy.” This gender mixture is also reflected in more recent tarantism reports such as episodes in the vicinity of Sardinia, Italy, studied by Gallini (1988) which found that the vast majority of “victims” were male, while de Martino (1966) reported that most participants that he investigated near Apulia were female.

What Caused the Dancing Manias? Ergot poisoning (pronounced “er-get”) has been blamed for hallucinations and convulsions accompanying the dance mania. Nicknamed St. Anthony's Fire, ergotism coincided with floods and wet growing seasons, which fostered the growth of the fungus Claviceps purpura that thrives in damp conditions and forms on cultivated grains, especially rye. While this could account for some symptoms, many outbreaks did not coincide with floods or wet growing or harvest periods. Convulsive ergotism could cause bizarre behavior and hallucinations, but chronic ergotism was more common and typically resulted in the loss of fingers and toes from gangrene, a feature that is distinctly not associated with dance manias (Donaldson et al. 1997, 203).

As for tarantism, most episodes occurred only during July and August and were triggered by real or imaginary spider bites, hearing music, or seeing others dance, and involved structured annual rituals. Also, while rye was a key crop in central and northern Europe, it was uncommon in Italy. Surely a few participants were hysterics, epileptics, mentally disturbed, or even delusional from ergot, but the large percentage of the populations affected, and the circumstances and timing of outbreaks, suggests otherwise. Episodes were pandemic, meaning that they occurred across a wide area and affected a very high proportion of the population (Lidz 1963, 822; Millon and Millon 1974, 22).

So what is the most likely explanation for dance manias? Based on an examination of a representative sample of medieval chronicles, it is evident that these episodes are best explained as deviant religious sects who gained adherents as they made pilgrimages through Europe during years of turmoil in order to receive divine favor. Their symptoms (visions, fainting, tremor) are predictable for any large population engaging in prolonged dancing, emotional worship, and fasting. Their actions have been “mistranslated” by contemporary scholars evaluating the participants’ behaviors per se, removed from their regional context and meaning. Tarantism was a regional variant of dancing mania that developed into a local tradition, primarily in southern Italy.

In reviewing the dance frenzies, it is important to consult original sources and realize that we are all to some extent products of our social, cultural, and historical milieu. When assessing the normality of a particular act, it is vital not to focus solely on the behaviors per se, but on the context of the participants and those making the evaluations. It is not that these prominent historians were trying to deceive, but their social and cultural milieu was different from our own. They had different assumptions and worldviews, and were writing at a time when it was taken for granted that women were innately susceptible to hysteria and were both physically and emotionally frail (Smith-Rosenberg 1972; Ehrenreich and English 1978; Micale 1995). This situation affected their selective readings of medieval chronicles despite their scholarly backgrounds and evidence to the contrary in the very texts they translated.

That a person's milieu affects their scholarship is not surprising. Of concern is the persistence of several fallacies about dance manias into the last decade of the twentieth century, and the reliance on secondary sources by the authors of many textbooks on abnormal psychology and psychiatry. In their defense, unless they are specialists in medieval manuscripts, most of these authors would lack the time or resources to consult original, obscure texts. This underlines the importance of consulting original sources whenever possible, and not relying solely on the interpretation of others. Scientific progress and understanding is achieved by standing on the shoulders of giants. However, occasionally those shoulders unwittingly face in the wrong direction. It is time to correct that mistake. One cannot help wondering how many more "facts" of today are based on the prejudices of yesterday, and will eventually be exposed as the fallacies of tomorrow.





=======================================================\n\n\n






 The notion of collectivity carries a nostalgic charge, which is especially evident in Marxism and its derived discourses. Collective action is seen as necessary to change social arrangements. However, this nostalgia is present because collective action seems increasingly difficult or outmoded, relegated to the status of the 'primitive'.

Primitive participation in ritual is intensely sincere and loaded with faith. It is corporeal and fully 'engaging' of all the capacities of the body. Conversely, modernity has seen the rise of individuation of bodies and the ideological individuation of the person. Ulrich Beck has argued that 'the basic figure of fully developed modernity is the single person' (Beck 1992: 122).

The debate in modernist studies about whether or not 'primitivity' can be 'left behind' is pertinent to the discussion of 'collective madnesses' that have existed in the past. These events enigmatically escape the explanatory frameworks of 'individual' disciplines or modes of thought. This suggests that modes of individuation in thought and its practical application to the treatment of illness might need to be revised. This situation requires theories of complexity and interdisciplinary appara-tuses to come to terms with it.

When the search for causes in individual bodies reaches practical and theoretical limits, we must turn to the more biophilo-sophical position. This position asserts that multiple life forms circulate in and beyond individual bodies as epidemics, and even less materially as codes and forces on life-enhancing missions feeding and starving each other in particular ecological environments.

In many cases, even the dead are still part of the equation for life. The Madagascans, obsessed with death and their ancestors, become possessed — some of them — by spirits of the dead (Sharp 1996). These spirits may come to them in dreams or may permanently occupy individuals. In the northern parts of the island, the possessed are most often older single women, and they are possessed by spirits called tromba, who are actually royal ancestors. The possessed might dress up in the style and period of the King or Queen inside them. This kind of possession may or may not be quite unrelated to an episode of choreomania, noticed in the late 19th century and reported by James Sibree early in Maurice Bloch's book, Placing the Dead: The Imanenjana, or Dancing Mania.

In the month of February 1863, the Europeans resident at Antananarivo (Tananarive), the capital of Madagascar, began to hear rumours of a new disease. It was said to have appeared in the west or south-west. The name given to it by the natives was imanenjana, and the dancers were called ramanenjana, which probably comes from a root signifying 'to make tense'. The name did not convey any idea of its nature, and the accounts given of it were so vague as to mystify rather than enlighten. After a time, however, it reached the capital, and in the month of March began to be common. At first, parties of two or three were seen dancing in public places. It spread rapidly and reached the central province of Imerina. The public mind was in a state of excitement, as the late king, Radama II, introduced remarkable political and social changes. An anti-Christian, anti-European party opposed progress and change. The epidemic aligned with this party. The patients complained of pain in the praecordia and great uneasiness. They became restless, nervous, and uncontrollable when excited or hearing music. They danced rapidly with amazing endurance. The eyes were wild, and the countenance showed an abstracted expression. The dancing was regulated by the music, often becoming leaping. The patients exhausted the patience of musicians and continued running until they fell, almost insensible. After exhaustion, the patients were taken home, and the morbid impulse was destroyed. Some professed to have intercourse with the departed, particularly with the late queen.

James Sibree, with the London Missionary Society, was an eyewitness. He wrote about the phenomenon but may have spoken to doctors, as the dancers were referred to as "patients" and used technical terms like "praecordia". The other discourses intersecting here concern religion and politics, revealing more about the phenomenon. The syntax in the title, "The Public Mind," betrays a desire to entertain the collective singular. Bloch, the anthropologist, adds more threads to the multiple causality, mentioning the dancers' belief in preparing for the return of the recently dead traditionalist queen, Ranavalona. 

As noted above, Madagascan cultures are strongly centered around cults of the dead, and the major ceremony (famadihana) involves ritual reburial where the power of the ancestor is made manifest. In the case of spirit possession by royalty, this dancing mania may well be thought of as a kind of collective re-embodiment. And Bloch notes that (in addition to the crucial element of music which makes the events social and planned rather than accidental), the movements are meaningful: The dancers believed they were carrying [the Queen's] baggage from the coast to the capital and they mimed carrying heavy loads which they passed one to the other in relay. . . it recalls the famous cargo cults and other millenarian cults which it has often been convincingly argued are closely linked to violent foreign contact. In this case, however, the somewhat surprising element is the absence of any clear leaders of any kind, and perhaps the closest parallel is therefore with the ghost dancers of North America.

The significant aspect of the movement is the combination of the frenzied situation, reaffirmation of the past, the focus on tombs and the dead, and the total rejection of western influences. (Bloch 1971: 25) The rejection of things western was manifested in the dancers (or perhaps we could now call them, anachronistically, demonstrators) knocking off people’s hats and killing pigs, both western imports. The dancers were not self-contained, they were interacting strongly with bystanders, forcing them to greet them, smashing contents of houses, and encouraging them to join the movement, which even a parade of soldiers did, going into a frenzy and attacking their officers (Andrianjafy 1902: 60).

The anthropological comparison with the ghost dances of North America encourages us to think of this as an anti-colonial protest, but that particular global political framing was certainly not available to the locals. The local newspaper, the Moniteur universel, reported on 7 juillet 1863 that the dancers said that Ranavalo et Radama 1st emerged from their tomb to declare their son unworthy of the crown. It was said he had sold his country to the whites. His mother and father were groaning under the weight of this monumental crime. Their spirits were weeping and beseeching all their old subjects to seek the help of sikidys (diviners) so as to deflect the curses cast by on their unfortunate successor. (Andrianjafy 1902: 61)

The expatriate doctor Andrianjafy wrote a thesis about this phenomenon in Montpellier in 1902, remembering what he had observed as a boy, and gave it a medical explanation: an origin in malarial infection. But at the same time, he saw that it was literally orchestrated; musicians had to be there playing fast music for the dancers to ‘cure’ them. His prescription was not only treatment for malaria, but also, as a second step, modernization of the whole society, including an ‘uncompromising ayjany rout of witches, diviners and others exploiting the credulity of the people. Ancestral prejudices, superstition, and ignorance, which are jealously maintained by these people, must be eliminated by progress, civilization, and science’ (Andrianjafy 1902: 62).

Then towards his conclusion, his rhetoric becomes more strident: ‘This is a battle for moral hygiene on three fronts: political, religious, and social’ (Andrianjafy 1902: 63). A little research discovers that there is a fairly large body of writing on the other dance manias which have been known to history, especially St Vitus’s dance and Tarantism: between the eleventh and seventeenth centuries, manias swept across Europe______ It is little wonder why psychiatrists and medical historians classify such episodes as group mental disorder affecting those overwhelmed by the stresses of the period. During outbreaks, many immodestly tore off their clothing and pranced naked through the streets. Some screamed and beckoned to be tossed into the air; others danced furiously in what observers described as strange, colorful attire. A few reportedly laughed or wept to the point of death. Women howled and made obscene gestures while others squealed like animals. Some rolled themselves in the dirt or relished being struck on the soles of their feet.

An Italian variant was known as tarantism, as victims were believed to have been bitten by the tarantula spider, for which the only cure was thought to be frenetic dancing to certain music which supposedly dissipated the 'poison' from their blood. Commentaries, including the classic treatise of Hecker (1888), are a queer combination of medical, social and cultural discourses. While, as a physician, Hecker is sensitive to the after-effects of the plague on the early manifestations of dance mania in Europe, with the correlative factors of starvation among lower classes. He also notes that the concentration of the dancing around the festival of St. Jean related it to earlier pagan rituals, so that the clergy attempted to exorcise this clear influence of the devil, and to stop it spreading to the more respectable classes of their congregations.

Hecker, in his secularism, can refer to the effects of "Oppression, insecurity and the influence of a very rude priestcraft, as the powerful causes" of this phenomenon (1888: 169-70). Hecker speaks freely of these manias as epidemics, of the bacchanalian freedoms enjoyed by the participants, and of the 'morbid sympathy' which united the people involved, drawing ever more into the crowd behavior.

Clearly, this phenomenon set the stage for the analysis of hysteria, even though it was not a particularly female phenomenon. So we note that after the 'mass' effects settled down, the activity could be regularized and localized to individual acts in the heat of mid-summer: "It grew every year more rare, so that at the beginning of the seventeenth century it was observed only occasionally in its ancient form."

In the year of 1623, G. Horst saw some women who annually performed a pilgrimage to St. Vitus's chapel at Drefelhausen, near Weissenstein, in the territory of Ulm, that they might wait for their dancing fit there . . .They were not satisfied, however, with a dance of three hours' duration, but continued day and night in a state of mental aberration, like persons in an ecstasy, until they fell exhausted to the ground; and when they came to themselves again, they felt relieved from a distressing uneasiness and painful sensation of weight in their bodies, of which they had complained for several weeks . . .After this commotion, they remained well for the whole year; and such was their faith in the protecting power of the saint that one of them has visited this shrine at Drefelhausen more than twenty times, and another had already kept the saint's day for the thirty-second time at this sacred station. (Hecker 1888: 129-30)

In the Europe of the middle ages, dancing was a courtly practice not available as an 'outlet' for the pleasure of the lower classes, so while bodily movement in the dance manias tended more to the berserk than the graceful, the almost obligatory presence of music as stimulant and 'cure' is a significant factor in the pre-history of mass entertainment, which would no doubt repay further research. Hecker is sensitive to such cultural factors entering into the manifestations of dance manias as cultures. He notes, for instance, that in Liége the possessed assembling in multitudes, frequently poured forth imprecations against [the priests] and menaced their destruction. They intimidated the people also to such a degree that there was an express ordinance issued that no one should make any but square-toed shoes, because the fanatics had manifested a morbid dislike to the pointed shoes which had come into fashion immediately after the ‘Great Mortality’ in 1350. They were still more irritated at the sight of red colours . . . (Hecker 1988: 108)

Tan Hacking, in his book Mad Travellers (1988), looks at ‘transient mental illness’, in particular the fugue syndrome appearing in France about the time of the invention of the bicycle. The bicycle, an ideal mode for individual escape, is to the fugue as music is to choreomania: an exciting technical prosthesis. All factors must be looked at for an understanding of these phenomena, such that Hacking’s evocation of the ‘ecological niche’ is useful in that it invites the kind of complex analysis proper to ecological studies. But he also finds major cultural tensions in operation, saying that one of the vectors within which mental illnesses find themselves is ‘cultural polarity: the illness should be situated between two elements of contemporary culture, one romantic and virtuous, and the other vicious and tending to crime’ (Hacking 1998: 81).

For the middle ages, such a cultural and social polarity finds its sanc- tioned reversal in Rabelaisian ‘carnival’, for which the dancing manias may well have been dangerous precursors. In the case of Madagascar the cultural polarity is the one set up by colonialism and the late Queen's rejection of it. The cult wants to bring her back from the dead to fight the battle again, and reject the foreigners. But it is too late, Madagascar from this moment on will enter the colonial world.

Under conditions of immense social stress the collective body reacts, especially if it has no lines of escape or contact with effective power. If God can be no help, because there is a struggle between, say, Christianity and paganism, if there are no govern- mental mechanisms in place to relieve suffering or at least listen to its complaint, then the collective body convulses and reacts in ways to confound all meaning in a hyper-sensational combination and ‘wastage’ of corporeal forces, the magic of ritual, and flamboyant ‘mass’ political expression.

Medicine rushes in to isolate the symptom and individuate the ‘patients’, but this practice is only partially effective and its discourse reveals itself as lacking any real explanatory power. Mass reactions of this kind convulsing ‘our’ body are rare today because of modern methods of individ- ualization and treatment, but even medicine knows of the social, cultural and historical factors which go into creating a ‘niche’ where a disease can propagate.

When an ‘epidemic’ fired up by a strange complex of forces causes the whole social body to convulse and react, we might have to think again, with Isabelle Stengers, about the ‘way human beings construct both their individual and collective identities’: | will simply remind us that it is not impossible for our descendants in the quite near future to find themselves in a position where they are classified into ‘risk groups’ and their relatives, under pain of social opprobrium, are con- strained to submit them from an early age to procedures which will bring about ‘at some stage’, responsibly, a statistical probability which today appears still to come. Insurance companies, employment procedures, techniques for procreation, and the right to healthcare: all these things, we know, are going to be redefined based on technical developments for which the sole vocation at the beginning was the relief of individual suffering. Beyond the legal and regulatory problems, what is at stake is the way in which humans hope, anticipate, fear, and imagine, and the way in which they conceive and construct their own identities.

The only difference, and it is a weighty one, is that they refuse, on this point, to think about what they are doing. (Stengers 2003: 34) Thinking about the historical phenomenon of choreomania is a way of thinking biophilosophically about the ecological complexity of life forms and the political struggles they engage in, which underscores the need for open experiment and analysis in interdisciplinary fields.






=============================================\n\n\n





Dancing to Utopia: Modernity, Community and the Movement Choir


Established by dance and movement theorist Rudolf Laban, the Bewegungschoren or 'movement choirs' of the 1920s and 1930s were a spectacularly visible element of German national culture. A network of amateur clubs, each run by a graduate of Laban's schools, the choirs were modern, urban phenomena, operating in cities and large towns against the backdrop of German industrial society. Their membership represented that society's diversity, for although choir leaders and many dancers were drawn from the educated middle class, those traditionally concerned with cultural generation and preservation, anecdotal evidence suggests they also recruited from the industrial working classes. Their amateur status was central to their aims, such that, as initially conceived, choir works were to have no audience. Although groups quickly became involved in public performance, taking part in community festivals and celebrations, their works were originally envisioned as an end in themselves, an experience for those taking part.

Historically, movement choirs have attracted specific forms of critical attention, and hence been construed in particular ways. Most often they have been addressed as a side issue in studies of Laban's life or work – or, less frequently, as part of the wider phenomenon of German Körperkultur, placed alongside the practice of 'Swedish' gymnastics, and contemporary fads for health food, body building, racial 'hygene', nudism and 'wilderness' experiences. Rarely have choir events been addressed as acts of performance. It is in this light that I shall consider Bewegungschére work in the following piece – not as the child of Laban's authorial genius but as live cultural representation, whose significance was a function of the socio-historical relations in which it was enmeshed.

In pursuing this project, the perspectives offered by Raymond Williams prove particularly apt. If the aim of his cultural materialism is to illuminate artifacts in terms of the social relations in which they are embedded and the cultural consciousness they display, he nevertheless warns against the dangers of seeking such consciousness solely in explicit utterance. He states:

The general tendency, within bourgeois sociology, has been a reduction of the sociology of consciousness to the 'sociology of knowledge'... [This] has been especially weak in relation to important kinds of art and literature. For consciousness is not only knowledge, just as language is not only indication and naming. It is also what is elsewhere, and in this context necessarily, specialised as 'imagination'. In cultural production (and all consciousness is in this sense produced) the true range is from information and description, or naming and indication, to embodiment and performance.

For Williams, then, historically specific consciousness is evidenced in a continuum of cultural products, extending from discourse proper – ideas presented as ideas – to action: real, mobile bodies engaged in tangible practice. While the former tends towards explicit 'naming', the latter typically involves embodiment, social subjectivity encoded in the very rationale of somatic shaping. If this most readily leads us to posit a doxic habitus, it equally importantly implies conscious acts of 'imagination'. Performance can be creative, Williams suggests, not merely reproducing dominant ‘structures of feeling’ but postulating alternatives. It therefore makes possible acts of opposition, commenting on and contradicting the social conditions from which they emerge. It is from this perspective that I will consider the dances of the Bewegungschéren. Movement choirs, I will argue, are the somatic expression of a specific social consciousness, one which, moreover, exists as a critique of the very conditions that gave it birth. Despite its relative scarcity, existing evidence, especially pictorial, actually provides a keen sense of the Bewegungschéré work as a live event. Probably because the choirs’ amateur participants had limited formal training, the movements demanded of them individually appear to have been relatively unchallenging in dance terms. The opposite was true of the choreography of the group, however. Involving anything from fifty to fifteen hundred participants, choir ‘dances’ were composed entirely of group action, members moving, gesturing, and adopting body shapes together to form complex, shifting patterns of a geometrical or biomorphic kind. Aesthetic success rested entirely on coordination, as it was only when actions were flawlessly unified that patterns formed at all. This was lent urgency by the fact that choir pieces were abstract, for without characters, stories, or allegorical subtexts, each dance consisted solely of the forms that grouped bodies traced in space. Movement choir performances, then, were most of all mass performances, and as such they were supremely evocative.

For in the first third of the twentieth century, the concept of ‘the mass’ possessed extraordinary resonance in Western culture, largely as a result of those developments that gave the century its shape. Cities, loci of that second wave of industrialization begun in the 1880s, offered the spectacle of teeming, hurrying masses, their anonymity expressive of a modern alienation. The fruits of that industry, in the form of identical, mass-produced goods, were similarly perceived as threatening both individual taste and the uniqueness of the hand-made artifact, seemingly predicating the erasure of producers and consumers alike as choice-bearing subjects. In subjecting workers to the behavioral discipline of machines, the Fordist mass production techniques eventually used to manufacture those commodities imposed a degree of behavioral uniformity that was historically unprecedented, a regime from which community and individuality were visibly absent. The cumulative effect of such developments was massive disruption, the displacement of those forms of social functioning characteristic of the old world, as society moved towards industrial work patterns, class relations, urbanization, and the nuclear family. The social order, which had once seemed a given, was revealed as ephemeral. Equally important, it now required reinvention.

Whatever their social effects, such developments had a profound impact on representation. For in the absence of any agreed conception of the social whole, symbologies of the mass became inherently speculative, each image functioning as an implicit argument for one or other model of human communiality. Reflecting humanist distaste for modern, Fordist populism, Lang’s Metropolis (1926) figured its swarms of proletarian workers as at once pitiful and threatening, both an oppressed poor and an anarchic mob throwing civilization into peril. In contrast, the ‘Odessa steps’ sequence of Eisenstein’s Battleship Potemkin (1925) posed a crowd, which is the innocent victim of history, against a faceless, automaton mass in the form of the Imperial Army. Later, with its image of revolutionary sailors arrayed in perfect, cooperative unity, it showed the workers triumphant, transformed into history’s agents. Over the following decade, the filmed choreographies of Busby Berkeley and the high-kicking dances of the Ziegfeld Follies’ and Radio City Rockettes deployed groups of women in moving, geometrical patterns, their interchangeability suggesting their commodification, while their pliability en masse functioned as a metaphor for sexual compliance.

National Socialist rallies, Wall Street tickertape parades, Communist Party street festivals, and N. N. Evrienov’s Moscow mass performances—all such spectacles functioned as tacit proposals regarding the nature of the social whole. It was into this arena of representational speculation—effectively, of socio-political contest—that Bewegungschére performances were inevitably drawn. Vying for cultural space alongside bourgeois, Marxist, and National Socialist representations, as well as others less easily defined, they, like all images of the mass, became canvases onto which anxieties endemic to developed societies were projected.

If this ‘structure of feeling’ was evident in Europe and the USA generally, in Germany, mass images such as those presented by movement choirs carried added symbolic weight, the result of a uniquely German history. The majority of states that would go to make up the unified Germany had approached the middle nineteenth century as primarily rural, agricultural societies. It was only under the mid-century hegemony of the Prussian Junkers, and particularly in the early years of Bismarck’s chancellorship (1862-90), that most regions of what would become the German nation took their first steps towards industrialisation. Additionally, once it was begun, industrial development proceeded largely without check, a consequence of the 1848 failure of German liberalism and of the ‘top-down’ social modernisation which that failure permitted.

While the notion of a German Sonderweg (‘special path’) to industrialisation has in recent years been called into question, the late start and unchecked development combined to ensure that change was both rapid and seismic, major social shifts that had taken over a century in Britain occurring in little more than forty years. While all developed nations underwent social upheaval, in Germany, it was experienced in a particularly condensed and abrasive form. Visible at the level of lived experience, it became a component of shared cultural memory. Evident in German culture as it neared the twentieth century, then, was a perception of negative social change, the loss of those communal forms that had once given life its shape, and this was to underpin one of the key tropes structuring critical thought. In 1887 Ferdinand Ténnes published his Community and Association, the seminal work of modern sociology in which he proposed a fundamental distinction between two forms of social organisation: Gesellschaft or ‘society’ described social relations built upon contractual obligations and divisions of labour, relations which exist only between discrete individuals and which are entered into solely for those individuals’ self-interest; Gemeinschaft or ‘community’ referred to social aggregates based on affect, kinship, and group membership. With these terms, Tonnes was, of course, offering analytical abstractions, ways of thinking about the social per se rather than descriptions of actual or possible societies. However, he drew upon a conceptual dichotomy already found in German thought, which was apparently validated by historically recent experience. It is not incidental that comparable cognitive binaries can be traced in the writings of Nietzsche, Klages, Wagner, and Fuchs, and they underpin the ‘primalism’ so central to late nineteenth-century and fin de siècle German literature.

These otherwise diverse writings articulate and render abstract what is at root a historical distinction, operating socio-cultural critiques founded in perceived differences between the industrial and pre-industrial worlds. Moreover, it was a distinction with an inherent value judgment: if the past was a Golden Age of communitas, it had now been lost. The German perception was thus paradigmatic of the Western experience of modernization per se but rendered in an extreme form.

If early twentieth-century artistic ‘primitivism’ was in part developed society’s response to the loss of the old world, German culture evidenced a structure of feeling in which that loss had become a lack: something to be overcome. Consequently, some responses to this consciousness, this perception of degraded sociality, were very concrete, including direct proposals to rebuild the community. In 1904, brothers Wolf and Harald Dohrn, under the auspices of the Deutsche Werkbund, initiated the construction of the new town of Helerau, near Dresden. Conceived as a utopian community, Helerau was planned and built with housing suitable for different social classes, central, communal facilities for education and recreation designed to ‘enrich’ the individual, and access to health-giving nature in the form of the surrounding countryside.

Even more than Morris’s Hampstead Garden Suburb (by which it was almost certainly influenced), Helerau was an attempt to give physical form to a kind of society deemed to have been lost, a supremely organic community in which diverse social levels and dimensions of existence, fractured in modern life, would exist in holistic union. This ethos, written on the scale of urban planning, is equally evident on the micro-scale of interpersonal relations, with fin de siècle and early twentieth-century German social life displaying what has been termed a ‘passion for association.’

This wealth of voluntary, recreational organizations constitutes evidence of income newly available for pleasure — paradoxically, a material excess produced by modernization itself — it is significant that this was expended on what were in effect forms of communal activity, pastimes that exceeded the narrow, modern limits of work, family, and commodified, passively-experienced entertainment: the profits of the new world were employed to ‘reconstruct’ the old. Clearly, the Bewegungschore was a part of this phenomenon, a recreational institution no less expressive of a widespread urge to sociality. Most important, however, is that, like those other initiatives, it entailed or presumed actual behaviors. Rather than represent the ‘idea’ of a pre-modern communitas, as painting or literature might, Germany’s proliferating bunds and leagues enacted it, tracing the shape of a hypothetical society via real social interactions. This is true even of the construction of Helerau, for as a built environment, it predicted very specific forms of use from its occupants—the cooperation between, and happy acceptance of distinct classes, the implicitly premodern melding of work, art, and social exchange, and the interpenetration of human life and nature. This set of group processes sketched in cameo a projected social whole. Rather than acknowledging and lamenting the loss of a world retrospectively construed as a utopia, these cultural phenomena instead sought to be socially active, to rebuild it.

This active, constructive quality is perhaps best exemplified in one of the most successful recreational networks of the period, the Wandervogel. An organization of pacifist 'walking clubs' for young people, the Wandervogel was founded on the belief that a combination of group activity, physical exercise, and exposure to nature would promote spiritual wellbeing. Like Helerau, it thus invoked nostalgia for a past, pastoral mode of existence, one in which such experiences were supposedly the norm.

But the full social significance of the Wandervogel derives from its relation to the much-debated 'Jugend question': whereas some could remember a life graced by genuine communitas, it was argued, the young in today's Germany had experienced only the brute instrumentalism of modernity, and so had not assimilated those values necessary for truly collective living. If the creation of a generation of delinquents was to be avoided, it was necessary to provide for young people group activities founded on different principles, a taste of the communality of the club and the friendly league.

No less than Helerau, then, organizations like the Wandervogel explicitly or implicitly had at their core a social project, key to which was their character as essentially performative. While such as Tonnes and Klages gave abstract, theoretical recognition to the perception of social decline, in their very rationale these activities embodied an alternative to it. It is in this socially active light that we can view movement choirs, for like Helerau, the Wandervogel, and Germany's blooming recreational culture, they too sought to counter the ravages of modernity by reshaping real behaviors, remodeling social relations to recreate a lost communal experience.

This remodeling of experience is key to the principles shaping movement choirs' initial aims. We have noted that, as originally envisioned, choirs were not to give public shows, the pleasure of their 'dances' being reserved for those taking part. While this affirms their status as recreational organizations, it also constitutes a denial of the usual, modern commodification of performance—as something to be produced by one class of participant, and purchased and passively consumed by the other.

Such denial evokes more than a preference for the communal logic of the Gemeinschaft, it is a refutation of the inherently contractual principle underpinning commodification, a rejection of the orthodox social relation between spectator and performer. The rejection of orthodox spectatorship bore a particular ideological charge in Germany at the time, one rooted in the architecture of the modern, Cartesian subject. Founded on the splitting of mind from body, Descartes' self necessarily posited a distance between them, enabling mind to assume ascendancy as the true site of selfhood. Such notional distance formed the basis for the subject's supposed capacity for rational and scientific objectivity, the validity of the Newtonian scientist's explanation of phenomena deriving from his position of disinterestedness, not compromised by involvement with the world he sought to understand. The same logic underpinned the development of the modern stage. Whereas premodern theatre typically required the coexistence of locus and platea, modern performance was distinguished by increasingly profound ‘illusion’, a firm interpretive distinction between performer and character, social space and the hypothetical space of the fiction. The spectator was thereby separated from the notional world he or she viewed, the edge of the playing space marking a symbolic boundary between the worlds of viewer and viewed, subject and object, social world and its fictional counterpart.

No less than science, then, the stage’s design came to reproduce the epistemological arrangements of the Cartesian individual, that relation between self and other that was the foundation of modern subjectivity. Demanding interpretive assumptions analogous to those on which the bourgeois self rested, the position offered the spectator was thus redolent of modernity — but a modernity which, in Germany, had profoundly negative connotations. If ‘the modern’ would frequently evoke images of a degraded sociality, the analogue of this at the level of the subject was not the Gesellschaft’s economic individualism but its threat of alienation, that isolation of the self resulting from its separation from community, and emblematised in images of the factory floor.

It is not incidental that so much of the performance theory emanating from Germany in the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries took as its model an archaic, ritual-like form, for ritual’s insistence on a unified experience promises the reengagement of the onlooker as part of the event, not its distanced observer, making it an apt model for those seeking to disavow modern spectatorship. By the 1920s, when the movement choir network developed, such disavowal was no longer restricted to theories of a reactionary or nostalgic kind. Left rationalists in Germany such as Brecht and Piscator welcomed the new world of mass production and technology for its promise of surplus capacity and a montage-based, critical aesthetic. Nevertheless, in seeking an alternative to the cognitive arrangements of bourgeois representation, they too redrew relations between the auditorium and stage, rejecting a model of spectatorship which, they felt, reinscribed the ‘passivity’ of the ideologically integrated subject.

Of course, the Bewegungschére too offered an alternative, but one very different to Brecht’s. Not originally envisaged as being for public performance, movement choirs were to eschew the auditorium-stage division of modern theatre and dance in the most literal way. They were in effect to deny the identification of their participants with the bourgeois self — and hence deny the baggage of alienation such identification was deemed to carry with it. With all involved committed to the same task, there was to be no separation of viewer from viewed, individual from community, worker from the fruits of his labour. In this, movement choirs were by no means unique, for they were part of a contemporary trend, a tendency towards radical nostalgia quite at odds with the work of such as Brecht. Nuremberg rallies, Thingspeil, clubs dedicated to staging medieval passion plays, and the theatres proposed by Wagner and Fuchs - all in their different ways sought ‘premodern’ alternatives to modern spectatorship. Such strategies imply more than a change in the social relations of performance, for spectatorship is in reality always active, requiring that audiences perform the interpretive activities presumed by the event in its cultural context. In effect, the relations demanded by a given spectatorial context merge into terms of identity: to carry out the activities predicted by the event is to perform the role of (appropriate) spectator. Albeit that these activities require no literal, physical action, they nevertheless constitute an ‘embodiment’ of social consciousness in Williams’ sense, for they rest on (psychic) activities. Viewing a performance at a Cartesian remove, with all that entails, constitutes a short-lived enactment of modern subjectivity. It is in a similar light that we can view the Bewegungschére’s rejection of modern spectatorship, its proposed avoidance of public performance going beyond the mere refusal of commodified subjectivity to implicitly demand a different cognitive arrangement.

In this, the key quality of choir works was their unity, that spectacular coordination of all participants into a single whole, on which each piece depended. As performer and (notional) spectator combined, the choir member’s experience is inevitably suffused with the awareness of social gestalt, every individual action coming to bear the charge of group significance. As each gesture is carried out in the awareness that it is, crucially, part of a whole, every moment is permeated with the knowledge that one is acting in concert with others, part of a larger, communal project. Movements thus bear a dual status, as both individual acts, experienced kinesthetically, and components of a coherency that cannot be seen by the participant, only pictured in his/her mind. The experience, reshaped, thus addresses the Cartesian rupture directly, infusing self-conception with a consciousness of one’s position within the social totality.

In carrying out their individual roles, performers in effect enact a place in a surrogate community, demonstrating the one-ness of the group by acting in remarkable unison. Each participant thereby performs the identity of a ‘pre-modern’ community member, adopting that subjectivity: for the duration of the performance, you are your place in this society.

IV Movement choirs ultimately did perform in public, showing their wares by participating in festivals etc, but far from negating their denial of Cartesian spectatorship, from the performers’ point of view this enhanced it. Distinct from those taking part, the real and separate audience can function as witness to group coherence: performing, we are aware that others will observe our coordination, note the union implied in our kinesic unity. The performers’ notional ‘perspective’ on what takes place is thus given a concrete locus, albeit a hypothetical one, in the gaze of onlookers — or, more accurately, in the performers’ imagining of the gaze of onlookers.

Not only are performers seen, they can see that they are seen, spectators’ eyes acting as the vantage from which individual actions possess group significance. But the greatest paradox of the Bewegungschire performances is that despite the palpable suspicion of modern spectatorship they emblematise, the ultimate expression of this social consciousness is to be found in the experience they provide for spectators. This is a result of the very form that their works take, notably their refusal to symbolise. We noted how choir performances had no characters and told no stories, their aesthetic ‘work’ consisting entirely of the formation of patterns. Being abstract, those patterns offered no specific, decodable meanings, and spectators were denied the opportunity of reading what occurred as ‘representation’ in the familiar sense, of translating the works’ elements into the objects and events of some hypothetical other-place. Interpretive focus therefore remained not on what the patterns meant or stood for but on the occurrence of pattern making. To observe a choir performance was to be treated to a vision of otherwise idiosyncratic individuals operating in a fashion that was spectacularly collective. This is at the core of the interpretive experience choirs offer, for pleasure in viewing a Bewegungschire work, even today, derives from the act of kinesic orchestration itself. It is an act that, because it lacks a dimension of representation, remains emphatically real, not standing-in-for events of some other, fictional realm but remaining of the spectators’ own. As we saw, as onlookers we are always emphatically aware that the success of each choir performance relies on the unity and precision of the performers’ actions. This reliance is absolute, for if choir members do not fulfill their roles exactly as scripted, patterns simply do not form, and the performance therefore does not take on the status of an aesthetic object at all. Comprised only of kinetic unity, Bewegungschére dances remain visibly built of communal action, actually consist of real individuals functioning as an organised collective, and it is this ‘embodied’ rationale which so spectacularly presents itself to the audience.

The Bewegungschére provides not simply an ‘image’ of Gemeinschaft but an example of it, a successful working model of social interaction which refutes the logic of modern instrumentality, proffering instead the relations of an actual, albeit short-lived community. While this idea perhaps remains somewhat abstract on the printed page, for spectators to a live performance it is immediate. The key quality of movement choirs is that they do indeed move, forming not the static tableaux of the photographic record but formations evolving and shifting over time. As a result, the aesthetic object is never ‘safely’ complete but remains temporally and spatially fragile, continually being remade; indeed, having to be remade, arms, legs and torsos realigned in space to form the next figure, then the next. This has direct consequences for those watching. Placed in the position of having always to trace new spatial forms as they emerge on a second by second basis — a position of anxiety, saturated as it is by the possibility that the next form may not coalesce — the spectator’s experience is of a continually re-found group cohesion, the periodic endangerment of collective unity followed by that unity’s immediate and successful reaffirmation. It is this that makes the movement choir performance unique.

Metropolis and the Ziegfeld Follies provided tacit models of modern society: the Wandervogel, Thingspeil and restagings of passion plays at Oberammergau supposedly offered the experience of a past communiality. But movement choirs first provided the experience of that communality’s break-down, only then to restore it once more. They thus implicitly promised the triumph of Gemeinschaft in the age that had all but succeeded in destroying it. This presents us with something of an irony. Far from reestablishing a notionally premodern communitas, choirs provide an experience analogous to its modern loss, doing so in order that that loss may then be overcome. The task spectators are required to undertake, that of refinding cohesion under the continual threat of its dissolution, provides an ongoing experiential correlative of the persistence of community despite the social reality of its failure, the onlooker’s endlessly moving eye actively demonstrating the irrepressible one- ness of the group. The choirs' final impact is on the interpretive consciousness of the spectator, for it is in this performed 'role' that a social consciousness, a 'structure of feeling' of the kind described by Raymond Williams, is embedded. To be the spectator of the Bewegungschére work is to find and find again the endangered communality of the group. If movement choirs defer to a prelapsarian utopia in which the community was intact, their works effectively dance that utopia into tangible, somatic being, such that seeing the dance is utopia's reaffirmation.

While the political allegiances of some Bewegungschére participants are a matter of record — the socialism of Berlin choir leader Martin Gleisner, Laban's own relations with a triumphant National Socialism — positioning the form itself in socio-ideological terms is complex. We noted that the anxieties informing movement choirs were endemic to developed Western societies. Further, in Germany, the perception of a degraded sociality crossed political boundaries, reactions to it arguably being realized in activities as diverse as Communist Party festivals, trade union parades, the tacitly reactionary revivals of medieval passion plays and Nazi rallies.

One cannot therefore simply brand the Bewegungschére as reactionary, a proto-fascistic artifact of the same order as Thingspeil, tales of a lost Teutonic past and theories of racial hygiene. After all, movement choirs did function to critique social conditions, physicalizing a social consciousness that opposed the status quo. For all that, there is finally an inherent, albeit oblique conservatism to the movement choir project. The image that choir performances provided was of communality. In showing that communality to be endangered, they evoked what was a widely recognized myth of a premodern utopia: by reaffirming it in the face of peril, they implicitly promised that utopia's reestablishment for the future. In their original cultural context, then, movement choirs always looked back. Fritz Lang proposed contemporary capitalism's moderation via benign dictatorship, while German Communist Party festivals constructed a space of notionally unfettered interaction that predicted the arrival of class-free society. While these both sought to change the modern, the Bewegungschére instead retreated from it, finding solace in a world that was already irretrievably past.







=====================================================\n\n\n







German Gymnastics, Modern German Dance, and Nazi Aesthetics

Not much is known about the art of the Third Reich. The general assumption is that all the art, however persuasive, was so bad that it does not deserve the attention of art historians. One might think that the Nazis had good art, but the art that was created after 1933 and is deemed “good” today cannot have been Nazi art.

A few years after BBC filmmaker Peter Adam had reminded the public of the general misconception concerning Nazi art, writer Neal Ascherson took the question further: What would have happened if the Nazis had embraced modern art? The very thought seems idiotic. We are brought up to accept that dictatorship has its own taste: muscle-bound literalism.

The dogma that the Nazis were always fiercely anti-modern survives. So does the related assumption that the avant-garde painters in the Germany of the 1930s were politically left wing. Neither is true. The Nazi decision to declare war on the Modern movement was a disaster. But a decision to sanctify it would have been far worse.

If the Nazis had embraced modernism, all that wonderful Expressionist art would not have been declared “degenerate,” and there would have been no need for artists to emigrate. The West would have been deprived of a wave of innovation and originality and “Modern Art’ would have been associated with fascism in both its Italian and German forms.

Both propositions, that of Nazi art as nonart (also Strathausen 1999) and that of modernism as entirely anti-Nazi remain prevalent. German modern dance, though, counteracts both hypotheses.

Should we speak of Nazi art at all? What do we mean when we do? Is it merely art created during a period that happened to coincide with the establishment of the National Socialist political regime? Or is it more: an art that adopted, integrated, expressed a specific, namely, a Nazi aesthetic?

The question whether a fascist or, more precisely, Nazi aesthetic exists, has occupied many minds, and there is no consensus. Nor is there consensus on what constitutes a Nazi ideology. Without a Nazi ideology, it would be futile to discuss aesthetics as both are bound to one another in a dialectical and dynamic relationship.

We are thus dealing with a matter that is contentious, hotly debated, and, still, in many ways, a taboo subject, full of apologist attitudes, inconsistencies, moral dilemmas, guilt, and shame.

Ideology today is generally taken to mean not a science of ideas, but the ideas themselves, and moreover ideas of a particular kind. Ideologies are ideas whose purpose is not epistemic, but political. Thus, an ideology exists to confirm a certain political viewpoint, serve the interests of certain people, or to perform a functional role in relation to social, economic, political and legal institutions.

Adam’s remark about art under the Nazis was highlighted by modern German dancers who, in an attempt to whitewash their past, have indeed claimed that modern dance was persecuted and the ballet performed during the Third Reich not worthy of the designation art. After the collapse of the Third Reich, these dancers maintained the myth of their persecution by the regime. What had been performed was antimodernist dance, nonart. German dance has been central to the conception of modernist dance, with German dance (predominantly the theories and practices of its two founders, Rudolf von Laban and Mary Wigman, and several of their students) developing the fundamental tenets of a modernist movement aesthetic adopted in many Western cultures. Despite Ascherson's view of German dance as a terrifying distortion, the Nazis embraced modernism, specifically Ausdruckstanz. However, modern German dance has struggled to undergo de-Nazification.

This text does not address the extensive scholarly literature on Nazism and its aesthetics, nor does it investigate attitudes developed by dance scholars regarding the relationship between movement and Nazism. Many scholars consider movement independent from political influence, emphasizing its revolutionary spirit and formal integrity. This approach follows Mary Wigman's definition of "absolute dance" as a condensed essence of rhythmic movement.

There is a general reluctance to place dance aesthetics in the specific political and ideological milieu of Nazism. Yvonne Hardt articulated this when she warned of causal historiographies that deduce from ideology to movement. Ambivalence in the practice and analyses of dance accentuates the ambiguity of "form"; not even "latent" ideological tendencies can be detected.

There have been remarkably few broad studies looking at the vexed relationship between dance, Nazism, and an explicit Nazi aesthetics. Laure Guilbert's study Danser avec le Troisiéme Reich (2011) is the most extensive on dance's collaboration with the Third Reich. Her assumption is that dance is ideology, articulated in reviews, criticism, and dance descriptions, poured into movement form.

Lilian Karina and I took the same position in Hitler's Dancers: German Dancers and the Third Reich ([1996] 2004), focusing our investigation on the integration of German dance into the Nazi cultural system. We argued that such integration relied on the aesthetic identification of German dancers with Nazi ideals and ideology, making collaboration possible. The politics of all these artists manifested a clear ideological intention; their engagement with the Nazi administration was undertaken so that the ideals of both sides would be fulfilled. While the involvement of artists happened on several levels—institutional, ideological, and aesthetic—it always contributed to the reality of dance and could not then and cannot now be neatly separated into aesthetic form on the one hand and politics or ideology on the other. Linda Schulte-Sasse, in paraphrasing the characterization of Nazism by Brecht and Benjamin as the aestheticization of politics, suggested that another element needs to be examined in the context of a fascist aesthetic (a problematic term as it subsumes Nazism under Fascism and thus is forced to gloss over the substantial differences): it can be detected only if there is a transgression of the "boundaries between the imaginary and real life and [the] aestheticization [of] the political through extradiegetic references" (Schulte-Sasse 1991, 143). This is an interesting though problematic approach as the "extradiegetic" cannot easily be identified in an art that considers itself a closed system, such as Laban's spatial theories or Wigman's "absolute dance." The extradiegetic cannot infiltrate absolute dance; it will always remain superfluous.

Did the relationship between dance and Nazi ideology arise only beginning in 1933 and was it loose enough to be severed later when such political affinity was no longer advantageous? For many scholars, there was dance, its form, and then there was ideology, even Nazi ideology. Within this frame of thought, German dance becomes nothing more than an echo of an affinity. In the counter-position, dance too has an ideology, embodies ideology, and becomes form when the ideological tenets take shape through the dancer's/choreographer's body—form materializes in movement. The link between formal properties and the social environment is complex. In the case presented here, the interdependence existed through the creation of aesthetic categories by the creators of modern movement practices. Conservative and Nazi concepts intentionally activated ideological histories to define form. Whether formal properties remain attached to ideologies depends on many more factors, foremost among them is the historical evolution of philosophical, cultural, and formal contexts. Form can become flexible and reach beyond the initial structure. If one does not accept the autonomy of art, then the question of how form shapes itself and what happens to it remains relevant. If one insists on aesthetic self-sufficiency—as absolute dance does—then the question is irrelevant; form holds supremacy over everything else. Ethical dimensions would arise only if the creator wishes them to be part of the work of art. Form, in the following discussion, is treated not as an independent aesthetic principle; rather, it represents the formal and visible and audible structure of aesthetic-ideological thought.

Nazi Ideology
The study of Nazism from the beginning provoked opposing views. Hermann Rauschning's Revolution of Nihilism ([1938] 1939), or, more seriously and systematically, Franz L. Neumann's study Behemoth: The Structure and Practice of National Socialism, 1933-1944, published in 1944 denied the existence of a coherent Nazi ideology. For Neumann, National Socialism was constantly shifting, contained an eclectic mix of elements of previous philosophies but, in the end, was composed of negative assumptions and lacked beauty. It was an ideology of destruction and without consistency or structure. This attitude has been adopted by several contemporary historians, such as Mary Fullbrook (Fullbrook 1991, 45), and it underscores that Nazi ideology either does not exist or is too inconsistent, contradictory, and diffuse to be called systematic. For George Mosse, Nazi ideology evolved from völkisch philosophies, the literature, aesthetics, and the ideologies of conservative thought of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. He outlined this historical arc in his study of the intellectual origins of the Third Reich ([1964] 1991) that is still a relevant work (Dennis 2012, 261). Mosse traced the major doctrines of conservative ideology through the nineteenth century: those of national unity based on an idealized community and its purity, the orientation toward leadership, and the charismatic personality, or the need to create an enemy. Völkisch thought, closely related to German romanticism (cf. Stern [1961] 1963; Hermand 1992), had set up a specific relationship to space and the concept of a specific national living space. This essay too argues for the existence of a Nazi ideology—coherent, consistent, powerful, persuasive—that grew out of older, antiliberal, and anticapitalist ideas.

The arts permeate social reality more than any political pamphlet ever could and thus play a particularly important part in the propagation of such ideological frameworks as they spread these ideas, make them visible, put them into sound, word, movement, and performance action. Art was and is ideology; art carried and still carries ideological concepts and realizes them through aesthetic means. All the arts thus made völkisch ideologies comprehensible and acceptable. The arts gave thought aesthetic structure and made ideology accessible through artistic form. The Nazis merely claimed unambiguous control over this form and declared all arts part of their propaganda campaign for the National Socialist cause. Art was a vital expression of the German people and therefore the ultimate propaganda weapon in the battle for Nazism’s values. Joseph Goebbels’ Ministry of Popular Enlightenment and Propaganda oversaw the employment of the arts in this sense, with the help of artists who organized and managed the entire cultural sphere.

Throughout the nineteenth century, certain schools of dance and gymnastics consciously integrated themselves into the cohort of völkisch thinkers and politicians and, in the end, enabled Nazism to establish a unified ideology and political system. Dance and gymnastics in particular offered themselves as testing grounds for those völkisch ideas that coagulated into the most important aspects of the Nazi ideology. This is not simply a parallel development to that of Nazism, an affinity that could be cut; rather, movement cultures, literature, fine art, and music and their representations of völkisch concepts were the precondition for Nazism to articulate its own ideology with its particular aesthetic orientation. German dance and German gymnastics did not find themselves in coincidental proximity to right-wing political movements; they sought the association: when Rudolf Bode integrated Paul de Lagarde’s or Julius Langbehn’s philosophy into his gymnastics method and education (Bode 1926), when Rudolf von Laban chose to run his summer courses in the völkisch village Klingberg near Gleschendorf in 1921/22 where racial experiments were being conducted, when the Carl Orff School with Dorothee Giinther and Maja Lex aligned itself with Rosenberg’s Munich chapter of the Kampfbund für Deutsche Kultur in mid-1933 (Kater 2000, 119-120). During the early nineteenth century, two reform movements emerged in response to the Napoleonic Empire's conquest of Europe: an aristocratic attempt to improve the government and army, and another to establish a unified German Volk. Friedrich Ludwig Jahn (1778-1852) founded the first nationalist gymnastics system, Turnen, proposing the idea that a new German man could free the German Volk. Jahn developed Turnen from 1807 and published the manual Deutsche Turnkunst in Berlin in 1816. The practice was systematically explored and refined, becoming a fixed part of German physical education, first as a social force in clubs, and then as part of the national physical education curriculum in 1842.

Jahn also invented the term "Volksthum" to provide a term and concept for his and his contemporaries' nationalist ideas. He admired philosopher Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1762-1814), who lectured on the need for a German nation-state in 1807/1808 at the University of Berlin, and whose "Reden an die deutsche Nation" (Fichte 1922; Jusdanis 2001; James 2011) provided an important impetus toward recognizing a German national essence. Another nationalist, Ernst Moritz Arndt (1769-1860), was more ardent and pragmatic than Fichte, demanding German independence and believing in a German essence. However, Jahn's concept of an active physical expression of nationalism created a patriotic mass movement. Jahn's invention of a German gymnastics system was inextricably linked to later projects of nationalist emancipation and sovereignty. As historian Hans Kohn said, "none had a stronger influence on the practical manifestations of German nationalism than Friedrich Ludwig Jahn" (Kohn 1949, 419). That was true for the nineteenth century and most of the twentieth century, with Turnen part of the school curricula in all primary and secondary schools and also part of higher, ie., university, education. Jahn's movement method became the most widely spread and taught and most influential gymnastics practice in Prussia and later in united Germany. The origins of the "rhythmic," "aesthetic," and "expressionist" gymnastics of the later nineteenth century as well as modern German dance of the twentieth century can be found in Turnen. Thus Jahn provided the blueprint for most later vélkisch orientated movement methods.

His theory focused on the education of a German, healthy, muscular, patriotic male battle force able to fight the French, that is, the Napoleonic, occupation. His gymnastics manual set out a series of exercise sequences to be done in a group of like-minded people. That sounds innocent enough. But he also advanced a political theory of German statehood and the rules of citizenship and national unity, laid out in 1810 in Deutsches Volksthum.

Turnen with its set exercise repertoire was the path to instill national ethics and indoctrinate boys and young men (female physical education was introduced later against Jahn's will) so that they would accept their duty to fight and sacrifice themselves for the German fatherland. In the early 1800s that fatherland was a dream and only became a reality in 1871 when Bismarck unified Germany. Even in the twentieth century, there was hardly a German citizen who had not had some experience with Turnen.

Jahn was convinced that he could reestablish a new equilibrium of body and soul and unify, harmonize, and balance all aspects of life; he would introduce a new spiritual development with and through physical exercise. Turnen would become the expression of a patriotic people; Turnen belonged to the people and was to be practiced according to the needs of the people (Jahn 1810, 289). Turnen was the corporeal ideal of the German Volk and would embody the culture of the German Volk. This system should be recognized as one of the earliest modern examples of a nation as a community becoming, forming, and defining itself through physical movement.

With a leader leading and the group following orders, Turnen established hierarchies based on physical abilities. The Turnen community acted as a collective avant-garde that intended to replace the existing social order. It was strictly authoritarian and relied on the voluntary submission of the members of the gymnastics groups to the demands of the leader. This active bodily submission to rules, set out in a written pledge, to which every individual member of the community had to agree, ensured obedience to and through movement.

Turnen was rigorously organized and carefully managed patriotic socialization in action (Kant 2011). It soon set up its community network across Prussia and several other German states and became an institution that determined German socialization and social interaction beyond the movement clubs (Diiding 1984; Goltermann 1998). Jahn also influenced the student corporations (many of the students had joined the Turnen clubs), the Burschenschaften, that carried out imagined German Volk rituals in annual commemoration celebrations, at new specially commissioned memorial sites and ceremonies that reenacted significant events in German history such as the defeat of Napoleon. One of the first such meetings, during which the student disciples of Jahn burned un-German books, took place on Wartburg castle in Thuringia in 1817. Jahn's Turnen method promised individual and communal liberation from French tyranny, civil constraints, ill health, loneliness, and a sense of belonging. The Turn associations provided a purposeful engagement for the national community, offering certainty, safe hierarchy, and historical lineage. The gymnastics space, designed by Jahn, was a special area with boundaries and equipment for gymnastics. The first gymnastics area was built in 1811 on the Hasenheide, outside of Berlin. This space was intended for the community, where they could communicate, conceive new jurisdiction, practice new rules, and absorb them into the body. The space was fenced in and accessible only to community members.

Jahn's vision of gymnastics space as practice grounds for a new German corporeal ideal was innovative. He reversed the relationship of theory and practice, emphasizing "doing" rather than ideas or "thinking." Political development was to arise from deed and exercise. The leader, Jahn, had the theory, and the community would internalize it through the implementation of gymnastics. The gymnastics space was separated and isolated from the social reality of Prussia.

Jahn opposed universal suffrage and the emancipation of the bourgeois under the banner of equality, liberty, and brotherhood. He sought the liberation of Prussia and the subjugation of everything non-German under specifically German legislation. Protestantism and Christianity, for Jahn, were to be reinstated as public transcendental religion, excluding Jews and Catholics from state affairs. The gymnastics space, as a true German runic space, practiced the transformation of the civil public sphere into a Germanic national sphere. The German community of gymnasts not only opposed civil society but practiced its destruction, aiming to replace it with Jahn's ideal German Lutheran state. The principles of the movement sequences remained consistent, emphasizing the importance of commitment to the principles and surrender to the rules of the community. The battles around the Turnen practice, the correct and faithful rendition of certain exercises, and the attempt to keep them pure ran through the nineteenth century. This is not the place to elaborate on these fights, but they had to do with the notion that Jahn’s community principle with all implications of space, belief, leadership, nationalism, etc. needed to remain core values. If meaning and ethics were lost or diluted, physical practice could no longer claim the tradition of Turnen.

In writings on modern gymnastics and modern dance of the early twentieth century, there are few references to Jahn. But most gymnastics manuals refer to their exercise routines as Turnen; from the mid-nineteenth century on, men as well as women were integrated into the movement. Émile Jaques-Dalcroze, who educated many of the modern German gymnasts and dancers who enthusiastically joined the Nazi cause, spoke and wrote of Turnen and gymnastics (cf. Jaques-Dalcroze, 1907); Karl Storck (the anti-Semitic music and dance theorist; cf. Dahm 2007, 185; Schenk 1999, 125-166), who commented on Jaques-Dalcroze’s school in Hellerau continued the terminology of Turnen and gymnastics from 1903 on (cf. Storck 1903 and 1912), and Rudolf Bode also used the terminology beginning in 1913 (Bode 1933b) as did F. H. Winther in 1922. Rudolf Lammel (Limmel 1928, 12-15) specifically referred to Friedrich Ludwig Jahn as well as his innovative Turnen practice. Laban represented his movement concept in the Deutscher Gymnastik Bund [German Gymnastics Association] from 1925 on (Wedemeyer-Kolwe 2004, 52, 424) and used the terminology of Turnen in several of his books (Laban 1926a). In 1992, Kurt Peters reconsidered the Jahn initiative and drew a comparison between the physical education of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and that of the early twentieth century; he underlined an important continuity in the educational impact that the early gymnastics systems made (Peters 1992, 6; Wobbe 1992, 25-33; Toepfer 1997). If we compare Jahn’s theory and practice with that of the rhythmic gymnasts and the modern dancers, the similarities are striking. The organizational structure and the launching of nationwide networks followed that of Jahn’s Turn associations. All the gymnastics clubs and schools were based on the promise of liberation; they demanded a pledge to adhere to the rules and values of the community and its movement system. At the end of the nineteenth to the twentieth century, liberation from constraints imposed by “civilization” and the return to “nature” dominated. The new groups articulated their own language (the Turner greeting formula from 1817 on was Gut Heil!), designed their own dress codes, specific meeting rituals, and rules of behavior for the gymnastics space but also for wider society. They invented a history with a tradition and with origins that lay in the dark and distant past. They often began as secretive organizations but sought to establish nationwide institutions. Relics of that secretive nature often lingered in the gymnastics groups and Laban’s movement choirs, with a small group of initiated teachers or instructors who carried the burden of knowledge, who delivered the message to the group, and who had to keep the mission pure. Lucia Ruprecht has noted that “dancers are conditioned in Laban’s early writings by the reactive rather than active character of their permeability towards their environment” (Ruprecht 2015, 36). 

I would extend this insight: the reactive and preconceived conditioning of Laban's dancers, particularly in the movement choirs, never really changed. Like many of the gymnastics groups and the Laban dance groups or movement choirs, these associations were influenced by cult-like characteristics. They thought on a grand scale—rescue of the nation—and attempted national reform through reform of the entire education system. They addressed social renewal, intended to replace society with community (the distinction between Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft, articulated by Ferdinand Ténnies in 1887; Baxmann 2000), and envisioned a grand new order of social relations. They had to delineate a specific space, just as Jahn had done with the Turnplatz, in which the community moved together to distinguish itself from the degeneracy of theater institutions or ballet studios. The living space of gymnastics and modern dance, as that of Jahn and Turnen, was always run according to special rules. Anyone who was declared an enemy was not allowed to enter. None of these gymnastics or dance schools were inclusive or egalitarian. They were intolerant and did not allow criticism or dissent (Karina and Kant 2004). One example: Laban never forgave Béhme (1928), one of his most devoted disciples and influential dance critic for the publication of Entsieglung der Geheimnisse: Zeichen der Seele, which revealed insights into Laban's creative process and Masonic past. Bohme mentioned that Laban hated him henceforth and predicted that madness punished those who betrayed secrets (Béhme 1932). Out of the interchange between the principles of space and community emerged the various formal visions of the gymnasts, dancers, choreographers, and pedagogues. A separate, sacred space was demarcated within a specific geographical area and then populated by the community. Once the space had been defined, the community could act and live within it. Specific vocabulary and languages, rituals, and symbols that would maintain sameness of the groups could be developed. The belief in a cause that drove the community toward self-recognition and self-realization also made possible a carefully constructed historical trajectory that redefined present and future. Such projections of space and time made individual life choices within the group possible. Ideology and aesthetic structure thus found their explicit form and physical expression and emerged in and through movement. In order to demonstrate the persistence of this ideology, every one of its elements has to be followed in practice through the nineteenth into the twentieth century. Here I sketch only one example of the evolution of an aesthetic category in movement: the aesthetic of walking and its realization in the dance genre of the Reigen. The Reigen, integrated into Jahn's movement concepts, became the summary of German ancestral honesty, continuity, and truth, an original German dance with ancient roots. This is another moment of "invented tradition" (Hobsbawm and Ranger 1992), i.e., the deliberate attempt to identify a movement genre and its formal structure as German and juxtapose it to any non-Germanic artistic utterance. Jahn defined it against international dance practices, particularly French ballet. His contemporaries, the Grimm brothers, on the other hand, saw it much more generally as a row dance that reached back to the ancient Greek chorus and was recorded as a simple dance welcoming spring in the fashion of the olden days (Grimm 1854-1961). In the Grimm version, the Reigen was not specifically German, but Jahn insisted that it was. The brothers also recorded the word "Turnen" and attributed it to Jahn. They pointed out that it was "allegedly" an old German term, which could be traced to earlier sources only in those that Jahn himself had supplied (Grimm 1854-1961). Walking and the Reigen Jahn's gymnastics space had been created according to ideological and political conceptions concerning the German people and a German state. As mentioned, this space initially represented the unity of ancient German practices (inscribed and transported over centuries in runic sources) and modern statehood. At the same time, it acted as a counterproposal to the Napoleonic civic and republican state and attempted its forceful removal.

The new space needed protection from hostile influences as well as constant internal readjustment in order to rationalize its rejection of the external belief system. The gymnastics routines, invented to instill patriotic feelings and educate a German fighting force, were well established by 1819 when the whole practice was forbidden in several states as a response to the assassination of playwright August von Kotzebue on March 23, 1819, by Burschenschaft member and gymnast Karl Ludwig Sand. The ban experienced its fiercest implementation in Jahn's beloved Prussia. Jahn was denounced as a "demagogue" and placed under arrest. The Turnen project was on hold.

Though it was not banned in all German states, it did not flourish throughout Germany until after 1842 when the last prohibition was lifted. Jahn spent five years in several prisons and was only released after he promised not to teach any of his ideas. Nevertheless, Jahn kept the Turnen system alive during these years of isolation. He wrote new pamphlets and reedited the Turnen manual. Very gradually, the Turnen practice, which had many defenders in high office and was still deemed an articulation of German liberation ideals, was integrated into Prussian schooling.

In 1840 Jahn was rehabilitated by the Prussian king, and in 1848 he was elected to the first German parliament at Frankfurt as a representative of the center-right-wing conservative national interest. He now advocated the most reactionary political state organization possible: hereditary emperorship. The Turnen movement (meanwhile relatively independent of Jahn, run by his students and developing a gigantic national network) preserved its status as a symbol of national liberation and shaped social interaction in the German states.

In the Turnkunst manual, Jahn set out gymnastics exercises, the first and most basic of which was "Gehen"—walking. Throughout his book, Jahn emphasized the importance of simple, "natural" forms of movement, above all Gehen and Laufen (Jahn 1828, 5-15), walking and running, and classified them as essential exercises that supplied the basis for everything else (Jahn 1816, xii). All other exercises were dependent on the ability to walk properly: upright, with a sense of pace, duration, length of step, and adaptation to conditions of the landscape. He stressed the naturalness of posture: the steady, straight way of the foot slightly turned out hitting the ground, the light swinging movement of the lower arms. Walking had to be practiced from childhood on to instill a correct and healthy way of moving and to make the walker feel comfortable carrying weights. Jahn distinguished between walking, running, racing, creeping, jumping, swinging, hanging, and balancing. After these fundamental walking skills had been mastered, exercises could be done on the apparatuses (Jahn 1816, 3-6). Walking was the basis for coordinating individual body movements and for synchronizing and disciplining moving bodies in the group. Jahn's 1816 Turnen manual initially condemned dance, but later editions modified his stance. German dancing, together with Turnen, became the antidote to French ballet and supported the gymnastics cause. Jahn began to revive the old Reigen, the ancient German dances, and suggested dancing the Reigen during commemorative events and during national festivals (Jahn 1816, xvi). In later editions of Deutsche Turnkunst from 1847 on, Jahn's musings on the Reigen reappeared. The Reigen was supposed to transport the purity and naturalness of German movement, combined with folk songs and imitated folk dances. Jahn traced the dance back to ancient Germanic tribal customs: in past centuries, Reigen were collective step and dance movements that everyone used to form long rows and move in lines in one direction or in circles. Sometimes counterdirectional groups assembled, but all followed the leader moving. Most times one sang together or had someone sing for all. (Jahn 1847, 117) The Reigen became an additional educational tool, alongside singing, hiking, and playing group games. From a historiographical perspective, the Reigen helps establish a direct line from the early nineteenth to the early twentieth century. The Reigen and gymnastics within a demarcated gymnastics space, and walking, hiking, and game playing outside of it, imparted the movement forms that still embodied nationalist ideals. The Reigen evolved from supplementary exercises to Turnen in 1816 into an independent aesthetic dance form. By 1847, the gymnastics movement had gone through several stages: in 1818, about 12,000 men from all social spheres belonged to gymnastics groups; starting in 1819, the movement was banned in Prussia as subversive activity; in 1842, it was rehabilitated and introduced into the Prussian school curriculum. By 1847, about 90,000 enlisted Turner were enrolled, and Turnen presented a major force in the public social organization of the masses in Germany (cf. Wedemeyer-Kolwe 2004). In the mid-nineteenth century, Adolf Spiess (1810-1858) adapted Jahn's principles and fought for the introduction of gymnastics curricula into Swiss and German schools. Spiess's last written work was a collection of songs and dances for the physical education of girls in Schulturnen (published posthumously, Wassmannsdorff 1869). With music and dance, Spiess inserted levels of aesthetic meaning and structure into methodical physical exercises. He freely expanded principles and means that Jahn had also employed. The Reigen, though still with ancient mythical origins, was defined as a dance genre with aesthetic properties that could be written down, and as an art form, the Reigen was beneficial in gymnastics and dance instruction. Spiess understood that in dance, one could emphasize technical ability or structural regularity. With the same set of exercises, he could direct pupils to dance or to gymnastics, as both represented different aspects of a similar physical education—they were free exercises (Freiiibung). Both also defined the structural and methodological relationships among those who moved. He wrote of these movements as connected to order (Ordnungsbeziehungen) because they established and authorized order and were rehearsals for later social orientation.

Spiess's experience and integrated the latter's Reigen compositions as well as the rhythmic march into his own system. As mentioned above, Laban used the Turnen terminology in several of his books. The first sentence of Gymnastik und Tanz (Laban 1926a, 7) reads: "The foundations of all gymnastics are calisthenics (Freiiibungen). All other forms of gymnastics—Turnen—that employ some sort of apparatus are variations of calisthenics." Laban picked up terminology as well as ideas that first Jahn and then his devotee Adolf Spiess had devised.

Laban not only copied the entire structure of childhood movement education from Spiess's work or from other Turner advocates such as Carl Euler, but he also lifted the idea of song and dance that Spiess had taken from Jahn and had further modernized. By the 1860s and well into the 1910s, the Reigen was part of the exercise and ceremonial presentations of many gymnastics schools during official events. Laban appropriated the genre of the Reigen and redefined it within his movement choir practices. He also made sure that his affiliation with the gymnastics movement did not break off: he, Hertha Feist, or other students, taught classes in Tanzerische Kérperbildung [Dance as Physical Education] at the Berlin Hochschule fiir Leibesiibungen [the Berlin College of Physical Education] in the 1920s and 1930s (Schéning 1929-1933).

The basic movement patterns of the Reigen with walking [Gehen] and procession-like movement [Schreiten] permeated most gymnastics and modern dance methods and many choreographic works; we see them applied as thought structure in Laban's book Die Welt des Tiinzers (1920), in Wigman's choreography Reigen (1922), where walking sequences established the spatial patterns and included the formation of rows of dancers holding hands and snaking through the landscape. The Totentanz (Dance of Death, 1926) was also conceived as a Reigen (Manning 2006, 123). The Orff school contribution to the Olympic Opening Ceremony 1936 consisted of Reigen performances by several thousand girls (Organisationskomittee 1937, 577).

We see walking as the basic instruction element in the gymnastics schools of Mensendieck, Bode, and Klamt, and of the dance schools of Laban's and Wigman's students such as Palucca. The latter built her entire teaching system on different ways of walking and maintained this method throughout her pedagogic career and throughout the twentieth century. Jahn had introduced walking as an essential German form of movement, and like Jahn, the dance and gymnastics schools advertised walking as "natural" and nonartificial—the movement of the folk (as opposed to the artificial body stance taken in ballet or social dancing). Walking was understood as a type of language through which the people could express themselves as a national entity. This becomes blatantly obvious when walking, as moving one step at a time, already the essential foundation of modern dance, is applied to a racial concept of movement: "The picture, which we have of the most natural movement for the white race, is roughly the sideward movement" (Laban 1928). Walking, stepping forward, and stepping to the side constitute natural building blocks of everyday and aesthetically formed movement. Early nineteenth-century ideas, those of Jahn, for instance, consistently were rediscovered, redefined, and expanded throughout the century; the new element of racial rationalization was added to the already existing nationalist conceptions of human social order with an orientation toward a powerful national community. "Natural," "strong," and "healthy" as defined by Jahn were basic categories that enabled and justified an anti-enlightenment interpretation of human social order. Jahn had a clear concept of nationality yet only a vague idea of race. The notion of racial integrity and the need to separate and protect the leading white race from inferior elements implanted itself into German thought more strongly from the mid-nineteenth century on.

Richard Wagner's essays of the revolutionary years around 1848, Kunst und Revolution (1849), Das Kunstwerk der Zukunft (1849), Oper und Drama (1851), and, above all, Das Judenthum in der Musik (1850, published under a pseudonym and in 1869 published under his own name), sketch what a Gesamtkunstwerk, a "total work of art," for a specifically German people should look like and how it could activate a people to determine its own destiny. Wagner's essays, which preceded Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species (1859) by several years, already operated with the conception of a homogenous German Volk and the racial category of the Jew as the alien and destructive force amidst the German people. Wagner's combination of aesthetics with the German national cause, in fact, his view of aesthetics as the dynamic motivator of national consciousness, strengthened the existing national model for a modern and German concept of art, not only in music or opera, but also in dance, literature, painting, sculpture, and other arts.

Whether in Isadora Duncan's entire artistic approach! or Jaques-Dalcroze's writings (1907 and 1915), Wagner's theories became an integral part of German aesthetics, either as a positive or negative factor. Jahn's theory concerning movement as original source of national purity was neither discarded nor replaced. It was amplified and gained new momentum with the new "scientific" insights of Darwinism. After Charles Darwin's theory of human evolution found its application in the social sciences and made its way into aesthetics, once the eugenic and racial propensities of physical culture were discovered, many gymnastics strands, the so-called Spielbewegung (translated as "playground movement" by Fred Eugene Leonard, 1918), and in the early 1900s also modern dance shifted even more toward national-conservative inclinations. As a result, the concept of evolution was regarded as a means to drive survival of the fittest with the implication that "races" fight over living space and for their purity or that human beings are nothing but biological entities, living organisms, and that societies need to recognize and incorporate these scientific facts and align their politics accordingly. What we call social Darwinism determined much of the public debate in the late nineteenth century. "Community, with its living space increasingly represented the organic, natural type of national social formation. Conceptions of individual health were inextricably linked to the health of the communal body, ranging from interventions such as vaccination programs to sterilization and abortion prescriptions to physical education that supposedly offered preventative strategies. Jahn's first moving community, the Turn-Gemeinde, based on the unity of state and German Volk, evolved into the Gemeinschaft der Nationalitét, the community of nationality (Jahn 1833, 3, 52), in the course of twenty years.

Systematically, the state became the vehicle for nationalism in its extreme interpretation until it lost its independence. It either disintegrated and reformed as a communal structure or served as a negative template that had to be removed. For the gymnasts and modern dancers, the moving community, the Gemeinschaft of the German Volk in movement, had become the natural opposition to the state. The seeds had been sown by Jahn; Wagner's aesthetic racism pushed the whole idea further toward racial segregation and cleansing policies as theory. Then social Darwinist or eugenic racism redirected the efforts once more and provided practical solutions.

Over the course of the nineteenth century, movement as national expression increasingly became a means as well as the end of the project of finding a unique German bodily or physical symbol. The 'Germanization' of movement, that has been the argument here, was a long-term endeavor. By the early twentieth century, the early proponents of gymnastics and dance had become dedicated to racist and vélkisch ideas. The Nazis gathered all the scattered, murky conceptions and aesthetics together and rearticulated them as a Germanic racist, destructive ideology. German modern dance and gymnastics found no problem with that and fitted themselves into the new National Socialist state.

It was not one particular form that conveyed Nazi aesthetics; rather, it was movement or dance form as a structural principle that coagulated ideas into physical presence. When we speak of embodiment, then form is the shape that ideas or an ideology take, and this shape is then projected onto the human body. Walking as the initial experience of communal and national physical realignment and control (perhaps one could even call it the basic technique of modern movement) and the Reigen as the formal structure containing walking together nurtured a particular historical lineage.

Like Turnen, walking could be considered a means to blur the boundaries between real and imagined, between aesthetic, ideological, and political or between formal and structural. To repeat: Wigman rejected any external factors as relevant for absolute dance; 'extradiegetic references' could play no active part in her art. If 'extradiegetic references' thus were confined to the definition of the creators of modern German dance, they would not exist. Yet Laban's or Wigman's spatial or communal concepts are not 'absolute'; they are dependent on social and cultural realities and become 'extradiegetic' and unavoidable external forces that shape their dances.

The relationship of ideology and form as interdependent and inseparable thus predisposes a Reigen, performed by Wigman or Laban's movement choir, to become a protofascist or Nazi work. Nazi Dance Aesthetics The complex legacy of German body culture had arrived at a moment when it could pass triumphantly into the main stream of Nazi culture." As historian David Welch pointed out, in 1933, "the ideology of National Socialism represented the triumph of a rejuvenated Germany, liberated from outdated fallacies of bourgeois liberalism or Marxist class war" (Welch 2004, 233). The National Socialist ascent to power, the Machtergreifung, was more than simply a change of government: it represented the start of a revolution that would transform German society in accordance with their ideology. [and] propaganda alone could not have sustained the Nazi Party and its ideology over a period of 12 years. ... There is ... considerable evidence to suggest that Nazi policies and propaganda reflected many of the aspirations of large sections of the population. (Welch 2004, 216, 213)

This is precisely the point. The modern dance of Laban and Wigman had already adopted values and practices that could move easily and without friction into the new Nazi state and culture. Many dancers of the modern persuasion formed part of that enthusiastic populace; they had enhanced vélkisch and eugenic ideas through their practice when they had been on the margins of German social reality. They would then join the majority of supporters during the Nazi years and were rewarded with good positions as they celebrated the new regime. The dominance of Nazi-sanctioned aesthetic practices identified and excluded political and racial enemies.

Nevertheless, "Nazi rule and society, as seen from the perspective of contemporary historiography, were of course much less homogenous than Benjamin's aestheticization thesis would suggest," as Lutz Koepnick (1999, 52) pointed out when he revisited the aesthetic complexity in the Third Reich. That is important to keep in mind: the wide range of interpretative possibilities in all art forms and genres meant that an ideal vision of a Nazi art existed but that such a vision was a guiding principle and only partly permeated practical concerns and pragmatic programming. The interplay of violent cleansing of German art from "degenerate" art with the desire to continue great German artistic traditions dictated Nazi art practice.

Not all modern dancers, of course, became adherents of Nazi ideology: those who followed left-wing ideas used choreography and performance to articulate their opposition to the system. The traditions of cabaret and nightclub performance were also questioned by the Nazis and forced the performers of these genres to rethink their place in society and their aesthetics. Some emigrated, for example, Valeska Gert, Gertrud Bodenwieser, Jean Weidt, and Kurt Jooss; some joined the antifascist resistance, for example, Oda Schottmiller, and others were murdered in a concentration camp, for example, Tatjana Barbakoff and Sasha Leontieff. Many modern dancers saw the rise of Nazism as their opportunity to realize their dreams on a nationwide scale with state support. The Nazi political system would afford them their rightful place in the new state. They had worked hard for the rejuvenation and regeneration of Germany; the Nazi revolution was their revolution, and the Nazis were asked to acknowledge the substantive role that modern dance and gymnastics should play in establishing the new regime. The dancers had already contributed, to varying degrees and in various ways, to the articulation of all of the elements that constituted Nazi ideology:

+ To the concept of a homogenized community that became the Volksgemeinschaft, the people's community with its structure a guarantee for the creation of the "master race"!
+ To the community that was led by the leader. Under Hitler's leadership, the Führerprinzip or leader principle was applied to the inherent racism of the Volksgemeinschaft, which prized purity, unity, and the strength of the healthy body as a racialized entity. Modern dance in Germany had also combated the opposite of that healthy body and demanded the elimination of all enemies, the "degenerate species" and "unhealthy bodies." Anti-Semitism and anti-Slavism were used to justify and fight the "degenerate" Jewish and Slavic elements, which were deemed necessary for the protection of the master race. This was pursued with social Darwinist justifications and social hygiene measures.

Modern dance had also contributed to the elimination of all political enemies, represented in the modern German movement culture. This same movement culture was part of the economics and culture of a nationalist space, the Lebensraum, and the resulting Lebensraumpolitik, the politics and geopolitics of living space. It also cultivated a national/regional and local Germanic culture that grows out of German soil (Blut und Boden).

Gymnastics and dance groups set themselves apart from society by strengthening communal structures or movement choirs. Most of these groups and schools were run according to a strict leader principle, incorporating eugenic concepts. This was reflected in language as well as bodily practice: organic bodies seeking harmony with nature could be kept healthy only by eliminating all impure, sick, or degenerate influences.

The gymnastics schools and dance communities believed in the unity of practice and performance spheres as living space. This space made possible the emergence of the wholesome body and the harmonic community of movers. Laban's spatial concept, which cultivated a communal living space within the sacred icosahedron and the spatial aura carried around by every dancer, is an important example of the realization of a living and movement space for an imagined community in the twentieth century.

His space was not merely a narratological space for entertainment or instruction but one in which the community narrated its own identity by living it. Imagined space materialized in the true sense of the word—it became physical, bodily matter. Blood-and-soil policies were equally vigorously cultivated by many groups. Bode, Klamt, Wigman, and Laban emphasized the close link of movement and soil, the necessary connection of body, exercise, and German soil. Bode and Laban believed in the necessity of cleansing German popular culture and encouraged a return to German folk customs.

Under the Nazis, they confronted each other as bitter enemies, vying for supremacy and leadership in the entire modern dance community. Bode aligned himself with the supposedly existing true German folk culture, whereas Laban suggested that his movement choirs, as new German folk expression, would replace the decadence of consumerist entertainment.

With the renewed orientation of the Reigen in the way Jahn had suggested and the prominence of walking as a basic element of German movement (in contrast to the "pas" of ballet) and the appropriation of space as outlined above, there came other aesthetic developments that supported first völkisch and then Nazi ideals. These developments prized the beauty in muscular strength and health and the exploration of the natural in the body tied to organic functions, such as blood flow, breathing, digestion, or the workings of other internal organs. In addition, there was the rediscovery of the tragic and heroic, the concept of individual and communal sacrifice performed in responsorial interaction, with emotion and body-intuition placed above rationality and rhythm circumscribing a specific time related to historic space. The perception of modern dance in opposition to ballet also belongs to this catalogue, with all relevant social and artistic connotations.

Immediately after the Nazi ascent to power, dancers, choreographers, and writers issued statements in support of the new regime. Many outlined why modern German dance was particularly suited to advance the values and ethics of Nazism; most argued from ideological positions: race, blood-and-soil interdependency, community, leadership, and the healthy body.

Fritz Bohme, one of Laban's great supporters and journalist at the Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, wrote to Joseph Goebbels and reminded him of the qualities of dance as a carrier of racial purity. "Dance is a race question," summarized Bohme in a succinct phrase: "There is no international dance form that is above race. Where dance is so cultivated, it attacks the roots and the authentic expression of a people" (Karina and Kant 2004, 197).

Rudolf Bode declared early in 1933: "More profound than thinking is the bodily-spiritual that is tied to the origins of the soil [Heimat], to the mother's womb and the circulating blood stream. Only a physical education that addresses this duality of soil and blood will be able to survive in the future. With a mighty leap National Socialism has pulled young Germans out of the dull caves of unnecessary scholarliness and has put them out into the strong wind, into rain and sunshine and this almighty stream of the breath of nature." (Bode 1933a, 2)

Hans Brandenburg stated in 1934: "German art dance was from the beginning a community art form, an artistic precursor of that Volksgemeinschaft, which has begun to realise itself in these days" (Brandenburg 1934, 57).

And Mary Wigman in her book on German dance in 1936 explained: "The oft-abused term community [Heimat in original] does not denote a delusion. We do not err when we ascribe to our times the power of community. At the core of community in its most productive meaning lies an idea that is accepted by all participants. Community demands leadership and recognition of the necessity of leadership. The masses that refer only to themselves can never constitute a community. Work within and towards the community means to serve the work, to serve the idea." (Wigman 1936, 64)

Laban made walking and row dancing the basic principles of all German dance education in his proposals for education and examination standards submitted to and accepted by the Ministry of Propaganda in 1934 (Karina and Kant 2004, 204-205). He envisaged that his movement choirs would replace all "degenerate" social dancing in the Third Reich and also suggested that his movement choirs should be integrated into the Nazi Thing plays (ibid., 221).

Some scholars argue that the statements after January 1933 were born out of immense pressure and that all artists were forced into collaboration. That is incorrect. Except for those in immediate danger, the political and "racial" enemies, most German dancers and choreographers were eager to join the cause voluntarily and to support the regime. Most dance and gymnastics that carried prototypes of vélkisch concepts became part of a deliberate Nazi aesthetic when the representatives of the many strands of movement cultures joined the various Nazi organizations, associations, institutions, and ministerial entities. In order to counter the claim that coercion and force were used and responsible for the superficial integration of modern dance and gymnastics into the Nazi system, we have to look at the decades before the establishment of the Nazi regime. German dancers and German gymnasts carefully invented their past and in particular rejected the association with ballet. Ballet acted as the negative template against which everything in relation to modern dance was defined and developed. Rudolf von Laban was clearest and most decisive when he declared that dance had to be created anew (Laban 1920, 24). In the speeches to the participants of the Dance Congress in Essen in 1928, Laban and Wigman demanded that the theater be cleansed of the old and rejuvenated by their own dance (this is but one example): "Only the dance that is called modern today can fulfill the demands of a theatre dance of the future. We want to conquer the entire theatre with our dance gesture. This seemingly arrogant demand embodies the highest fulfillment of the dancing being and the deepest modesty within itself. We will not be contented with partial aesthetic pleasure, which the theatre offers today. ... We want not only danced theatre— we want rhythmically moved and vibrating theatre." (Miiller and Stéckemann 1992, 82) The past was conjured up as a powerful but not historically verifiable construct. This construction had to eliminate and "forget" as many aspects of movement in the eighteenth or nineteenth centuries as it had deliberately to invent new origins. It had to define the historical enemy and prepare its destruction. That is another outstanding feature of the gymnastics and dance modernists: the demand not only to reject or replace an existing practice, but to prepare its elimination. Ballet—foreign, French, un-German—had to be cut out of German theater culture. Ballet was declared un-German by critic Fritz B6hme in 1933 (Béhme 1933). One of the very few Laban students who incorporated ballet and theater dance into his own style, Kurt Jooss, contradicted Laban as well as Wigman in his speech at the Dancer’s Congress in 1928 (Miiller and Stéckemann 1993, 76). Joss emigrated in 1933 and with him the possibility of compromise vanished. On the whole, there was no tolerance or notion of coexistence with other performance traditions (Wigman 1929). By the 1910s and 1920s modern dance disciples even felt the need to distance themselves from their gymnastics cousins and thus also denied that common past (Wigman 1921). The Nazis promoted Friedrich Ludwig Jahn to the status of honorary National Socialist and pioneer of the vélkisch cause. Though he had never left German public consciousness, though his books were constantly reprinted, he rose to new political and cultural significance, much like composer Richard Wagner. Jahn’s theories and practices gained ever more favor. His concepts of patriotic gymnastics, of a space in which the nationalist community would congregate, his conviction that Germany required a community of healthy bodies, and all his other beliefs had infiltrated most movement systems that cultivated a German essence. These cultural traits distinguished German gymnastics and German dance from other modernist aspirations. I have argued that a direct historical line winds through the nineteenth and into the twentieth century. Yet that development is also much more contradictory, which makes the orientation toward eugenic and racial theories in gymnastics, with the female body at its center, in the later nineteenth century truly extraordinary. Jahn's system, which started on the margins of Prussian reality, moved to the center of German politics and eventually conquered the public sphere within a few decades. Jahn's gymnastics entered the state school system, encountering a powerful corrective from the ministries of culture and education. The system was remilitarized in the 1880s and 1890s, with Carl Euler orientating it toward war games played in the Turn associations.

The gymnastics schools encouraged the racially clean organism of the female body and its ability to procreate through exercises that addressed "natural" muscular strength and breathing abilities as purification mechanisms. Laban's movement choirs with their spatial and communal properties were a different formal structure that could fit into the Nazi Thing play or stand on their own. Wigman's choric works with their pronounced relationship between chorus and leader were another version of a Nazi "living space" and one specific Nazi configuration of community.

Choreographers and dancers, by working in the Third Reich, validated and rationalized movement form as part of the ideological approach that would authenticate and not undermine or contradict the Nazi worldview. They found the means of translation, and they did not need to incorporate all elements of Nazi ideology into their works of art to demonstrate their support of the regime. However, they could not remain ignorant of the danger of ideology contamination. Perspectives on space and community, on leadership and group coherence, can change with different ideological outlooks. But they can also remain embedded in works of art if the ideology of Nazism is not recognized and rejected, if change is not acknowledged and understood as necessary reflection on the past of movement, gymnastics, and dance.






======================================================\n\n\n







Making Sense of Dancing Mania

On Christmas Eve in 1021, 18 people gathered outside a church in the German town of Kélbigk and danced with wild abandon. The priest, unable to perform Mass because of the irreverent din from outside, ordered them to stop. Ignoring him, they held hands and danced a "ring dance of sin", clapping, leaping, and chanting in unison. The enraged priest, recorded a local chronicler, cursed them to dance for an entire year as a punishment for their outrageous levity. It worked. Not until the following Christmas did the dancers regain control of their limbs. Exhausted and repentant, they fell into a deep sleep. Some of them never awoke.

It might seem improbable to us, but there was nothing in this story that mediaeval people found hard to believe. Compulsive dancing joined that litany of natural and human disasters to be explained in terms of celestial or supernatural forces. But even if much of the chronicler's account is clearly the stuff of legend, we should not dismiss it as purely invention. Plenty of sources indicate that this obscure chronicler may have embellished a real event. The Kolbigk incident is a contender for the first of the dancing plagues.

Later chronicles speak of a bout of unstoppable, and sometimes fatal, dancing in the German town of Erfurt in 1247. Shortly after, 200 people are said to have danced impiously on a bridge over the Moselle River in Maastricht until it collapsed, drowning them all. Likewise, dozens of mediaeval authors recount the terrible compulsion to dance that, in 1374, swept across western Germany, the Low Countries, and northeastern France. Chronicles agree that thousands of people danced in agony for days or weeks, screaming of terrible visions and imploring priests and monks to save their souls.

A few decades later, the abbot of a monastery near the city of Trier recalled "an amazing epidemic" in which a collection of hallucinating dancers hopped and leapt for as long as 6 months, some of them dying after breaking "ribs or loins". On a far larger scale was the outbreak that struck the city of Strasbourg in 1518, consuming as many as 400 people. One chronicle states that it claimed, for a brief period at least, about 15 lives a day as men, women, and children danced in the punishing summer heat. There were also several isolated cases during the 1500s and 1600s, from Switzerland and the Holy Roman Empire, of the mania gripping an individual or entire family.

The dancing plagues are little remembered today, in part because they seem so unbelievable. But while the incidents at Kélbigk, Erfurt, and Maastricht might be apocryphal, there is no question that the 1374 and 1518 epidemics occurred. Dozens of reliable chronicles from several towns and cities describe the events of 1374. And the course of the 1518 epidemic can be minutely detailed with the help of municipal orders, sermons, and vivid descriptions left behind by the brilliant Renaissance physician, Paracelsus. These outbreaks represent a real and fascinating enigma.

On one thing contemporary and modern writers have agreed: those who danced did so involuntarily. They writhed in pain, screamed for help, and begged for mercy. So what could have impelled them to dance against their will? One theory is that they had ingested ergot, a mould that grew on stalks of ripening rye and can cause hallucinations, spasms, and tremors. 

Epidemics of ergotism certainly occurred in mediaeval Europe when people ate contaminated flour. But this theory does not seem tenable, since it is unlikely that those poisoned by ergot could have danced for days at a time. Nor would so many people have reacted to its psychotropic chemicals in the same way. The ergotism theory also fails to explain why virtually every outbreak occurred somewhere along the Rhine and Moselle Rivers, areas linked by water but with quite different climates and crops.

We do know, however, that the victims of dancing epidemics were experiencing altered states of consciousness. This is indicated by their extraordinary levels of endurance. In a trance state, they would have been far less conscious of their physical exhaustion and the pain of sore, swollen, and lacerated feet. Onlookers in 1374 also spoke of the afflicted as wild, frenzied, and seeing visions; the dancers yelled out the names of devils, had strange aversions to pointed shoes and the colour red, and said they were drowning in “a red sea of blood”. There is even a drawing of 1564 by Pieter Bruegel the Elder showing a group of women dancing uncontrollably, all of them wearing the distant, distracted, and divorced-from-reality expressions of the deeply entranced.

High levels of psychological distress significantly increase the likelihood of an individual succumbing to an involuntary trance state. It is unlikely to be a coincidence, therefore, that the 1374 dancing plague spread in the areas most savagely hit earlier in the year by the most devastating deluge of the 14th century. The people of Strasbourg and its environs were similarly experiencing acute distress in 1518, after a succession of appalling harvests, the highest grain prices for over a generation, the advent of syphilis, and the recurrence of such old killers as leprosy and the plague. Even by the gruelling standards of the Middle Ages, these were bitterly harsh years for the people of Alsace.

But if despair created the right conditions for an extreme psychological reaction, this does not explain why so many danced in their misery. Why did they not sob, scream, riot, fight, or fall into a sullen silence? This is where anthropological field studies prove to be invaluable. Accounts of “possession rituals” from the Arctic and Andes to the Kalahari and Caribbean show that people are more likely to enter the trance state if they expect it to happen and that entranced participants behave in a ritualistic manner, their thoughts and motions shaped by the spiritual beliefs of their cultures. Female mediums in Madagascar, for instance, take on the distinct personas of the spirits believed to inhabit them. Similarly, the participants in Vodou rituals adopt the roles of specific deities drawn from a pantheon of gods with varying personalities.

Were there, then, belief systems in the regions affected by the dancing plague that could have channelled widespread despair into an irresistible urge to dance? A variety of sources, from altar paintings to chronicles and law books, show that a dread of this punitive affliction formed part of the collective consciousness of the people of the Rhine and Moselle valleys. Those living near these mighty commercial waterways shared a profound fear of wrathful spirits able to inflict a dancing curse. And it is in this region alone, close to the western fringe of the Holy Roman Empire, that confirmed epidemics of dancing occurred. Moreover, these outbreaks nearly always struck in or close to cities affected by earlier dancing epidemics.








=========================================\n\n\n






Annunziata Dellisanti THE TARANTA - DANCE OF THE SACRED SPIDER TARANTISM

Tarantism is a widespread historical-religious phenomenon in Spain, Campania, Sardinia, Calabria, and Puglia. Its various forms shared an identical curative aim, and by around the middle of the 19th century, it had already begun to decline. Since the Middle Ages, it had been thought that the victim of the bite of the tarantula (a large, non-poisonous spider) would be afflicted by an ailment with symptoms similar to those of epilepsy or hysteria. This 'bite' was also described as a mental disorder usually appearing at puberty, at the time of the summer solstice, and caused by the repression of physical desire, depression, or unrequited love. In order to be freed from this illness, a particular ritual that included dance, music, and the use of certain colors was performed.

RITUAL DANCING
The first written account of music as an antidote to the bite of the tarantula was given by the Jesuit scientist, Athanasius Kircher, who was also the first to notate the music and rhythm in his book Antidotum Tarantula in the 16th century. Among the instruments involved and used, the frame drum plays an important role together with the violin, the guitar or chitarra battente, a ten-string guitar used percussively, and the button accordion or organetto. This form of exorcism consisted in a ritual carried out in the home of the sick person and a religious ritual in the Church of San Paolo (Saint Paolo in Galatina (Lecce)) during the celebrations of the Saints Peter and Paul on the 28th June each year. Exorcism, i.e. the liberation of the tarantula's poison and freedom from the illness, was achieved by using a very special kind of music called the pizzica-tarantata, with a very marked rhythm, which forced the sick person to move, rocking backwards and forwards, until they burst into a frenzied dance with great leaps and contortions that represented the spider's behavior and its final murder by the 'sick person'.

'The first person to document this phenomenon in the Puglia region of Italy was Ernesto De Martino in his 'mythical' ethnographic expedition in 1959, which was described in great detail in the essay La Terra del rimorso. Contributo a una storia religiosa del Sud [The Land of Remorse. Contribution to a religious history of the South], the most detailed study on the subject. In the years following the publication in 1961 of La Terra del rimorso, tarantism was the subject of numerous studies (often from diverse perspectives) and was provided with ample photographic and film documentation (such as La Taranta, a documentary in 1962 by Gianfranco Mingozzi and Sangue vivo by Edoardo Winspeare, a fiction film in 2000). In his essay, De Martino revealed that:

The classical antecedents of the symbolism of the bite and sting thus refer to the sphere of female orgiastic cults and indicate maenadism in particular, as well as to the corresponding existential crisis of which those cults were at the same time the revival and 'change of the sign'. (De Martino 1996: 217)

WOMAN TARANTATE
Although De Martino believes that the tarantate, the afflicted women who fell into a hypnotic state of mind, are reminiscent of the crowd of maenads and bacchants of the ancient world stirred by the rhythm of the drum, he believes that "the rite [...] is a 'remnant', the remains of a pagan world in a context of extreme poverty and misery" (De Martino 1996: 31). The placement of the tarantism phenomenon in a "minor religion" in the South of the 1950s, a world characterized by underdevelopment and superstition, is a unique approach to understanding the cultural and psychological misery of the poor in the South. This society, forgotten and isolated for centuries by institutions, is reflected in the feeling of guilt, which De Martino defines as "an anxiety which is a coded symptom of unfulfilled choices and conflicts operating in the unconscious" (De Martino 1996: 272).

The prevalence of female participation in tarantism, as analyzed by De Martino, shows that more women were afflicted by tarantism from the end of the 17th century onwards. The prevalent female participation led scholars of that period to suspect that women had invented the excuse of the spider to gain freedom for themselves. The ritual of the tarantate could be considered a form of self-cure and a primordial defense for women in the face of malaise, psychic discomfort, grief, and a periodic explosion.

The women in Puglia were able to "act out their desperation in front of a crowd of spectators" (taken from the soundtrack of the film La Taranta, Mingozzi 1962) and escape from the anonymity and invisibility that relegated them to a cloistered life between home and church. Ethnomusicologist Tullia Magrini observed that women in southern Europe, finding themselves in a position socially "without voice," resorted to symbolic expression, discovering in religious and ritual behavior one of the few expressive and emotional channels available to them in public contexts. Within this field of action, women could become creators of events that were significant for both themselves and their community, displaying their own particular skills. The Italian tambourine or tamburello is an ancient musical instrument connected to rituals associated with women, dating back to ancient Egyptian and Sumerian culture. Just as the Sumerian people felt the need in time to document the presence of the first percussionist in history, priestess Lipushiao, the scholars of tarantism in the 19th century also documented the presence of a highly skilled tambourine player: "In 1876, famous musicians for the tarantate were still living in Salento, and the scholar De Simone from Salento met and questioned the tambourine player Donata dell'Anna di Arnesano and the violinist Francesco Mazzotta di Novoli" (De Martino 1996: 148). It was on Donata's ability that the success of the cure and recovery from the illness depended, in a ritual in which it was essential to find the 'appropriate' music, the sounds and rhythm that would crush the depressive tarantula illness, so-called musical motifs that were exclusive to "a divinity, a spirit, a genie, i.e. figures that [...] are being evoked" by a specific melody or a particular rhythm, making them similar to the rituals of possession (Agamennone 2005: 41). According to De Martino, the musicians thus take on "the character of exorcists, doctors and artists" (De Martino 1996: 75) and the female musicians that of shamans, witches and composers carrying out a magical ritual.

Musicologist Franco Lao writes: "Analogous to shamans, the witches had to avail themselves of assistants who played and danced while they smeared the narcotic ointments and applied the cure, extracting the evil (symbolised by a piece of glass, a worm or an insect) and showing it to the community that had gathered. On the other hand, as was the case with tarantism from Puglian and Sardinian argismo, these musical, choreutic and periodic chromatic ceremonies had the function of controlling and resolving the hysterical crises." (Franco-Lao 1977: 13)

These religious-ritual practices, the result of cultural syncretism with pre-Christian religions, are often the "privileged field of action for women", generally represented along the Mediterranean in particular, "as silent, passive and marginal people, closed up in their homes, covered from head to foot because they are ashamed of their bodies, and apparently employed in the sole activity of tacitly showing their modesty" (Magrini 1998). Gender studies in music are very young, but it is necessary to emphasise that the presence of women in musical activities, documented by recordings collected by ethnomusicologists, have not always received the attention they deserve. However, other observers have emphasised not only the great number of females present in the therapy of tarantism but also the important role played by female musicians, the great "Ladies of the tambourine", who "have the honour of leading the dance of recovery and celebrating the death ritual" (Agamennone 2005: 39). The woman-tambourine association can still be seen at the end of the 1950s in tarantella rituals in ceremonies which celebrate the passage from life to death, fertility rituals that recall the myth of Demeter and her daughter Persephone who, kidnapped by Hades to the bowels of the earth, are celebrated each spring. Agamennone's text Le musiche tradizionali del Salento [The Traditional Music of Salento] includes two CDs that present extensive audio documentation of music recorded by De Martino and Carpitella in 1959 and 1960, in which the female presence is central. The music that starts the dance and the entire curative process is often played by a single musician who often accompanies her song with the continuously increasing insistent rhythm of the drum. When listening to the recordings, one can observe the decisive and characteristic role the convinced, confident percussionist on the tambourine has, so much so that it seems to draw in the other instruments. The Puglia women demonstrate a special energy and strength, above all in the explosion of the dotta, a strong blow to the centre of the membrane, to the face or near the ears of the tarantate, to shake up and revive the suffering women.

The photographs in the volume show rather large instruments, apparently so heavy, as they would be played for hours on end, that the musicians had to bandage their forearms. This is in complete contradiction with the presence of many male performers who now dominate the scene during the revived Festival The Nights of the Tarantella. These musicians regard the tambourine as an exclusively masculine instrument since women would have neither the strength to support them, nor the resistance, to support them for such long lengths of time.

THE LADIES OF THE TAMBURELLO
Agamennone gives us a list of musicians: Salvatora Marzo, the ‘Za Tora’ of Nard, specialised in a loud, strong dota and in the use of nonsensical verbal formulas, Cristina Stefanizzi, specialised in binary rhythms, Addolorata Assalve, Leonide Pedid, Grazia Zoccu, with a typical style that produces low-pitched frequencies and Laura Pedid, who was 73 years old at the time of recording. These women, used to hard labour in the fields and at home, were evidently endowed with great strength. Physically very unlike today’s aesthetic ‘television’ models, they preserved the practice, custom and familiarity with the same instrument we see portrayed in the hands of the Maenads, who held large tambourines similar to those in use today.

The women from Puglia undoubtedly learned the technique from their mothers and grandmothers, who instinctively entrusted their daughters with this knowledge as if it were part of the female domain just as the preservation of the secrets of good traditional cooking. Later on, we shall see how this almost exclusively female tradition was interrupted and how today, only a very few musicians, like Alessandra Belloni, have rediscovered this musical heritage and are trying to spread these ancient therapeutic, choreutic musical traditions amongst women.

Like the Maenads, the Bacchantes described by Euripides, the tambourine players of Salento were the depositories of a musical tradition that was then already over 4,000 years old, in which the song, dance and sounds of tambourines were the means of harmony with the divine. This particular ritual is a continuation of the rites in honour of Cybele, the black goddess of the Earth. The tambourine players of Salento were gifted with a particular, typically ‘feminine’ sensitivity that allowed them to offer support and a cure to the tarantate, helping them endure grief, melancholy and fear of death or of an empty, miserable life. According to the ethnomusicologist Gianfranco Salvatore, the symbols of tarantism, which go back to cults and rituals of the goddesses of the Mediterranean, are numerous:

1. The use of the tambourine as the main instrument of the ritual. The presence of a 'totemic animal' — the tarantata — can identify with, imitating its movements. In the past, the animal was not a spider but rather a serpent, symbolizing Dionysius, skillfully controlled by the Maenads. The image of the spiral is linked to the cult of the Great Mother and the Serpent Goddess. The Taranta - Dance of the Sacred Spider Hiiyiik' and symbols of divination of life and cyclical time of birth and death, would in time take on the negative significance of the animal of the devil or sin.

The presence of the thyrsus and vine leaf of life documented by Baglivi in 1695 as the accessories of the tarantatas' dances and clearly visible on both the Puglia ceramics and the ornaments of the Bacchantes. According to Athanasius Kircher, the tractate's habit of swinging evokes the myth of Phaedra who hangs herself for love, while the myth of Isis, who puts back together her husband Osiris, who had been cut to pieces by his brother, and symbol of the changing seasons, can be traced back to De Martino's words regarding the tarantate who felt they were "in pieces", "torn apart", "broken".

Ethnomusicologist Gilbert Rouget interprets tarantism as a phenomenon of possession in which the therapy is a phenomenon of the reconciliation of the tarantata with the 'possessor entity', the tarantula, the spider. According to Georges Lapassade, one of the greatest experts on the study of altered states of consciousness, the most significant aspect of tarantism is the trance generated by the obsessive rhythm of the tambourines. It is the rhythm of the tarantella itself that draws people to the dance owing to the simultaneous presence of two complex rhythms — the beat, the pulsation, the regular beat and the offbeat, a 'rhythmic superstructure' that creates the effect of retard, syncopation and of slight rhythmical displacement.

The tambourines and rattles possess such force that they can hypnotize and almost anesthetize the tarantata, who, inside the holy space (called perimetro cerimoniale) — in the past a prehistoric cave, symbol of the maternal womb or sacred mountain of the Sybil — is now reduced to a white sheet stretched on the floor of the dark and poor houses of peasants. Catal Hityiik, ancient Turkey, is now considered to be one of the earliest known 'cities' in the world. A series of shrines has shown clear evidence of bull veneration, a vulture cult, and signs of worship of the prehistoric mother goddess. The earliest visual depiction of a drummer playing a frame drum comes from a cave in Catal Hiiyiik, around 5600 BC. Archaeologist Marija Gimbutas, author of The Language of the Goddess, published in 1989, speculates that the small clay drums and bowls found in the Catal Hityiik site represent the instruments used in the worship of the bird goddess, the goddess of music. All these elements confirm the continuity of a choreutic musical tradition that connects magic rites, recovery, rhythms of the tambourine and therapeutic musical actions of women. Female religiosity, wisdom and sexuality are confirmed through musical expression, perpetuating an ancient knowledge that has been preserved in various forms in the Mediterranean area, and in Salento in southern Puglia in particular.

This strong, constant presence over the centuries of events that associate the tambourine and female musical actions with the celebration of the ritual of death and birth/rebirth through a curative process (but also of regenerative self-cure) might perhaps be the symptom of a greater capacity in women to let themselves go, surrender to emotions, relieve grief and tension, recharge themselves with energy, above all through the body, movement, breathing and search for rhythms connected to nature and its cycles. The same melody follows a cyclical form that is repeated obsessively until therapy is completed. The cure, which is a search for wellbeing and health but also the expression of one’s own discomfort, takes place because of a particular need for relationships with others, apparently a characteristic of women.

Today, the stereotype of ‘female qualities’ that characterise women as altruistic within the social sphere, looking after the sick and elderly, is still strong, as if women were destined to sacrifice themselves. A WOMAN’S AFFAIR

The renewed interest in tarantism, which has produced a vast number of studies from different perspectives over the last few years, would seem to confirm and underline that this is almost exclusively a female phenomenon. Research carried out by Franco Signore in Novoli (Lecce) has provided further evidence that therapy involving the sound of a tambourine was a “woman’s affair” and the “Lady of the Tambourine” was always the same: “La Cenza te lu Gervasi” [Gervasi’s wife] (Signore in Agamennone 2003: 125-129). According to the information given, in the case of the town of Novoli, it is all about ‘menstruation’, a centuries-old taboo that should not be mentioned in public. The women allegedly simulated possession by the tarantula so they could dance until it induced a miscarriage. Signore believes that the use of this induction of miscarriage was an epiphenomenon of tarantism and suggests that in Novoli it was the specific and exclusive domain of the female world since women always played the tambourine and played a primary role in dealing with the crisis.

There is, therefore, abundant evidence that tarantism is a specifically female manifestation, as an expression of psycho-physiological discomfort and as a remedy generally administered through the hands of the tambourine players. In his conclusion, The Taranta - Dance of the Sacred Spider Signore emphasises how difficult it might be for male observers to evaluate this ‘female experience’. Furthermore, the very transmission of information might be partly unexpressed or censured by women out of fear and a feeling of discomfort owing to the lack of communication with men about taboos and subjects such as menstruation, pregnancy and sexuality. The gender of the interviewer and therapist seem to be important in initiating more intimate and profound forms of communication, capable of entering into the sphere of private experience. This was the case of the friendship between the scholar Annabella Rossi, a member of De Martino’s team in June 1959, and the tarantata Anna. After their first meeting in Galatina, a strong friendship was established between them, unprecedented in ethnographic studies in Italy, giving rise to a long correspondence that continued until 1965. According to Annabella Rossi, Anna’s story is common amongst the women of that area — one of poverty, fatigue, hunger, a strict father who forbade many things and a society that favoured male offspring, thus leading her to view the male universe with hostility, to the extent that she wrote, “Dear Miss, I hope you aren’t offended but the way I see it, I really can’t stand the male sex” (Rossi 1970: 154). This is a strong statement underlying this woman’s desire to describe her own marginalisation and the wish to escape. Women have a special kind of sensitivity that allows them to begin interpersonal communication with greater ease, be it a therapy or an ethnographic study. According to Ida Magli, the arrival of women anthropologists has been very important: “Indeed, only women anthropologists have ‘really’ been able to talk to women from those countries where, until now, researchers have almost been blind: Travellers, missionaries, ethnologists, anthropologists” (Magli 2007: 102). Women, or rather ‘scholars of the female sex’ as ethnomusicologist Bruno Nettl (Nettl 1993: 44), describes his American colleagues, have a particular way of dealing with field research, using an anthropological approach that pays more attention to human experience.

Today, a gender study in Puglia is nearly impossible since tarantism has disappeared and musical therapy is no longer practised. The ritual of the taranta has become a collective joyful summer festival accompanied by the pizzica-pizzica, the last remains of the ancient curative dance. Towards the end of the 1970s, the phenomenon of tarantism was viewed in Puglia as something shameful to hide, a past best forgotten, along with its music and instruments. At that time, ethnomusicologist Diego Carpitella took part in the Tambourine Festival in Cutrofiano (Lecce), organised with the aim of preserving old musical traditions. According to Carpitella it was highly possible that the tambourine would become the most popular instrument in Salento. During an interview for a local newspaper, he also 279 Annunziata Dellisanti tackled the problem of the conservation of techniques used in tambourine construction and made an appeal to his readers that an important and living symbol of civilisation should not be forgotten. Carpitella believed that a census should be carried out on both tambourine makers and performers. Once again, the ethnologist documented the presence of a tambourine player, Donna Rosa: “An elderly female player who had a highly original way of beating the tambourine. The rhythm, typical of Muro Leccese while preserving the therapy of tarantism is one of the fastest and liveliest” (Carpitella Interview in Agamennone 2005: 25-26). Donna Rosa was another of the countless musicians with a strong personality and the ability to communicate tambourine rhythms in a new, personal and innovative fashion. But was she perhaps the last of the ‘Ladies of the tambourine’? Where are the percussionists of Puglia today? NEOTARANTISM At the end of the 20" century, a new cult appeared: neotarantism. The neologism "neotarantism" was coined in 2001 by journalist Anna Nacci and defines the revival of music and dance of the past in all its elements, particularly rhythm. This phenomenon, known as neo-tarantula, induces an unrestrained unleashing of the body, allowing it to move in a collective manifestation of joy, freeing itself from everyday life's problems.

In the past 20 years, the music has survived despite being deprived of its ritual framework. It has changed context, with dancing now taking place in festivals, public squares, or discos. This renaissance of tarantism is supported by countless articles and the proliferation of musical groups. It has also been promoted by local culture, drawing attention to a forgotten tradition that was once unpopular and despised.

Over the last ten years, there has been a radical change in perception of a phenomenon previously considered shameful and backward. Today, the pizzica and tambourine are vindicated as symbols of Salento and an autochthonous past. The culture of taranta existed before Greek influence, as proven by the painted murals of the Grotta dei Cervi.

These new generations vindicate their feelings, which their parents and grandparents considered shameful, as a symptom of superstition, illness, hysteria, lack of equilibrium, madness, or weakness. They also consider it as a therapy from an almost exclusively female universe linked to the problems of women's condition in society and within the family.

This cultural change and globalization make it possible for young people to revive the ancient therapeutic ritual, which has become an expression of innovation, energy, celebration, joy, positive energy, and strength. These expressions are symbolically linked to a male world.

At present, tarantism is claimed to be "a positive, noble, profound sign of the history of Puglia." Women as therapists and percussionists disappear, and many skilled singers perform, at times playing the tambourine as a simple accompaniment. The great Signori del tamburello are left to the solo and virtuoso parts.

Women in Puglia and southern Italy have not stopped playing the tambourine but are no longer at the center of the stage. The frenetic rhythms of the pizzica-pizzica are now the prerogative of men only. The main figure, outstanding in both originality and personality, is Alfio Antico, a Sicilian percussionist who became the symbol of the tambourine thanks to his skill at creating a "magical, primordial atmosphere." "I was the inventor of the tambourine solo. At times I wonder if, without me, the tambourine would have still been as important as it is now," Antico said in a 2007 interview. Today, there are countless opportunities to attend courses by Signori del tamburello. However, if we wanted to find a female teacher, out of respect for the original female nature of the instrument or just out of pure curiosity, it would be much more arduous. Indeed, women play at festivals and some singers and dancers in traditional music groups know how to play the tambourine, but they never reach the virtuosity of their male colleagues. It seems as if they use the instrument as a decorative object to give their performance a traditional flavor.


ALESSANDRA BELLONI: THE QUEEN OF THE TAMBOURINE

We first met on August 14, 2005, in Tuscany in Chiara di Prumiano in Val d'Elsa, for the seminar Rhythm is the cure that Belloni has taught for over seven years. The musician offers seminars on Italian dance and the tambourine in relation to the therapy of tarantism. The following information comes from my participation in the two seminars Belloni held in August 2005 and 2006 and from an interview with Belloni herself and the participants in the seminar in 2005. I also took notes when I participated for the second time and these notes document the impressions, reactions, and emotions each woman experienced.

Indeed, a key moment of the workshop is the conclusive group reunion that allows participants to share their experiences. Belloni suggests that the numerous women and few men who attend her seminars recreate the ritual of the tarantate with the aim of freeing themselves of their own worries while searching within themselves for memories and dreams. Belloni plays the tambourine for hours and the whole group dances for hours. This experience is highly emotional and also physically tiring.

During the interview, she told me that she herself had experienced the effectiveness of the rhythm of the tarantella, dancing for hours in a trance-like state to cure herself of a serious illness. She believed that other women she had helped had also benefited from the combination of the strength of the tambourine and movement.

For many of those who participate in Alessandra Belloni's seminars, dancing and simulating the movements of the spider takes on a completely new meaning. The ritual space is seen "as a safe place where everyone can trust each other", "you feel protected", where you can "let go". While dancing, "you enter a relationship with the Madonna", you re-experience "your past and that of your forefathers", you experience "a sort of prayer", you feel "the energy increasing in the group when they are joined in a circle", and you feel "you have the courage to experience this". Some thank Alessandra for having protected and helped them and for having "experienced trust in themselves" and they feel "the desire to reciprocate the energy they have received". For some of them “time just flew” while for others it was “the longest experience of my life” (Personal communications, Chiara di Prumiano, Val d’Elsa, Tuscany, August 27, 2006). The recurrence of the word ‘to experience’ proves that this was only the beginning of the journey, and it should be pointed out that the women who came from countries where emancipation has been underway for years, for example, the United States and England, found it easier and were more open-minded in their approach to these activities. The few Italian women present—just three—were more rational and said they found it difficult to let themselves go completely.

As mentioned earlier, in Italy, women do not play the tambourine professionally; normally they are singers or dancers who play it occasionally just for one song. According to Belloni, this is because, by going to school and leaving behind the exhausting work in the fields, they have lost contact with nature and the earth and, as a consequence, with strength (Mattingly 1999: 32). Since 1984, Alessandra Belloni participated in the Festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli in Salento, a traditional celebration that takes place in the summer with the playing of tambourines and pizziche. Belloni says that at the beginning she was the only woman who played the tambourine and was not particularly well received (Consolmagno 1999: 59). Since then, she has developed great strength and technical skill, so she is now able to play for hours in competitions with drum players and percussionists. Once she had proven her bravura and her physical stamina, she felt more welcome at these festivals and collective events in public squares, even if she was the only woman playing.

Belloni’s original objective to revive dance with therapeutic functions, which I believe has not yet been studied, annoys her colleagues and generates a sense of uneasiness that is similar to the one experienced by the elderly who regarded tarantism as a ‘woman’s affair to be ashamed of and left unspoken. Through seminars, Alessandra Belloni hopes to convince an increasing number of women to return to playing the instrument, to restore a balance between male and female energy. She wishes to transmit this female knowledge to women so they may find “the courage to break the cobweb woven by society and women themselves” (Belloni 2004: 16).



