The following are several books that discuss the theoretical aspects of mass dances, from an social, political and artistic point of view. Use them to inform your background knowledge on the subject. Pay attention to the connections between dance and music, choreography, and art. 

Some books are older, and their reproduction using OCR is not perfect. Try to work around the artifacts introduced by the OCR process. The occurence of ______ means that a small part of the text is missing.

=============================\n\n\n



CRITICAL MOVES
Dance Studies in Theory and Politics
Randy Martin

This book was occasioned by my own involvement in a very special encounter of scholars with heterodox training and a shared commitment to dance, convened by Susan L. Foster at the University of California Humani-ties Research Institute (ucHR1) in the first half of 1993. My residency there allowed for intensive interaction with Professor Foster and Professors Mark Franko, Heidi Gilpin, Lena Hammergren, Sally Ness, Peggy Phelan, Nancy Ruyter, Marta Savigliano, and Linda Tomko, as well as frequent guests and other fellows at the institute, especially Jennifer Brody, who provided very helpful insights on what is now Chapter 2. Most of what was to become this book was initially composed in Irvine. Writing, so often crafted by hands playing solitaire, was given a thoroughly collective slant during our seminar, Choreographing History. So much of what moves through these pages can be traced to the participation of the colleagues named above. To the staff and then director of ucHR1, Mark Rose, I extend special thanks for their kind assistance. The wisdom and support of Ken Wissoker and Richard Morrison, who have shepherded the project through Duke University Press, have been invaluable. The meticulous assistance and attention of the Press’s editorial, production, and marketing staff, especially Jean Brady and Anna Haas, and the fine copyediting of Nancy Malone, earned my deep respect and appreciation. I was fortunate to have the opportunity to publish some of this material in venues that offered keen editorial guidance. Portions of what is now in Chapters 1, 2, and 3 have appeared in the journals Social Text (Winter 1993) —a journal for which I am a member of the editorial collective— the Journal of Sport and Social Issues (May 1997), edited by Toby Miller, and the collections Choreegraphing History (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995) and Corporealities: Dancing, Knowledge, Culture, and Power (London: Routledge, 1995), both edited by Susan L. Foster.

I also express my gratitude to Sue Ellen Case, who offered helpful critics of an earlier draft of this book. Jane Desmond was incredibly generous in reading the work in its entirety, not once, but twice. Her comments energized me and opened fresh avenues of insight. Michael E. Brown and George Yudice have been mainstays of intellectual support during the entire period in which this book was written. Pratt Institute has been a congenial place in which to pursue my scholarly and creative interests. Again, I offer my deepest appreciation and admiration to Susan L. Foster, whose enormous creative abilities made these musings on dance and politics possible. My companion at so many stages of life and dance, Ginger Gillespie, keeps the words in perspective and the movement alive. She has lived this book in more ways than one. For those dancers and choreographers whose friendship I cherish and who have allowed me to see so much in dance, I hope that something of what I have learned from them is in evidence in the pages that follow. It is to them that I dedicate this work.

Critical moves. Steps we must take. Movement that informs critical consciousness. Dance lies at the point at which reflection and embodiment meet, at which doing and anticipation are intertwined. Dance is, therefore, the acute moment of its conditions, appearing as if with warning but no prior diagnosis. It has all the intensity of an emergency, yet one that is invariably survived. Dance occurs through forces applied to the body that yields to them, only to generate powers of their own. Dance makes for quick thinking, thinking on one’s feet.

Dance generates a sense of being in the midst of a crisis, a break, a rupture, even a loss and a prospect at the same time; thus while dancing may appear to be a series of stops and starts, for the dancer, next steps are already in motion, already passing from one (im)balance to the next. The commonsense view of crisis is that it arrests movement. Therefore it seems that breaks are total, and ruptures irreparable, as if each moment involves a rethinking of what is to be done. When applied to political life, the idea of crisis suggests a series of unconnected moves, each of which is prompted by a thought and a decision, rather than something continuous in itself and capable of going beyond itself. Applied to dance, crisis is only a metaphor, since no one could deny that the special motion and momentum of dance is inherently progressive, hence creative. Yet we still think of what dancers do as if they are constantly in the crisis they appear to be in.

What is important is to move beyond that metaphor to recover a sense of what motion, progressive movement, dance are, in fact, for the dancer. Taking dance seriously in this way helps us to see beyond the despair of an arrested present to the opening that any present forges for enhancing social life, as activity done together. The sense that the present could be made other than what it is—namely, that movement is possible and unavoidable —is intuitive for those who dance or attend to it fully. But the social significance of this goes beyond what is formally recognized as dance to apply to life itself and therefore to politics—the uncertainties and motions of life in the contemporary world.

If one grants that along with dance, politics cannot have a solitary form or unitary object, if neither can be one thing or about one thing, it becomes possible to notice a proliferation of political activity throughout the social fabric and not simply confined to what are formally considered to be political institutions. Once politics is no longer reserved for events that constitute a sort of big bang that suddenly changes the world (if only one could find the fuse), then it can be recognized as far as the eye can see. Political activity, conceived beyond any given site or type, is viewed here as the contest over what difference difference can make (in the double sense of that which diverges from what is dominant in the present, and the expansive multiplicity of human expression that demands adjudication and decision). In this regard, politics is activity already in motion. It does not await ignition. This introduction examines the interdependence of dance and politics, addressing the abundance of political aspects in dance and the scarcity of prospects in the political discussion. Analyzing social movements and understanding dance's contribution to politics, the author emphasizes the importance of movement in politics and the need for participation in social time and space.


In this introduction, we delve into the abundance of political aspects in dance and the scarcity of prospects in the political discussion. We examine the interdependence of dance and politics, exploring the notion of movement in politics and the importance of participation in social time and space.

This chapter examines the theory of social movements, situating the particular studies that compose the body of the book with respect to the issues they raise for dance and politics. The author addresses their own participation as a dancer and writer in relation to these studies.

The collision and mutual displacement of forces in the social world results in difference, which can be organized and contextualized in myriad ways, producing a given society and structuring its divisions along lines of class, gender, sexuality, race, and much more. Theories of politics are full of ideas, but they have been least successful in articulating how the concrete labor of participation necessary to execute those ideas is gathered through the movement of bodies in social time and space.

Politics goes nowhere without movement. It is not simply an idea, decision, or choice taken at a moment but also a transfigurative process that makes and occupies space. When politics is treated merely as an idea or ideology, it occurs in stillness, awaiting something that will bring people to action or mobilize them. But this presumed gap between a thinking mind and an acting body makes it impossible to understand how people move from a passive to an active state. The presumption of bodies already in motion, what dance takes as its normative condition, could bridge the various splits between mind and body, subject and object, and process and structure that have been so difficult for understandings of social life to negotiate. This is not the first attempt made to bridge these various rifts. The very ability to notice the problem belies a long and fruitful history. More modestly, I want to address a way of thinking that tempts us to judge politics in an abrupt and overly conclusive manner and, paradoxically, places theory outside the very practice it most wants to be part of. The corrective offered here takes the form of a certain approach to writing that is aimed at embodying the sense of being in the midst of what it looks at, hence, writing about dance that seeks to be captured by the movement of performance. For political theory in general (that would not necessarily take dance as its object of analysis), this writing elaborates the dynamics of mobilization that is already implicit in politics. In this respect, thinking about politics has scarcely grasped the language of mobilization. A critical reflection on dance can help promote fluency in the language of mobilization that political theory makes reference to but barely speaks. By mobilization I want to stress not an alien power that is visited on the body, as something that is done to bodies behind their backs, so to speak, but what moving bodies accomplish through movement. Mobilization is situated through dancing so as to indicate the practical dynamic between production and product. Here, production is what dancing assembles as a capacity for movement, and the product is not the aesthetic effect of the dance but the materialized identity accomplished through the performativity of movement. Hence, through mobilization, bodies traverse a given terrain that by traversing, they constitute. Further, by constituting that immediate context for movement, bodies display as their identity the practical effects of dancing. Mobilization foregrounds this process of how bodies are made, how they are assembled, and how demands for space produce a space of identifiable demands through a practical activity. Mobilization incessantly mixes metaphors of time and space because it displays the means through which one is transformed into the other. If movement can be plotted on a grid of space and time, mobilization is what generates the grid. Dance has much to offer this problem of theorizing participation and mobilization, for dance emerges through the mobilization of participation in relation to a choreographic idea. This, at least, is what I take to be a general idea about dance, irrespective of its cultural and historical particularity in terms of style, genre, social location, or relation to other aesthetic forms. Ideas about dance have at times spoken to what the politics of dance might be, but as the inspiration for thinking through politics in general, these dance thoughts have not assumed a place at the tables of political theory. Although "performance" as such has made an appearance as an organizing figure or trope for thinking politics, the more recent currency of the term derives from an act of speech rather than a reflection on those particular practices that especially feature bodies in motion. The spoken word is also embodied, but the presumption of speech act theory that the utterance accounts for the performance does little to clarify how the word is carried to act, what I am calling the “mobilization of participation.” Correlatively, there seems no reason to assume that the process of identifying certain practices as political and focusing on them as objects of study will necessarily generate the concepts that engender those practices with the fullest appreciation of their possibility and plentitude.

The distinction between theory—the effort to grasp something whole in order to reflect on it, as if from the outside—and practice—the experiential engagement with something as if from within the process of doing it—retains some utility only if reflection and experience are not treated as separable acts but as two interconnected moments of the same activity.

“Move,” “movement,” and “mobilization” are doing double duty here. They are words that are being used to name a relation between dance and politics, but that relation must itself be named lest dance appear with a kind of false innocence to wipe away thorny intellectual problems or be mistaken for those problems. Not only must dance be specified as a cultural practice, but both its resources and its limitations as a reference for supplementing the vocabulary of political theory need to be acknowledged as well.

Exploring what dance practices and political theory offer each other in no way collapses the two. What dance can bring to the scene of theoretical critique needs to be established; it cannot presume to be that scene. Dance is best understood as a kind of embodied practice that makes manifest how movement comes to be by momentarily concentrating and elaborating in one place forces drawn from beyond a given performance setting.

The constituent features of any given dance work include technical proclivities and aesthetic sensibilities that elaborate and depend on aspects of physical culture and prevailing ideologies. While dance is neither language nor politics, it is clarified and qualified through these means.

The question, "What is dance?" is not usefully answered by description (as if the categories used to inventory putative dance activities were somehow taken to be empirical rather than conceptual). The efforts to identify dance as purely different or clearly demarcated from any other cultural practice are complicated by the fact that venues, promoters, and practitioners have self-consciously mixed dance with other aesthetic forms, nothing novel in itself but surely disruptive to any firmly established classificatory schemata.

Equally unsatisfying is the elimination of the question altogether by saying that dance is whatever people call dancing, unless, when such statements are made, we ask, "What is being called for?" Definitions of dance, given the field's cultural, historical, and technical diversity, if they are to remain open to these differences, cannot presume either transcendent or immanent criteria. Instead, a concept of dance needs to be formulated some steps removed from any concrete dance practice to avoid excluding particular expressions before adequate reflection on them is possible.

It is insufficient, however, merely to state what dance is not. To delineate a field called "dance" requires a positive construction as well. In what follows, dance is treated as the reflexive mobilization of the body—that is, as a social process that foregrounds the very means through which bodies gather. Through dance, the means and ends of mobilization are joined together and made available to performers and their publics. Dance, so conceived, does not name a fixed expression but a problem, a predicament, that bodies find themselves in the midst of, whose momentary solutions we call dancing. Unlike most political practice, dance, when it is performed and watched, makes available, reflexively, the means through which mobilization is accomplished. In this regard, the relation of dance to political theory cannot usefully be taken as merely analogical or metaphorical. Just as dance has no defining ideal form or aesthetic model, there can be no simple resemblance between dance and social movements. What is social in dance could never substitute or stand in for the politics of other situations. Dancing cannot, by itself, cause change in other social arenas, but clearly connections and mediations can establish a certain legacy for dance beyond the scene of its performance. Nevertheless, what is situated in the world, what people contest in myriad forms, can also be found in dance. More pointedly, dance displays, in the very ways that bodies are placed in motion, traces of the forces of contestation that can be found in society at large.

The study of social change has had a long career in the humanities and social sciences, from certain perspectives, figuring as their central problematic. In the chapters that follow, it will be possible to reflect on the question of mobilization from a variety of literatures and disciplinary orientations. For now, to frame some of the stakes of my argument, I want to focus on the concept as it has developed specifically and explicitly within the historically informed sociological literature on social change through social movements. In increasing recognition that, to paraphrase Marx, people make history, but not under conditions of their own choosing, much writing has extended the emphasis on states, leaders, and formal institutions to common experiences, namely, those shared by people without recourse to offices of power. Social movements result from the organization of these quotidian sentiments which are directed toward transforming patterns of life, altering regulation and law, and generating and reallocating resources for collective benefit.

The growth in research on social movements over the past three decades in this country reflects both their historical elaboration as political formations and the rejection of notions going back to the nineteenth century of the crowd or the collective behavior of commoners as irrational and therefore incapable of generating any socially constructive activity. This earlier social psychological approach, exemplified in Gustave Le Bon's The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind, ascribed irrational behavior to those unruly assemblages of people protesting in the streets who lacked the dignity that property confers on speech through, say, ownership of the press. Instead, the dynamics of social movements were modeled, just like the actions of formal institutions, on assumptions of economic rationality. In The Logic of Collective Action, Mancur Olson argues that participation in social movements is a function of a decision taken by an individual. This decision is based on a cost-benefit analysis of what might be gained by joining the movement in the light of external constraints, such as the power of authority that is being opposed, or other issues that demand protest and attention. The conception of affiliations made in a virtual marketplace of potential actions a person could undertake is effectively equivalent to the economist's understanding of how commodities are selected by consumers. What complicates the market analogy is what Olson calls the "free rider" problem, in which the successes of the social movement are institutionalized and enjoyed by people who did not personally participate in the movement. Because the benefits of a movement are translated into what are called "collective goods" in the form of entitlements, legal protections, tax abatements, and the like, they need not be purchased individually. If this is the case, then the gains that accrue to all who have an interest in social change can be compromised by calculating individuals who realize that they need not pay the costs of participation, especially in terms of personal risk of arrest, loss of income, or strain, to reap the benefits of societal progress.

Inspired by the work of Olson and others, research on social movements began to contend with the gaps left by the earlier theory and, increasingly, to challenge many of its assumptions. The literature on the topic came to be known as resource mobilization theory because it focused on resources located in society rather than on the psychological disposition of participants or social actors. Resources included a variety of necessary inputs that could be obtained and used by participants, such as rights to petition, access to public space and media, finances, and tactics or repertoires of disobedience that were created and recognized in different historical moments. By the 1980s, the vast majority of work published on social movements in the most prominent scholarly journals in sociology and political science identified itself with resource mobilization theory. As the field expanded, emphasis on individual choices in the face of selective incentives shifted to group actors with varying measures of internal solidarity. Resources such as finances and access to the media were appreciated as not equally available to all, and a theory of the state inflected with Marxist analysis complicated the meaning of institutionalizing movement success. From this last perspective, the state embodied class divisions in society more broadly, and thus social movements could contest the contours and material form of the state itself so that oppositional currents could not be assimilated to the formal apparatus of power without effecting it as well.

By the end of the eighties, aided particularly by the influence of feminist theory, issues of subjectivity and racial psychology were reemphasized but now without the prior assumptions of an ideal, universal individual responding to external constraints with an objective calculus of rationality. Instead, the individual actor was relativized in response to collective identities and ideologies. If principal identification was made through collective identification or shared practice, such as the mother-daughter relation, rather than the lone male wage earner, then individual self-interest could no longer be assumed to possess a fixed content or predetermined effect. Further, emphasis on immediate, face-to-face interaction could open up the questions of motivation and involvement thought key to understanding the subjective aspects of participation, which came to be called "micromobilization." ”The consequent reference to local or community-based struggle had the appeal of subverting the model of an individual, universal rational actor and of focusing on the content of what animated people’s process of participation. In epistemological terms, the challenge lay in how to articulate the earlier model of rational choice derived from the natural sciences with the interpretive framework that concentrated on subjective meanings. The willingness to cede this split between subject and object, structure and process, which characterized sociological theorizing in general during the past decade, still left resource mobilization with an untenable gap between micro and macro levels of analysis and consequently between interests imputed to actors generated at the former level and an efficacy to action only discernible at the macro level of social structure, or over the long run. No matter how intimate with actors one became, their social activity was still largely cognitive, disembodied acts spurred on by locally generated common interests. However much the importance of subjectivity to account for mobilization was recognized, it remained an interest, an ideational form that could not account for what kept people in motion, for what maintained or mobilized participation. Even in its most sophisticated forms, resource mobilization theory could not account for what separated the inner life of participation from the outside effects of mobilization.

Typically, then, where the concept of mobilization has appeared in research on social movements, it is already subject to the logic of efficiency in applying available means or resources to ends or interests. Despite recognizing that participants share certain beliefs, these inquiries have scarcely addressed the dynamics of how mobilization occurs. Consequently, the participation generated through the gathering of bodies is undervalued in a theory of politics whose putative means and ends are cognitive, an analytic maneuver that separates a moment of pure thought from its embodiment in and fluency as practice. Further, the question of how people become identified with a particular political movement is reduced to a matter of interest, a notion that assumes that it is possible to know what situation is best for people as if an outcome could be projected that would be free of the very contradictions that posed 10 CRITICAL MOVES the problem of social change to begin with. Interest as an idea remains tied to objectively discernible divisions between costs and benefits that can be derived from one’s position in a given social structure. If interests can be given independent of the efforts to attain them, then analysis will face the disappointment of mobilizations that do not meet its expectations. The fixing of identification in relation to political actions robs history of that which makes it dynamic and renders incomprehensible the present conjuncture as one where interests are discrete and difference is absolute. For if such were the case, we would not be in a conjuncture at all but in an eternal present of decision optimizing without an inkling of the setting in which all these independent, well-reasoned moves became efficient or coherent. What is more grave, we would be confronted with the insufficiency of political mobilizations to meet the standards of interest, of participants doing what is best for themselves, that analysis itself places on what it scrutinizes. This is not to suggest that there can be no evaluative criteria in assessing what generates or results from mobilization or that all mobilizations can be equally preferred.” 

Rather, the responsibility of a self-critical analysis is first to allow what it looks at to be possible, then to notice what allows it to continue, and finally to evaluate what it facilitates and what it limits with respect to the larger project of social change in the service of which the analysis is presumably operating. In other words, the very proliferation of politics that may turn out to be the present moment's greatest resource is minimized when the current situation is understood to be no more than a marketplace of ideas that has overwhelmed its demand. This disjuncture between political ideas and social mobilization, or agency and history, has contributed to a certain sense of stasis on the Left. Indeed, to speak of the Left, as if progressive politics were stable or singular, has already become controversial. Yet despite the problems that inhere in extrapolating from a bipolar model based on the architecture of power in the French Revolution, reports of a crisis in leftist politics have issued from many quarters of the globe. Even if the practical referents for leftist politics are not constant or the conditions of opposition between left and right universal, the model itself persists in many habits of imagining politics. By way of shorthand definition, the Left is taken to be those forces mobilizing against the fixity of what is dominant in the social order and on behalf of what is productive of society as a means for elaborating human association and not simply an expanding universe of exchange. The Right may couch its project as one of freedom, and at the most basic level its mobilizations are no less authentic than those which generate a left, an ambiguity that complicates analysis and makes it possible for the political orientation of persons and movements to change. But the Right's project frequently turns out to entail excluding many from the resources of society so that some can be free to expend those resources.

The literature on social movements reviewed above, with its conceptual divide between interest and action, raises a problem that can be framed more generally in terms of a conception of politics that separates agency and history, two moments of any political activity that are, in practice, irreducibly interconnected. When the split between agency and history becomes a perspective from which the political scene is judged, the movement is taken out of ideas. The ongoing motion of historical change can somehow be placed on hold or be seen as having come to an end. Although many on the Right and a few on the Left would subscribe to this latter position, it remains influential because it is one of the persistent points of reference around which debate is joined and in this way retains its influence.

If, for example, through pronouncement of the collapse of socialism the most comprehensive efforts to date to counter capitalism are seen as coming to naught, then the unambiguity of the past renders the present flatly negative, a blank slate without the means to write on it. The irony here is that these self-limiting notions for social change had been the very ideas against which the Left had historically constituted itself. The Left had always taken as its brief the need to dissent from the claim that those in official positions of power had a hold on what could pass as social reality. It does not seem useful to me at this point to attempt to refute particular pronouncements of crisis, collapse, or ends for progressive politics. For they exist in an arena that forecloses so much other terrain before it can even be imagined. I am more concerned to address an entire climate of thought that could seem appealing in its clarity and resolution to anyone considering the conditions for meaningful social change. No doubt that chilling intellectual climate is grounded in its own conditions: corporate hostility to the social base of labor; state defunding of social programs; moralizing hostility toward those most mistreated by the rush to cultural, political, and economic austerity; and a generalized violence that takes only selective notice of crime. But even so short a list of obstacles to further mobilization grants all force to an external source of power, usually the state, or other formal and official institutions, without generating the means to recognize what those very forces seek to repress, coerce, and contain. One may be moved to wonder: if the newly established order is so successful, then why are the putative victors so manifestly unhappy, so wedded themselves to the mantra of collapse and crisis? Perhaps we need to learn to recognize more acutely what is making the triumphant so anxious, without at the same time denying that they make us anxious as well. We also need to ponder why, so soon after the trumpeting that history is over, the struggle to modernity seemingly complete and resolved, different noises, other rumblings, are again discernible. For such noises to be rendered coherent with respect to what is recognized as politically significant activity, the conception of social movements, and of agency and history more broadly, requires some adjustment. For anyone involved in efforts to change the world, doubts about what will become of struggle or history are ever present not only because the future is uncertain but also because it is difficult to know, in the face of opposition, how to value one’s own activity. It is unhelpful to rehearse yet another postmortem of the Left that rings of self-prophecy because idea and participation, theory and practice, and agency and history are divided from one another in a manner that arrests their development and stops critical movement in its tracks. Rather, I want to see if it is possible to imagine politics from within mobilization, instead of considering power as an external force that seeks to move people. Within this perspective, therefore, mobilization is a means rather than an end. This orientation shifts a key theoretical and political question from how to mobilize people to how to recognize what any given instance of mobilization could produce. Within cultural studies, the intrinsic relation between everyday life and social change has frequently been studied under the purely oppositional rubric of resistance. Resistance is the consequence of refusing the logic, values, and sensibility of the prevailing order or, in Raymond Williams’s term, the “dominant culture.” 'Cultures of resistance, or what were called “subcultures,” turned notions of assimilation and co-optation in the perpetuation of extant power relations on their heads, by reproducing the pleasures of transgression rather than obedience to dominant societal norms.' These studies of resistance, particularly when applied to colonial and imperial subordination, continue to have political and conceptual value. Yet to the extent that resistance assumes the perspective of that which blocks an offensive movement, it already cedes much to the forces of social control. Control rather than change becomes the principal problematic of society. Alternately, theory can seek to grasp the internal dynamics that generate social formations through the ongoing activity of people in motion. From this perspective, mobilization may turn out to provide a more constructive framework than resistance in which to value and evaluate social change. It is necessary to preserve a space where new formations germinate, to avoid assimilation and co-optation of the energies and demands that issue from social movements, to refuse to unsee what difference difference makes in the world. Yet, it must also be remembered that dominance too has much to lose and prepares itself incessantly to resist this possibility. Ultimately, the state takes on the responsibility to marshal forces that resist the societally cre- ative energies of mobilization. In its myriad concrete forms, mobilization is activity that is already offensive.

Dance has been written about in many ways and to many ends. Yet much writing in the twentieth century, following on the modernist conventions of an autonomous aesthetic domain distinct from other aspects of social life, has labored to affirm the distinctness of dance from other artistic and cultural forms. A series of critics sought to establish the artistic legitimacy of modern dance as a bodily practice without the associations with the sublime that the body, especially with reference to sexuality and popular culture, held. For dance writing of this sort, the separation of art and life could be considered strategic, if dance were to achieve recognition in a cultural environment increasingly being partitioned into high and low, avant-garde and kitsch.

With respect to the prospects for the professionalization of dance, from the types of venues available for performances to touring opportunities and salaries for dancers, the stakes of these arguments were not incidental, for critics helped to institutionalize modern dance in the United States. Yet the successes in legitimating certain emergent dance forms (although certainly to the exclusion of many others) frequently came at the expense of bracketing off dance from social life. Particularly during the thirties when dance, like other arts, often regarded itself as a form of political practice as well, formalist criticism sought to insulate dance from political interpretations (not the least, from other critics). Much contemporary dance criticism and scholarship is still inflected with the assumptions of this earlier formation, namely, that looking at dance politically might somehow interfere with its efficacy.

As is by now apparent, I would like to brush against the nap of these assumptions and explore not simply the politics of dance but also what dance has to offer politics. The question of what dance does for politics cannot be answered a priori; its effects need to be specified in any given instance. But, as the inspiration for a critical method, the study of dance can help one appreciate the context for "mobilization" and "agency" —two terms that register what is expansive and creative in the imagination of any political project. In my analysis of dance practices and choreographic works, I hope neither to omit the aesthetic vitality of dance from my writing nor to confuse life on the dance floor with that beyond it. Because politics appears, first, in the context of mobilizing forces within which dance and all other social practices are located and, second, as the particular bodily relations that contest a given space, the multiple effects that form a given instance of dance and politics can be understood as overdetermined. The multiple forces that give rise to mobilization, easily taken for granted in the rush of political activity, are foregrounded in dance. An effective dance study, therefore, would expose both a political specificity and an entire political horizon. Such horizons, with their promise to enlarge the sense of what is possible, generally lost in daily experience to the enormous scale of society, are thereby condensed and made palpable. Hence, mobilization in dance, because it is overdetermined, does not simply reflect the politics outside it but displays as well the activity of participation that is constitutive of the political as a field replete with myriad practices. Although the politics of dance cannot be directly translated or transcribed into other activities, it remains a source for generating concepts that are available to theoretical appropriation, as I sought to indicate in the preceding discussion of mobilization. Yet this sort of theoretical appropriation can always be tempted by the very idealization of dance as a kind of perfect world that would make dance the solution in formal terms to absences in other domains of social practice. This idealization can occur when aesthetics and politics are treated as the mirror of each other (notwithstanding their institutional separation) rather than as the inextricably joined terms of an uneasy relation of form and content, as true for the politics of form as for the forms of politics. While aesthetics and politics can be conceptualized apart from each other, any expression of one—whether in the concert hall or the statehouse—assumes an articulation of the other. All politics possess a form that cannot be reduced to its ideational content any more than material art forms are free of political significance, but both are in need of specification. Hence, dance must be suffused with the politics of all the various domains of society to the point that it cannot be free of any of them. Dance must also be subject to the critiques that have been generated through the range of diverse political practices that struggle with the multiple and uneven effects engendered by the histories of exploitation, racism, sexism, homophobia, and xenophobia. Dance, without losing its relation to the political and critical energies that enter it from without, can also indicate how those energies are mobilized within the confines of a particular setting. If studies can be crafted that present these dance insights cogently, the methodological platform for all political imaginings (including how manifestly different politics could circulate in the same sphere) might be enlarged and enabled. In the five investigations that compose this book, I aim to identify and apply certain methodological insights gleaned from dance studies to political theory. Thus far, I have spoken of dance and political theory at a level of generality that has permitted some clarification of their meaning. I do not presume, however, that conceptions of dance or politics are immune to their own sociohistorical context. While much strain from the global political economy has been placed on the boundaries of nation-states and their internal ability to respond to those strains, they continue to operate as the most powerful frame that shapes political activity. The setting of my own studies within the contemporary United States is not meant to deny the global circuits of dance practice, to neglect the more inclusive frame of world society, or to ignore mobilizations that transgress national borders. Like dance itself, politics must be situated in order to take some responsibility for the scene from whence I speak. In Chapter 1, “Dancing the Dialectic of Agency and History,” I explore the relation of agency and history through a double narration of a performance event, first from the perspective of my own participation in the performance and then from that of the audience as simulated by a video-tape of that same concert. The narrative of performance and the reception that licenses it are used to disclose issues that arise in the attempt to conceptualize the relation of agency, or the execution of an idea, to history, or the mobilization of a critical presence.

The performative idea, materialized in choreographic form, gathers a given public at a particular place and time. Although the choreography takes shape over weeks of rehearsal, it exists in anticipation of an audience that has not yet come to be. The audience is the occasion for the performance but is also transformed into a collective body, having been moved together by means of performance. No sooner does this public make itself audible by applauding the dancers off the stage than it disperses without leaving a trace of itself, other than the impression left from that time enacted together with the dancers.

The written review of the event that appears in the press and even the video of it are limited in their ability to capture by means of representation what made the dance performance possible. These limits to representation of an actualized occurrence are here marshaled as resources to grapple with the complexities of political mobilization, specifically, the problem of what to make of historical phenomena, which, like the audience, very often leave scarcely any traces of their passage.

Further, the separation of agency and history, as two moments of historical process more broadly, offers a corrective to those radical notions of history that seek, almost tautologically, to locate evidence of common people’s experience and, by so doing, to identify the true motor of history. While the absence of people who hold neither wealth nor office and their experience from historical records is not easy to recover, their presence is not as stable or efficacious with respect to what is termed “progress” as accounts of popular culture and history often claim it to be.

My own participation in the performance complicates the question of voice or agency in the discussion of historiography insofar as I am already initiated as a participant in an occurrence of which, after it has passed, I am also the observer. The frame of my own observation and the potential of the performance are both situated historically by examining the legacy of Judson Church, where the event took place, to reflect on that site as a kind of alternative public sphere.

In Chapter 2, “Overreading The Promised Land: Toward a Narrative of Context in Dance,” I explore the relation of agency and history through a double narration of a performance event, first from the perspective of my own participation in the performance and then from that of the audience as simulated by a video-tape of that same concert. The narrative of performance and the reception that licenses it are used to disclose issues that arise in the attempt to conceptualize the relation of agency, or the execution of an idea, to history, or the mobilization of a critical presence.

The performative idea, materialized in choreographic form, gathers a given public at a particular place and time. Although the choreography takes shape over weeks of rehearsal, it exists in anticipation of an audience that has not yet come to be. The audience is the occasion for the performance but is also transformed into a collective body, having been moved together by means of performance. No sooner does this public make itself audible by applauding the dancers off the stage than it disperses without leaving a trace of itself, other than the impression left from that time enacted together with the dancers.

The written review of the event that appears in the press and even the video of it are limited in their ability to capture by means of representation what made the dance performance possible. These limits to representation of an actualized occurrence are here marshaled as resources to grapple with the complexities of political mobilization, specifically, the problem of what to make of historical phenomena, which, like the audience, very often leave scarcely any traces of their passage.

Further, the separation of agency and history, as two moments of historical process more broadly, offers a corrective to those radical notions of history that seek, almost tautologically, to______ This chapter is composed in the same manner as the choreographic structure of the dance piece itself. Both writing and dance are organized into a prologue, four sections, and an audience response. A choreographic prologue, consisting of the cast as slaves arriving on the shores of the stage, corresponds to an initial methodological reflection in the writing. The dance tells a version of Harriet Beecher Stowe's "Uncle Tom's Cabin," and the essay narrates the choreographic work to show how the dance complicates the very process of narrative as such. The dance was first performed at a time when the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) had introduced anti-obscenity pledges into choreography grants. The second act of "Last Supper" comments on various meanings of authority, while the subsequent section of the writing explores the critical reception of Jones's work.

This context for the reception of the dance is further elaborated in the next section of the chapter by tracing the attempts by conservative politics of the eighties to police the boundaries between so-called public morality and private behavior in an effort to politicize the former and depoliticize the latter. The concern to keep social and political ideas separate from matters of aesthetic form is confronted directly in an encounter of profane and sacred staged with Bill T. Jones and a local cleric in the third act. The final act of the dance, called "The Promised Land," offers a certain utopian excess that has room for the ample diversity of bodies that fill the stage.

So this chapter winds down with a reflection inspired by Jones's work of how the overwhelming sense of austerity that characterizes the present might be rebuked to reenvision certain utopian possibilities and concludes, where the audience would make itself heard, with a reflection on the politics of overreading. Throughout the essay, insights from the dance are enlisted to read the present conjuncture for theory and politics. What I claim the piece ultimately makes available is a vision of the social totality and, against an abiding rhetoric of scarcity, a sense of political possibility, termed the "utopia of the real." This expanded imaginary is produced by overreading but does not exhaust further interpretive action.

Part of what makes Jones's work so successful is that it permits politics of labor, race, gender, and sexuality to occupy the same space. Such a shared site of difference suggests a strong version of multiculturalism that genuinely thrives on the diversity it creates. Outside of dance, the scene of multiculturalism is the nation-state, where diversity becomes a political issue against the presumption of a unifying and self-contained national culture that, in practice, seems to be more and more exclusionary of global and domestic populations. While the existence of borders around a given territory grants a juridical definition to a nation-state (assuming that they are recognized by others), what it means to be one of that nation's citizens, to take one's identity from the national culture, does not follow simply or directly from the fact of those boundaries but must be constantly established or imagined. Yet the existence of ideological machinery, such as mass media or political parties, to imagine the nation as a singular community and not the population of strangers it turns out to be, in no way guarantees that those persons will experience themselves as one people. In contrast to the conventional wisdom, national cultures are both internally and externally selective in determining who is considered as the ideal representative of the nation. In practice, any nation-state contains multiple imaginings of its identity, each of which may be based on different principles for organizing society. The nation-state, the contemporary version of the body politic, is often discussed as wishfully unified yet oddly disembodied, with the act of imagining national unity merely a matter of mental reflection. This perspective cannot account for the passions that inflame the nation. In the third chapter, I want to use dance to reflect on how national sensibilities are embodied. Instead of starting with the presumed affinity of citizen-body and nation-state, I examine hip hop culture in music and dance to evaluate what might be different about multicultural circuits of nationalist sentiment. Unlike the discussion of dance as a stage event in the previous two chapters, popular practices are sited but not so clearly bounded in a given space. What makes these forms popular is their circulation through the entire space of the nation (or globe). I treat multicultural bodies as composite, in the sense that their identification as physical presence comes about through mediated and direct participation in popular entertainments. Composite bodies are fundamentally diverse, as they are formed by different cultural processes, rather than simply disparate variants of the same means for imagining and sensing the affiliation of self to community. In its mediated aspect, the composite body assumes national contours, and as such, the means through which this body gains its sensibility at the scale of the nation-state needs to be discussed.

Perhaps the closest thing we have to an official and ongoing broadcast of national identity is the evening news. Although many stories are told, among the most persistent are those of violent crime. Crime stories are significant not only because they aim to evince a desire for unifying order through application of coercive means but also because they tell their story in a way that fortifies a racial divide. That the crimes portrayed, such as homicide, misrepresent what is most commonly an intraracial phenomenon as interracial needs to be related to the imagining of a nation as more threatened and divided by crime than the criminality of an increasingly divided and exclusionary economy. In Chapter 3, “The Composite Body of Dance: Re(w)rapping the Multicultural Nation,” I juxtapose the racialized and criminalized embodiment of nation on the evening news to a form of popular culture that has been accused of being divisively nationalist. My aim is to read the nationalist currents of hip hop against the grain of these accusations to see how aspects of this music and dance form might embody a different principle of association on which not simply a nation but also a society could be founded. Composite bodies are constituted across sites of production and reception. To examine the linkages between those sites, I have selected two instances of hip hop culture. One is a music video of Wicked by rapper Ice Cube that directly responds to broadcast news events and conventions, specifically those of the urban rebellion of spring 1 [sic] 92. The other is a hip hop aerobics class in Orange County, California, a geopolitic initially designed to be free of multicultural difference. Together, they serve as incidents of performance and audience in a thoroughly mediated and unexpectedly differentiated national environment. The music video is analyzed through repeated viewings, and the aerobics class, once again through my own participation.

The ethnographic study of the hip hop aerobics class suggests that dance techniques can orient bodies quite differently to their own (national) desires. That otherwise non-black bodies would be propelling themselves across a racial divide by means of dance technique introduces the possibility that technique does more than tool the body to what is dominant in the social order. Bodies can also be trained—or learn—in a manner that is inconsistent with dominance as such, which assumes investment in the logic and sensibility of exclusion and subordination. The key to subverting domination lies in the antinomies of the participation necessary to be mastered by technique.

At the most basic level, the dance class is impossible without participation, and so too with society. The problem for any society structured in domination is how participation can be managed and appropriated in a way that allows the fact, if not the particular formation, of those structures to persist, for it is never clear how much change a given social order can tolerate and still remain true to itself. In the last instance, the state bears responsibility to maintain physical mastery over its subjects. For this, armed forces are kept. But the state’s monopoly over these legitimate means of coercion generally remains a latent threat to the potential of an unruly citizen body. In daily life, other techniques take up this charge, and whether explicitly or not, techniques such as those found in a dance class are called on to align bodies with state authority.

At the most general level, techniques bring together the practical accomplishment of a given activity with the means to regulate what is considered appropriate to that activity. As such, the fundamental contradiction of all technique is that the very training which allows those who participate to be mastered by discipline also allows them to achieve mastery over technique itself. For mastering a technique develops the fluency in practice that loosens the fixed hold on the body initially commanded by that very technique.

Surely this contradiction does not necessarily translate into a politics that challenges state authority, particularly if the pleasures of accomplishing a given bodily practice are identified with the law of technique — the juridical structuring of opportunity—that assigns credit to the existing state order for what the citizenry accomplishes by dint of its own collective labors. It could be said that by virtue of the law of technique, the United States can be called a free country in that the technical means through which people get things done are seen as guaranteed and released rather than constrained and coerced through the state. Paradoxically, then, although coercive forces are more extensively deployed on behalf of the state throughout social spheres than is typically thought, bodies are also less subordinated than they would appear to be through standard means of political reckoning. The dance class foregrounds this paradox, which is also that of state authority wherever it is instantiated. The teaching of dance technique is a privileged site for examining how mastery of the body that is otherwise latent in society becomes manifest. In Chapter 4, "Between Technique and the State: The University in Dance," I examine the tension between the way a given technique takes hold of the body and the competencies that trained bodies bring to the subversion of authority driven by technical mastery. The institutional setting of the university is taken as a weak link in the state's armory, exposing the machinations of authority that seek to embody the coercive principle of the state in everyday life, particularly in a site thought to be exempt from such forces. As governmental resources shift from constructive social programs to exclusionary instruments of coercion, this line of analysis may become increasingly relevant. Modern dance technique is often cited as a distinctly (North) American form, loaded with certain national aspirations, which have been explicitly stated by dance pioneers such as Martha Graham. It has also been said that modern dance techniques have been posed as universal forms that fuse the impartially scientific with the transcendentally aesthetic to ground a well-rounded citizen-body as a naturally occurring condition.

In the university technique class, what appears at first sight as the mimicry of this singular national body reveals, through the influence of other techniques, a multiplicity of demands that the dancer learns to negotiate and, within limits, to surpass the strictures of technique to display the intrinsic diversity that composes each citizen-body. The university produces not only trained bodies but also trained minds. Dance studies materialize where these two trainings intersect.

The flourishing of investigations that take the body as their object of analysis might logically cede a central place to the theory and practice of dance. However, dance scholarship has only recently begun to incorporate into its own methods of reflection the interdisciplinary theoretical language of cultural studies that has attended to the radical moment of what bodies and minds produce. Writing about dance is now encouraged in this development across disciplinary boundaries by parallel occurrences in the field of dance performance. This phenomenon of cultural production overspilling its boundaries is consonant with my understanding of cultural studies.

In the concluding chapter, I consider a more formal undertaking of certain issues I have raised in this introduction, namely, what a critically informed approach to dance can bring to the emerging field of cultural studies that has itself been closely allied to forms of knowledge generated in the multicultural context beyond (but also through) the academy. I imagine the conceptual conditions and potential alliances for a dance studies that could participate more fully in the development of contemporary cultural theory by foregrounding what dance can offer to the understanding of politics. In Chapter 5, "For Dance Studies," I return to the problematic of mobilization and attempt to articulate the institutional and epistemological emergence of dance studies. Although the roots of university dance programs can be traced to certain feminist impulses in liberal arts education of the 1930s, departments proliferated with the Great Society expansion of the 1960s. Along with the institutionalization of the arts generally that gave rise to the NBA, the formalization of dance study emerged alongside a number of other social movements engaging gender, sexuality, race, and environment that privileged the bodily. As an object of writing, dance has enjoyed attention for centuries. But as a field of study, it did not begin to generate epistemological foundations until the 1980s. Dance studies, however, emerge with the benefit of specifying an already existing theoretical interest in the body, one that is also grounded as a practice and not merely as an object of analysis. As a cultural practice, dance has the potential to offer certain moves out of the entrapping splits between structure and agency, context and text, that have ensnared the humanities and social sciences even as they have come together in cultural studies. The mutual implication of choreographic structuration and of dance process, in which choreography already begins within dance technique and the means to dance already incorporate choreographic invention, suggests insights into what has plagued the theory of mobilization, the unworkable divide between agency and history. These nascent ambitions provide powerful interdisciplinary foundations for the participation of dance studies with other efforts to transform the techniques of self-understanding.


Judson Church, Bill T. Jones, university dance, mrv, and hip hop aerobics: What do these instances of dance have to do with one another, what dance topography do they imagine, and how do they map a political landscape? On the surface, these examples share no conventional aesthetic or stylistic unity or common technical foundation, nor do they issue from any single cultural location. On the contrary, the aesthetic and cultural diffusion that these examples display stands as a certain kind of evidence for the diver-sity of contemporary dance practice. Yet, on closer inspection all manner of mutual influence and relation are discernible. A hip hop mover need not study release technique, as did those in the Judson concert, to understand a downward use of his or her body’s weight that is in counterpoint to the gravitational uplift of ballet (and certainly many ballet classes have incorporated similar kinesthetic insights). Both Bill T. Jones and the dancers in the university class are drawn to the rhythms of popular movement forms. An affinity for the dance identities of others is an undercurrent that connects these four examples and suggests that the standard taxonomies for sorting out different dance forms may overstate the discreteness implied by such dualistic categorizations as modern-postmodern, concert-popular, black-white, gay-straight dance. On the strength of these connections, it is possible to imagine the vitality and range of dance. As points on a map of the dance field, these four instances suggest that no single point exists that all dancing must pass through, no privileged form of dance with which all others must be compared. The manifest distance at which these examples are located culturally and aesthetically suggests that any topography of dance must appreciate the relation between dancing as the reflexive mobilization of the body and physical culture more broadly. 

Dance is a specification of bodies in a given historical conjuncture, and its coherence must be understood not simply in terms of resemblance among different expressions of dance, but also with respect to the resonance between dance and the entire social kinesthetic. Because dance concentrates the social forces that make bodies what they are, it can be drawn on to rethink conventional views of politics as well. As occasions for writerly reflection, each dance example poses different conceptual problems and offers certain resources in relation to the question of mobilization that I have sketched in this chapter. Judson reveals the fragile link between agency and history that social movement theory assumes to be initially unconnected. Jones’s Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land suggests a way of thinking politics in terms of abundance rather than scarcity. Hip hop moves offer a way of imagining the underlying linkages among the manifestly diverse communities that compose the nation. University dance technique exposes how coercion and consent are actively negotiated outside the formal apparatus of the state. Dance studies, as a recent entrant into the field of interdisciplinary ways of knowing, not only galvanizes and disseminates the growing interest in dance but can also offer a fresh theoretical vocabulary that may help move certain clots and blockages in our entire epistemological enterprise. If politics is already in motion, dance studies suggests that so too is the practice of thought.

Ultimately, however, Judson, Bill T. Jones, university dance, and hip hop are but moments in the larger movement of my own dance life. Taken together, they help imagine the current dance terrain; their selection was not preordained but the consequence of my own participation in what led to these essays, an issue that deserves comment. While dance is being foregrounded here analytically, this strategy cannot be detached fully from the place of dance in my own biographical background. Ontogenetically speaking, dance appeared late in my body, relative to the recommended life course of a dancer. After some initial encounter with modern dance classes in 1975 as a college freshman at the University of California, San Diego, my training began in earnest when I transferred to Berkeley a year and a half later. There, I auditioned for a daily class as a way, I told myself, to satisfy my appetite for physical activity. At the end of the audition, there were piles of dancers in different corners of the studio. The perceived lack of men compensated for my own technical deficiencies as a dancer, and at the last moment, I was moved from the “out” pile to the “in” pile. This affirmative action, contrary to claims of reverse discrimination, is altogether too common and continues in all manner of special attentions from teachers and choreographers long after the initial access to dance is granted. Here it occurred in the face of lack with respect to normative expectations of what would make classes, and subsequently the ascendant movement of women in the modern dance world, more “balanced.” Beyond the phallocentrism that dance, like other practices, is also susceptible to, is perhaps a hint that the presence of male bodies can be taken as the site of technical insufficiency, rather than prowess, as assumed by the ideology of a male-centered world. I entered dance by means of a certain access to unearned gender privilege, by which I mean attributions of a value in identity made without reference to the labor performed to generate them. While there are many domains in which this privilege is invoked, it was particularly apparent to me in dance. My prior history of masculinization, including the requisite exposure to sports (albeit the less gender-divided tennis and swimming, with their own associations of privilege), accustomed me to movement but not to the flexibility associated with a technique that was developed from the strengths of a particular woman, in this case, Martha Graham. The relative inflexibility in my pelvic architecture, clearly not shared by all male dancers, nonetheless came to figure for me a definite lack that could be attributed to gender. In this regard, the effacement of my particular male history became part of my training not only at Berkeley but also when I danced during graduate school (in sociology) at Madison, Wisconsin, and subsequently when I moved to New York to study professionally in 1980.

Without pretending to have freed myself through dance from the webs of unearned privilege, my desire to move was animated by appropriating what could be found in the bodies of others. This explicit dependence on and crediting of others at least introduced a measure of interference with the strictures of dominance that called me out and through the pleasures of dancing offered immediate gains by means of a deliberate realignment of bodily identity. It is a great leap to take, but I would hope that the pedagogy of realignment to move through others and against the inflexibility in oneself that dance offers might apply elsewhere as well.

I venture this hope at a time when it is claimed that those who benefit from privilege have no interest in breaking their own affiliations with the dominant order and are thereby rendered indifferent to the violence that order does to themselves and others. The very appeal of the dominant order that is typically taken as operating behind people's backs might be subverted by a movement that is more fully sentient of a realignment of forces that is altogether more appealing than the power relations with which we currently contend.

With the prospect of that movement in mind, I return to the particular studies that follow and want to implicate my dancing self in them. In both the dance performance at Judson Church and the university dance technique class, I was the only male dancer. With respect to the choreographer and dancers in the Judson project, I was among friends. Not only were the gendered relations more fully negotiable than in other settings, but the movement vocabulary was also generated largely through improvisation and without the formalized gender roles of, for example, partnering and lifting that characterize certain dance divisions of labor.

When I began that project, I had no notion of writing about it and reserved for myself no special authority of the observing gaze that is conventional to the male posture in ethnography and art. The same cannot be said for the dance technique class. There, my presence could not be fully separated from that of the other males in the studio, the teachers, and accompanists, who gazed on the bodies of women. Although for the other students I had no formal authority, my writing of them after class, while dependent on them during it, traded on the split between the private role of the participant and public pronouncements of the observer that has been taken to task in feminist critiques of ethnography.

The affinity of whiteness for black culture that informs the discussion of hip hop clearly pertains to my own attraction to the work of Bill T. Jones as well. It is the concern to grasp the political implications of that affinity, and the questions of racial classification more broadly, rather than any special claim to expertise regarding African American cultural practices, that underwrites my efforts at understanding these two particular instances. Obviously the categories race and gender are not identical (nor are they exhaustive of either hip hop or Jones's choreography), but as historical constructs they share features of the process of unearned privilege I have described that makes it possible to live through others without acknowledging and constructively incorporating the debt that is incurred. Today, racialized divisions within society attack the very viability of racial difference. It is with no small degree of urgency that attempts must be made to realign the terms of identification across the violating chasm of race. The problem of speaking for the other, especially from these positions of dominance from which I hail, cannot be underestimated. The ability to appropriate what others produce by means of cultural identity is predicated on a larger cultural economy of unequal exchange and cannot be remedied simply by locating oneself. Even to be self-reflexive about the ability to speak to others can be problematic when that particular voice of self only amplifies a privileged position that we may need less, not more of, at this particular moment. Yet if my experience of dance practice continues to assert itself in these writings, it is precisely in the manner invoked in Chapter i—namely, as a disruptive other to the fixating powers of representation. I cannot dance to write, but reinvoking dancing can help to mobilize a realignment of the complex economy of identification and difference that is never far removed from the economy of things. Drawn to these divergent affiliations, I can be moved to support powers other than those of dominance. The endeavor to learn about my own desire for the disruptive presence of difference may be of some assistance to counter what is dominant in the lives of myself and others. The prospect of such desirable and self-effacing affiliations with others is fundamental to the call for a more generalized climate of participation—what for me makes socialism and democracy of a piece—that animates the present writing. Once we accept that we are already in motion, already at work in an ongoing process of realignment, the resistance—in the name of dominance—to those differences which make for abundance in and of society may lose more and more of its luster to these superior mobilizing forces.

1 Dancing the Dialectic of Agency and History
There are no wings in Judson Church. Stained glass. A marble altar. A gilded organ. These and not the conventional tokens of theater architecture are the markers of a space transformed. In an evening of works shared by two choreographers, dancers in the last piece of the concert await their moment of display in a gallery immediately above the audience. In anticipation of their own performance, they witness now in others what others will soon see of them. They join in the audience response to this just completed spectacle that they are now called on to provide. Dancers descend from this elevated perspective on a narrow staircase and walk along the audience's flank, brushing against the perimeter of that congregated body as if to measure its density. They enter the darkened space that holds a diffuse focus. The markings of "church" at Judson - quite eccentric, no doubt, to the experience of a good part of the crowd - is enough of a departure from the familiar to grant the performers the distance that will privilege their activity as spectacle, despite their entrance on the scene through means of such casual contact. What has accumulated over three months of rehearsals at sites with little resemblance to this one will now dissolve in fourteen minutes of performance.

The transcription from disparate spaces of rehearsal to this one of performance has occurred only once in a run-through of the piece an hour before the concert. This concert is one of a series of single-evening showcases on Monday evenings, when many other theaters are dark, and it is offered without charge to the public. Freed from competing demands of time and purse, a space that appears as if it were just outside the market for spectacle is filled to capacity. There is a certain drama to what will pass through the opening of an opening night performance that must be regathered for subsequent shows. In this case, the expectation of a future must itself be deferred.

Without the presumption that this moment would be repeated on the eve of 30 CRITICAL MOVES some further performances, four of us assume places in the darkness that we take as the illusory origins of something that culminates but did not actually start here. I sit farthest downstage watching, along with the audience behind me, the minimal beginnings of a recurrent gestural phrase, suggestive of but without specific signification. Kim, who sits perched on the edge of the marble altar, appears silently absorbed in these handmade gestures. I share in the audience's gaze on these initially tiny movements, but with a decidedly more instrumental interest.

One of those movements brings me to join in their general articulation and, by so doing, to depart from that gaze whose name is audience which had effectively formatted the performance space and as such facilitated the performance. There is now music to provide an aural frame of reference for the four of us and to allow the visual dependencies among us to abate. The escalating movement, punctuated like so many questions still listening for response, brings me from the floor to my feet. Randa intervenes on my behalf as I begin to fall back again toward the floor. She takes over the weight that had been me freestanding. She flips it, shifts it again, and departs.

Corporal interdependency continues in a duet with Greta composed of a series of embraces that slip away as we grasp for them. Well inside of the piece by now, the movement that has brought me here is all linked through permutations and disruptions of that initial gestural phrase. The physical contact of two yields to the unison of four in the first frontal encounter of performers to audience.

There are no lights angled at the stage at Judson Church that normally would blind performers to those who gaze on them, generating the visual asymmetry on which spectacle depends. On the contrary, the general illumination does little to discriminate between the two parties, and in the moments of movement that open outward, it is possible, albeit only fleetingly, to regard them as they do us. Soon this mutuality of regard will become more explicit.

The unspeakable state of my body as an object of the gaze is broken when I address the audience with a line that I had previously spoken only in rehearsal, without the audience being there: "I suppose you were hoping to get some sort of meaning out of that? Well did you?" These words carried my gaze back to the gazers and inquired as to what their sight had seen. But my momentary fixity could bring me only to gaze without being able to sustain such a visual stance. In movement, the boundary between the volume of the performance space and that of the audience could be effaced. Motion, collected in me as a medium of exchange between the history of rehearsals and the aggregated body of the public, operated across the spaces divided by staging and seating. In sight, I could not match the mass of audience with its detail. Framed in the aggregate, faces lost their claims to portraiture. There was the brown beard against blue plaid sitting in front and, several rows back, the curve of glasses matched in a facial furrow. Such sightings had to be quickly relinquished to preserve my own visuality as something available to the audience and to lend my corporeality to those three to whom I owed an imminent allegiance.

Racing through the performance space in a collision course with audience and lofting myself into verticality, I am caught by three standing in for many more beyond them. In the seamless circulation of weight that is dancing, what was caught is now deposited for the transit of others. These exchanges continue, enlisting dancers to effect the equivalent of localized polar shifts. Whole bodies are remapped along altered axes of arrival and departure. Soft folds for sudden landings are created where there were flat surfaces associated with the boundaries of self-containment. The boundaries have been redrawn so persistently as to inflict a partial meltdown of that familiar da Vinci figure in its orb. For inside that sphere is no longer a renaissance of singularity exposing its genius. The canvas has been torn, and like figures momentarily released from the stillness of representation, we pour through the openings.

There is now little movement that proceeds unmediated through the body of others. Space has become dense and bodies permeable to the point of narrowing the differences between them. It is possible to extend in a direction where no one yet stands and find support by the time of arrival. Such explicit collectivity, dependent as it is on proximity, yields to an expanding distance among the four of us. The suggestion is made through movements echoed peripherally among us of that prior community of proximity, now continuing without touch, implicating not only ourselves in a shared project but also those others on whose gaze we have come to depend for our continued activity.

But the piece ends. All of the motion in the space collects the place we each occupy as we regard those who gaze on us. Only their applause will break that tenuous obligation, and with it, our mutual unities disperse.

The genealogy of audience, as that other unity, is much more difficult to trace than is that of the performers. Like the latter, it is occasioned by and enables the performance, but unlike the dancers, whose specific unity as a company has a prior history, the audience in attendance is constituted only by that particular instance of the dance. Despite the indications that it exists for a specialized purpose, the chapel at Judson Church imposes fewer architectural and theatrical qualifications than many performance spaces do on the process of audience self-constitution. Without a functioning proscenium, the audience itself serves as a physical boundary of the performing space. The illumination of that space, which signals the opening of the dance piece for the audience, finds those in attendance scanning what lies before them — in actuality, looking for the dance. Given the absence of illuminated pools that are typically created in other stages by the canopy of focusable lighting instruments, or other visual aids, such as a curtain (both of which Judson lacks), and the minimal movements that begin this particular piece, it is not unlikely for an active participant of the audience to locate the figure upstage who makes the initial gestures after the dance has already begun. For audience members, then, it is the work of their own gaze that sets the piece in motion. Given too that the space is as wide as it is deep, the distance between dancers with which the piece begins imposes a certain sense that the origin of the dance may be lost. This loss is introduced by the work of the audience itself and takes the form of a suspicion that there may be more activity on the periphery of one’s gaze than at its focal point. Watching the piece entails looking for something to look at. The candidates in this visual field are not limited to the dancers. The carved details and inscriptions of the church may provide as likely a momentary resting place for the gaze as would the attire or attributes of others in the audience. The public is arrayed in a U shape around the performing space and is therefore difficult to avoid catching sight of. This particular seating arrangement resists the disappearance of the collective self in the act of viewing others that is said to be the stock-in-trade of the proscenium stage. The shifting character of the gaze is also activated by the specific inscription of the choreography in this space. Yet the promise of the choreography —to deliver the space whole to an intended viewer —is violated through the very activity of viewing. This occurs not simply because each participant in this process sees it from a different perspective but additionally because the different perspectives are generated by an indeterminate but distinct process of audition, a tryout, so to speak, for the senses. What audience members share is not what they have seen, as if the dance produced a common set of images exposed to a population with diverse propensities toward their reception (the model of mass media), but rather a common predicament of looking for the dance as they view it. This predicament is not inconsistent with the idea of this piece of choreography, as evidenced in the constant shifting of who moves through space and who moves in place in the opening sections of the work, or who moves and who observes or speaks in the latter part of the dance. There are, no doubt, moments of common focus for the audience that the choreographer has designed into the piece, and these make the reflexivity of viewing more immediate. When the muteness of the dancers is broken by the initial verbal address made to the audience, their common attendance to what they have heard breaks their own silence. The creakings of chairs and clearings of throats, the prior noises of the listeners, which usually go unrecognized as solitary acts of self-acknowledgment, are now expressed as a corroborative laughter. The laughter in this case was not a common roar that might have come from the spongy mass of a homogeneous body in attendance. It was instead punctuated through the house, accumulating its aural presence in response to the question I had asked them, without waiting for a reply, as to whether they had gotten any “meaning” out of the dance. Part of what the audience was trying out for was the assertion of its capacity for evaluation. The audience was listening to itself. The other opportunity for audition comes when the public brings the piece to a close. Applause emerges at the audience’s moment of fullest self-recognition. It is certainly occasioned by the dancers’ activity, but it is a response to a question that the audience must by this point have posed to itself: Was that the dance? By initiating this common reflective activity on what has just transpired, the audience imposes a direct physical imperative on the dancers, an authority that until now was reserved for the choreographer. For, when the audience decides that the dance is complete, it gets them to bow and then quite literally applauds the dancers out of the performing space. What the choreographer began --getting dancers to move with something in mind--the audience here continues. But as soon as they have succeeded in assuming their choreographic role, they disband themselves, leaving behind the very authority that their work had assigned to them.

One of this night's audience members was a critic for the New York Times who did invoke that lost authority. Several paragraphs appeared in the Home section of the paper a few days later. That a review appeared at all could not have been expected, especially for a concert of experimental dance that ran for only a single evening. But that it did appear meant that the dance could have an efficacy beyond the concert hall, at least in the minds of those who had not been at the event. Conventionally speaking, the review entered the dance into history by translating it into the representation of a past occurrence that could be interpreted by others. Yet both as a document of the event in which the artistic object was presented and as an instrument for understanding what made the event possible, the review in this rather truncated form is a weak device for historical representation. The review, the most common form of dance writing, is weak as much for how it attempts to describe the object of that performed event as for what it leaves out.

Clearly this problem of representing the artistic object impinges on any writing about art or, for that matter, other historical events whose deeds are invariably more than words. There is always something left out of the attempt to represent in words work executed in a nonverbal medium. Although all art exists within history, it does so, "as it were, twice": first, as an object that gains the status of a discrete and originary appearance, namely, as a creative event; and second, through the history of that object's reception, which while subject to different conventions of interpretation typically treats the object as an authentic instance of its past context rather than as a reflection on how representation of the object bears what, from the perspective of the present, is called history. Reference to the art object can thereby serve to elide the critic's own separation of past and present by means of the critical writing itself. This written representation of the object can then take the place of the object itself as an authentic, albeit mediating, authority. But dance presents special problems of how to move between representation and object, not the least because as a performance, it is an object that dissolves into the temporal medium in which it occurs. In the same event, the performance incorporates the historical appearance of a choreographic idea and the history of reception for a given instance of dancing. The fact that the dancing performance is already represented as history rather than as a problem posed by the historian of how to write about events that leave no traces in the form of archival evidence or material remains, it might be possible to imagine a sort of technological solution to the problem posed by the review, insofar as it serves as a document that writes the object into history. If writing itself is not an adequate device to document performance event-as-object, is there another technique that resolves some of the issues posed for representing dance? For example, better documentation of the dance might have been provided by either of two video cameras that recorded the performance at Judson Church that evening, insofar as they supply an index of the self-dissolution of the dance object during the course of the performance. But this assumes that it is the passage of time per se that constitutes the object of dance, an idea that may turn out to yield as little insight into dance as it does into history, not the least because time would have to be conceived of as an objective measure of some linear movement of the universe that is abstracted from human experience, rather than being produced through the process of living history. Instead of taking a notion of objectified time as the medium within which dancing occurs, dance may help elaborate an understanding of how a sense of time and space is generated through social life. Dancing features as its artistic object the motional dynamics of gathering together physical presence (mobilization), the incessant change of bodies moving in space. This process of mobilizing bodies in space can be simulated in video only by subjecting various shots to an editing process that results in a visual perspective distinct from any single view by an eye in the audience, of the actual dance in performance. Indeed, the more the video pursues the kinesthetic content of dancing through its own visual form, the more it disrupts the appearance of continuity in the standard documentary shot that purportedly places the camera in the seat of the audience. Whereas audio recording might replicate at least the signifiers of a musical performance, video relies on a displacement of an activity that occurs within a three-dimensional space into some virtual equivalent. Videography reinscribes dancing in another medium that, although not a mere reflection of performance, can, by its assimilation of the active looking that editing shots from different angles allows, introduce an awareness of how history is written.

When the video gaze assumes the perspective of audience, it imagines a generalized viewer that is consolidated under its watchful eye as a unity-in-the-name-of-collectivity (it speaks as audience and as event). In this way it does not depart from the claims to authority that make possible any form of representation. Yet, as an artifact of the performance, video may readily conceal the asynchrony and heterogeneity of audience activity. Hence, even the more self-conscious forms of documentation (when dance videography is that) focus on reconstructing an event-as-object rather than on recapping something of the social processes — namely, the very participation of performers and audience — that made that event possible. Dance performance highlights this participation precisely because of its resistance to representation. Yet this resistance can be apprehended only in the course of representation itself—for dance is associated with a variety of representational forms. Properly theorized, however, the limits to representation that dance poses become a resource for writing about all activities that share with performance the passage through the present and, as such, can deepen our grasp of what constitutes history. But any gains realized from dance analysis must specify dance adequately. Without moving too quickly to a set of essentially defining positive traits that make dance seem wholly exceptional from every other practice, it is useful to clarify what dance is by differentiating it relative to representation. In the 1950s and 1960s, semiotics gained currency as a transdisciplinary framework that allowed all forms of cultural representation, irrespective of their particular material form, to be understood as a kind of language, with corresponding regularities of form, structure, and function. By joining in this intellectual movement, a semiotics of dance could indicate what dance shared with other cultural practices and provide a systematic way of speaking and writing about dance. Yet, at the most basic level of its construction, the operation of the sign, dance is unlike language, in which at least a relation of the material image (or signifier and associated concept, or signified) is identifiable if not immutable. At the “zero degree” of dance movement, meaning is indeterminate because movement in practice lacks the discrete equivalents of sound images that words provide. In this respect, it departs from music, which, as Jacques Attali notes in a similar mode of inquiry, can be said to possess a determinate signifier, without an equivalent signified. As he puts it, “the ‘meaning’ of the musical message is expressed in a global fashion, in its operationality, and not in the juxtaposed signification of each sound element.” * Despite stylistic consistencies within dance forms, the association between particular movements and concepts has not been culturally established by any equivalent of a “community of speakers” that would systematically equate a lexicon of dance movement with a more generalized circulation of gestures. All this raises the question of what would constitute a unit of meaning in dance. While in his semiology in Course in General Linguistics Saussure is careful to avoid attributing a signifier with a determinate content, what makes one signifier distinct from another is a function of a process of recognition through difference. Yet where dance idioms such as ballet carry this kind of logophilic similarity, the meaning is still said to lie in the dancing as a whole, which constitutes the “speech act,” not in each gestural movement as if it were a detachable utterance. Even this connection belies a certain cultural and historical specificity as evidenced by recent developments in concert dance (such as contact improvisation), in which the continuity of movement or motion usurps sequences of gestures as the object of the dance. Although dancing relies on any number of structural devices as part of the choreographic craft, even such experienced dance-goers as professional critics do not evidence anything as efficacious as demonstrable codes of interpretation that mark what of the choreography is translated into words, though clearly there are continuities in the critic’s own philosophical disposition toward dance (a question that will be taken up in the next chapter). 

Nor has a secondary literature emerged that has articulated a grammar of dance criticism specific to its object or a more general meditation on this predicament for the representation of dance in writing. The other side of the resistance of the dance object to representation, therefore, has been the challenge (that only recently has begun to be addressed) to generate a theoretical language of its own or a sustained dialogue with theory from other sources. Suffice it to say that the belated entry of dance writing into the domain of theoretical reflection is here taken as a resource rather than a deficiency. For what appears at first glance to be merely muteness, fragility, or silence can be marshaled self-critically to speak of that difficult conjuncture between the irreducibly concrete and its vanishing point that constantly moves in dance. The distance between representation and object has engaged the intellectual energies of those writing on dance as a kind of bricolage where the concrete dance event appears to occasion writerly structure or the conceptual framework of representation. Following Claude Lévi-Strauss, this process of event-into-structure does not display its relation between theory and technique but produces an impression of the totality of relations within a culture. In other fields of inquiry, the question of how to represent the object of analysis has been addressed by a theoretical language that simulates the complexity of what is being discussed, so that the form of writing approximates the form of what it represents. If this idea is applied to the case of dance performance, the audience, when taken as an object of representation, is best understood as a means of participation. Participation, in my usage, assumes the internal perspective of the performance event. As event, audience-as-participation cannot see or observe itself from without but is labor that, through its association and expenditure, enables the event to occur. The audience is not only part of the event's reason for being but also its means of becoming, what momentarily embodies the communicative idea of the performance. The traces of participation, the work an audience does to create a sense of the object as it is presented to them, are nowhere to be found in the standard means of representation and documentation. These traces are absent from the ways in which history is conventionally conceived. Reception of dance, quite evident in the kinds of dancing referred to at the opening of this chapter but also characteristic of Western concert dance more broadly, is realized only in and through the execution of a particular performance event. This particularization is precisely the uneasy conjunction of creation and execution, of a birth that is a death, a consequence of this operation that is known beforehand. The dancers constitute themselves in anticipation of performance. This anticipation bears the anxiety of uncertainty, of something that can be completed only through its communication. The performance is the execution of an idea by dancers whose work proceeds in expectation of an audience that is itself constituted only through performance. The audience has no identity as audience prior to and apart from the performative agency that has occasioned it. As such, the audience is intrinsically "unstable," both in terms of its own presence and in its ability to occasion and then disrupt the very anxiety of performance. The uncertainty, the indeterminacy of performance, is momentarily actualized by the audience and therefore itself disrupted. At the same time, it is the work that the audience does, the participation that it lends to performance to make the latter possible, that is irrecuperable to representation. It is, like the dance activity itself, an untranslatable object. But unlike dancing, toward which writing may express a certain overconfidence in its ability to "capture and chronicle" the event, representation rarely makes an effort to recognize the fundamental participation audience offers to enable performance. Participation springs from this disruptive potential, an indeterminacy of representation internal to the performance.

Put more strongly, the preceding analysis of dance shows that representation generates a misrecognition of what, by virtue of its very relation to performance activity, cannot be represented or is lost to it. If writing and documentation can refer to performance but cannot recuperate the traces of participation found in performance, minimally they can recognize the disruptive effects of the work of participation lost to representation. This is the problem that was hinted at in the writing that opened this chapter, writing that, in effect, stood in for the activities of performance and audience.

My double account of the dance was meant to indicate a disruption of narrative forms, one that in this case depended on a kinesthetic memory of my part in the dance and the other on a video of that performance with visual and aural traces of audience in it, which I viewed six months later. A limitation of my writing, beyond altering typographical format, is that, as writing, the two narratives appeared as a sequence of discrete events, whereas during the performance event, the work of dancers and audience was simultaneous. What a fuller elaboration of these narratives would want to show was that the performance event could be grasped only as a process of exchange through the mutual interruption and displacement of narratives. A single privileged narrative perspective, whether that of the dancers, the audience, the choreographer, or the critic, is not adequate analytically to the complexity of the event.

The conceptual challenges posed by dance based on the particularization of the performer-audience relation suggest a shift in analytic perspective from something I have called "representation" to participation. This reorientation has an import beyond dance writing, one that can contribute to recent debates over the constitution and representation of historical agency. Nietzsche anticipated these debates in his discussions of the ways in which the very representation of history can interfere with living history. He characterized an abusive presence of the past as either "monumental" or "antiquarian," the former referring to the problem of exclusion and the latter referring to immutability.² The monument alludes to those vanished moments of eternal greatness that eliminate from consideration much of what transpired in the past and all of what goes on in the present as capable of providing value in human affairs. Similarly, the antiquary preserves in relics and mementos an unmediated survival of past times as compensation and grounding for a present that bears no ethical substance. Although each approach styles itself differently, as lofty and as humble, both views of the past allow it to be treated as a negative reference for the present, undermining the recognition of the means through which social change is generated — that is, of historical agency. 

Here I want to argue that what at first glance may look like a misconception of history turns out to be something more complex. Conventionally speaking, what is taken to be the past in actuality appears as an idea or force within the present, and yet, paradoxically, past and present are conceived of as absolutely disjoined from each other. Nietzsche’s critique is, after all, occasioned by a concern with what the present has become to those who live it. He is attempting to articulate the experience of modernity as an awareness of the interminable loss of the present that is possible only when what is felt as “just now” (modernus) becomes a central cultural reference. It is the culture of an incessantly passing “now” that allows the past to figure as compensation for the imminent death of what is. Hence the temptation to reify the past—to displace a subjectivity onto the pure exteriority of things (monuments or relics)—to stabilize an ungovernably vanishing present. Nietzsche was committed to confronting the present more directly without the mystification of what was confusing about modern life, which he saw as being swept aside in the exclusive focus of so many other intellectuals on reason as a force of progress.

Like Nietzsche’s work, and seminal as well to the contemporary discussions of history that I will focus on, is the work of Karl Marx, who also opens the horizon for a self-critical awareness of history as crucial to the agency of social change. The historical conditions under which the production of a present could simultaneously appear as its loss were central concerns to Marx in volume 1 of Capital. His analysis of the movement of concrete (the efforts of living people expended in production) to abstract (the now dead consequence of that expenditure referenced in the whole universe of exchangeable objects) labor can also be read as an account of how labor is temporally set in motion. In the most fundamental sense, it is his work that provides the theoretical context for the points I would like to make about agency and history with reference to dance.

As an account of how labor is set in motion, the labor theory of value is also consistent with Marx’s own historical writings. It is in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, the most well known of these writings, that Marx makes the claim that people “make their own history, but they do not make it just as they please.” Taking their cue from this claim, a group of British historians associated with the Communist Party committed themselves to locate the popular forces absented from monumental histories. Contrary to the antiquarian view, the people were, in the accounts of these British historians, invested with a generative capacity for social change that treats the past as always in motion. The “people’s historians,” as they were called, sought to include the everyday life experience and activities of those who had been excluded from the historical record and to render contingent the very authority of those who wield official power so often thought to be fixed in the present. Among the group’s efforts could be counted such seminal works as Eric Hobsbawm’s studies of popular resistance, George Rudé’s reversal of the historic antipathy toward the crowd, and Raphael Samuel’s development of oral history. Edward Palmer Thompson's The Making of the English Working Class is perhaps the most influential in the efforts to treat the relation between historiography and history as a political project that takes as its object “the social constructions of the relation between past and present which intervene in daily life. "But the move toward the people was not without its own problems. Thompson especially expressed great skepticism toward those very conceptual frameworks that sought to problematize the relation of representation to its object. In The Poverty of Theory, Thompson was concerned that the politics of history writing would be lost by the attempt to theorize it. He focused on the work of Louis Althusser, specifically, Althusser’s critique of historicism, or the linear unfolding of history in a uniform temporal field.

Consequently, the historian’s identification and location of “the people” in history was tantamount to an assurance that history was being made to their benefit, a position that risked an essentializing reduction of the subject of history to the object of historical analysis. In the words of Bill Schwarz, “‘History’ is at once both the practice (in the sense of people making history) and the theory of the popular.”

Hence the radical historians traded a fully interventionist intellectual practice for the risks of essentialism and historicism that Nietzsche was alert to in calling for a “critical history.” Yet, Thompson’s polemic with Althusser, in which the latter is accused of blinkering historical consciousness by overly abstract language and refusing to recognize the progressive movement of history, constitutes an impasse for thinking the relation of history and historiography only if we accept the theoretical claims that Thompson makes for his own work.

If, instead, historiography and history can never be fused as something on the order of the representation of a historical idea with the living voice of those who make it, then the work of Thompson and his colleagues may rest on more complex theoretical premises than they have been willing to consider. This is the argument made by Michael E. Brown in his appreciative reading of Thompson’s work against the grain of its own claims.

According to Brown, Thompson’s historiographical practice assumes a theory of representation that, with great conceptual complexity, “makes too much of too little” and, as such, is constructive, an aspect of a project in which past and present must be shown as of the same order of human reality if the future is to be conceived as capable of “production” through the actions of people. It attempts to display the fact that any account of class interactions and political life is “complete” only when it takes account of the possibility of underground activity, inchoate resistance, and the whole panoply of minor events and unregistered acts that must be a feature of any event or outcome if history is to have occurred and to have been part of our own history— if history is to be conceivable as human action such that we too could have acted.

The status of “unregistered acts” is not that they can now be registered but that they offer a perspective on “human action” that effaces the demobilizing divide of past and present. Brown posits history as a feature of all social life and therefore rejects the historicizing separation of a past time of significance from a present that cannot recognize history in itself. The force of the popular consists in an ongoing ability to occasion itself without ever being fixed in the manner of a pure presence like that of the monument or relic that, paradoxically, in its immutability, renders ahistorical the very conception of history. Rather, inclusion of the popular prohibits any simple monumentalization that would make of the hitherto excluded merely the same as what they had been opposed to, as yet another monument to add to the registry, or a kind of rectification of the injustice of historical accounts through addition." The twin problems of essentialism and historicism are thereby averted insofar as the people never becomes a substance with a voice whose very expression is of the order of a forward movement in time (as in the expression “progressive forces”). Against the conventional view that time constitutes the most fundamental historical agency that generates change, it is instead the production of difference through human activity that makes sense of time. Time as it relates to history is not the abstraction that makes human life concrete but an effect of the various densities, aggregations, and mobilizations of human activity.

Brown emphasizes the centrality of difference—here as internal to a historical moment rather than being what separates one moment from another—to the constitution of history and of time per se. His own work notwithstanding, the historiography of the Communist Party (CP) in the United States has only recently begun to apply some of the principles developed by historians of the British CP and to move away from an almost exclusive focus on the leadership, shifts in the party line, and the relation with Moscow, toward the practices of the rank and file in relation to other social movements.

Brown's discussion of these issues once again merits citation: "The contradictory and history-constituting character of the relationship between formal and informal aspects of organization, and its implications for the critical project, can be appreciated in its application to the sociology of organizations or ensembles. The main point is that such unifying formations cannot be understood as merely resolving momentary differences of interest or perception, but must be seen as increasingly complex sites of certain unresolvable tensions responsible for whatever appears to be their identity (of form or project) and course of self-transformation in regard to their historical and histori- cizing situation. The alternative, characteristic of orthodoxy, is to see human ensembles mechanistically and as passing through rather than constituting historical time."

As was the case with the French historians of the Annales school and Fernand Braudel, Brown seeks an articulation of history and sociology, but it is one informed by the theoretical considerations of representation and agency that characterize the so-called new cultural history. Hence the formal and informal aspects of social organization (the structured arrangements of human interactions), like the relation between what is representable and what is "unregistered" in history, encounter each other as an "unresolvable tension" that constitutes historical time. Here, time is the self-production of "ensembles," not a medium through which people can pass. If the ensemble that makes time pass is not of a single piece but an entity internally divided against itself, then perhaps we must reconsider the unity of its object, historical agency.

In sociology, the development that could be said to parallel that of the people's historians was the study of social movements and collective behavior. Alain Touraine, a sociologist of social movements, has found it useful to speak of "historicity," the collective work done by social actors that produces ensembles or, as he puts it, "the production of historical situations by actors." This perspective suggests an internal divide of the sort that Brown speaks of between the actor or agency and history. It distinguishes two moments of any ensemble: the production of voice, idea, or agency and the movement or the capacity to gather that generates historical time, or history. The radical project of relating representation (whether it be called historical, sociographic, or choreographic) to its object assures the ongoing productivity of politics without assuming that the political tendency of a mobilization can be reduced to its identifying source. While any representational act constitutes an object for analysis, it also makes reference to a larger practical field out of which that object is constituted. Representation does not exhaust what it purports to cover, nor does the construction of an object subsume other dimensions of activity that remain unnamed. People make history, but the history they make cannot be evaluated simply by noting the presence of the people. This is the perspective I hope to encourage by privileging that ensemble identified as dance performance, in which the relation of formal and informal, represented and unregistered, is materialized in the tension between performers and audience that enables performance to produce itself as historicity. This analytic attitude toward history simulates a relation of performance and audience in which performance pertains to the execution of an idea implicit in the notion of "agency," and audience suggests a mobilized critical presence intended by radical notions of "history."

This distinction between agency and history points to a conception of history in which historical project, seen as the formation of an identity, and historical possibility, taken to be the capacity for continued mobilization, are dialectically joined. Agency and history, thus conceived, focus on the moment of reception in relation to the object. The full appreciation of the place of reception, of the unstable audience, has the potential to expand an understanding of the political beyond its conventional register in representation, which grants agency an impossible autonomy as an idea disembodied from its material expression and takes participation for granted. As a consequence, quotidian and "great" events are disjoined from each other within any given historical moment, in a manner that minimizes those forces of participation that grant all ideas their reception.

Hence, this is not a problem of scale—of micro versus macro levels of social activity—as it has been posed in the sociological literature. There, much gets made of the difference between face-to-face encounters among small groups and impersonal processes that operate through large numbers of people. It strikes me that in practice as well as in theory, the question of what social dynamics can be attributed to the difference between small and large, micro and macro, local and global, is not simple to resolve, nor, ultimately, are the distinctions themselves easy to maintain. The most intimate interactions are subject to constraints of the global economy or widely circulating formations of pleasure that result from the commingling of the world's peoples. Concomitantly, the exquisite range of diversity from which we draw our differences refers each putatively local instance of human expression to the whole societal field in which it is located. As reviewed in the last chapter, the sociological literature on social movements has the greatest affinity to the work of the people's historians and shares many of the latter's conceptual challenges. Participation must be considered irrespective of the scale of collective action. In sum, joining the politics of history and of performance rests on a specialized application of dance analysis. Dance does display a particular agency, but its place in politics generally cannot be privileged with respect to other practices. It is offered here as a site of analysis whose resistances to representation offer special resources. Briefly stated, dance can be more particularized than performance idioms such as music and theater, whose scores and scripts exist both within and beyond the moment of performance. Dance treats the mobilization of bodies more reflexively than quotidian bodily acts. The efforts to represent dance index their limitations and exclusions more pointedly than other instances of cultural production and reception.

The point is not, therefore, what other political activities dance resembles or is representative of, but how dance analysis develops concepts that can be applied to other spheres of practice. Rather than proposing dance in any form as a model for political activity or prescribing models for political dance, both of which assume a priori responses to what can be only conjuncturally based questions, the specificity of the relations of performance and audience in dance can provide methodological insights for recognizing politics where it would otherwise be invisible.

Two avenues of expansion deserve mention: first, the study of what gives rise to politics but leaves no traces, and second, the identification of the politics of those situations frequently thought to be politically irrelevant. In the context of this analysis, dance should be considered as an analytic frame, not as a particular activity that should be extended or emulated in other social arenas.

Fuller recognition of the moment of reception in dance performance not only brings the issue of participation in historical processes to the fore but also can be applied beyond the narrow confines of a venue such as Judson to reconceptualize the place of audience in a culture of mass communication. Since the 1980s, media theorists have critiqued the view in which culture is mistaken for a market transaction that proscribes the public as passive consumers of images who lack the capacity for critical presence suggested by the term “participation.” In this market view, the image on the screen is only a decision taken that requires no further effort and disappears somewhere in the demand of the audience.

Even in more complex conceptions of media consumption, it is often assumed that representation is the sole optic through which to view the prospects for mobilized publics or the making of history. Conversely, where readers are said to perform, embody, or enact what they receive, the question can at least be raised as to whether reading itself remains an appropriate term from which to generalize processes of cultural production and reception. The performer-audience relation seems closer than that of text and reader to approximating the object of history. As something that passes without a trace, like dance, the historical object lacks the stability of a text. Likewise, the conditions of history’s production imply more participation than does the activity of interpretation or reading. This is not to suggest that dances cannot be read (a strategy for which will be pursued in the next chapter) but that reading must recognize the limits of its own approach to the object of analysis. Methodologically speaking, reading requires a corrective, which the performer-audience relations in dance provide, that recognizes the place of participation if there is to be historical agency. The sense in which participation can be recuperated beyond those settings rests with the possibility of theorizing it as more than simply attendance at an event (even one as manifestly unique as the Judson performance), that is, as struggles over the context and configuration of an alternative public sphere. Without developing these oppositional spaces, the work an audience does in performance may not have a political efficacy beyond merely asserting a capacity as a public to mobilize productive energies. When questions arise as to whether the desire exists for more expansive and ambitious political mobilizations, appreciating the more fundamental social capacity to participate in and as audience serves as a not politically insignificant resource for politics. More concretely, performance, like any other means of gathering a collectivity, cannot exist outside the social regulation of public space that directly or indirectly invokes the state. The history of contemporary political performance, from the Soviet director Vsevolod Emilevich Meyerhold to the Living Theater of the 1960s, is the history of boundaries for participation established as a particular conjuncture of civil society and the state.

The point, however, is that if performance is an agency that occasions participation, it also limits the scope if not the persistence of participation. The agency of performance is distinct from the one that transforms state or civil society as such, but in either case, such an agency elicits a desire for further participation. In this regard, critical writing that takes its inspiration from dance identifies politics where there was thought to be none. This is not to say that we should expect to hear more from the audience at Judson that night; clearly, that would take some other event, tied to a sustained mobilization. But if critical analysis is to understand what keeps any audience coming back for more, if it is to grasp what sustains any mobilization irrespective of its duration, it had better attend closely to the dynamics of performance.

Difference hitherto relegated to some exotic other elsewhere now lies within the account of the object as destabilized and destabilizing. Context here is not what lies beyond the object but what it cannot grasp and in failing to do so what appears as a momentary assertion. The other, grounded in practical terms as the mobilized presence of the unstable audience, provides momentary context to the agency of the object itself, now the writing of spatial inscriptions or dancing. Such a conception of critical writing could be applied to any number of situations from television watchers to soldiers in battle, from movements of capital to those against it. But to develop its terms of analysis, it should logically begin with the highly particularized relations of dance where the participation of audience refuses to be subsumed by the representation of performance.

With these issues in mind, I will return to the particular performance at Judson Church that initiated these reflections and then offer some indication of how it might be placed in its social and historical context. Judson in History

All the dance performances in which I have participated labored under the sign of repetition. The anxiety over whether the dance is possible and the affirmation that the dance is for others, both of which suffuse opening night, are tempered by assurances that the anxiety will return the next evening and that even when the run of performances expires, there is always the prospect of a revival. This urge to repeat that which is lost, the desire for more performances as a movement into the future, is, no doubt, what renders dance an instance of history. Yet this disposition depends on a situation that is exactly its opposite, namely, that the actual condition of appearance for any ensemble is that of a unique instance of mobilization that cannot be repeated. Dance as history can easily be misrecognized exclusively in terms of that which recurs, whether as choreography or the engagement that contracts the dancers to the performance space for a fixed number of shows.

The piece of choreography performed once that November evening of 1991 (and not since) may well have aspired to recurrence. But it took the contractual situation of nonrepeatability as its performative disposition, foregrounding analytically the irrecuperable presence that gives rise to history. Identifying that which cannot be repeated is not the same as asserting some pristine origin for the appearance of an ensemble.

At the Judson performance, the performers emerge through the audience in several respects. Given the architecture of the church, with its gallery above the audience overlooking the performance space that is used as an area for warming up, our dancing is preceded by watching others. We enter the place where our dance is to be by passing through the audience. I sit as an extension of the audience, looking, like many of its members, at a dancer upstage and begin my own performance as a differentiation from within that audience gaze.

While I am a representative of the agency that this public has gathered to see, its gathering is what offers my agency the place and perspective from which it can begin. Once I have taken my initial movements, the piece is no longer simply there for me to see. Music intervenes where what had connected us was only looking. Some concert dances are set to music. Some scores are metered to measure dancing. Although the score was composed especially for this dance, it offered a field, a medium internal to the performance, in which the choreography could occur, rather than an index for the passage of movement.

The music was a mediation of the performance activity that soon usurped that of the gaze. Yet this power of the gaze (an extension of the audience through the performers) that is interrupted by the music reemerges with a certain mutuality in the course of the performance. The dancers address the public verbally and motionally, to see what has occasioned them. The gaze stands in for a kind of first contact between dancers and audience that the dancers took as their own condition of possibility.

Thus, the physical contact among the dancers, through the vehicle of bodies that by touching give rise to further movement, develops in the choreography as a subsequent form of mediation. But, like the gaze, once this touch is established, it can become virtualized in the sense that the dancers remain in touch kinesthetically even when not in contact. This play between actual and virtual touch could be taken as precisely what gets particularized in the space occupied by performers and audience.

For the audience, history is initiated in the self-constituting boundary that fills as its members gather to mark where the space of performance begins. Here, too, the architecture of Judson is more sympathetic to presenting the problem than designing its solution. While the audience takes its place in chairs arranged before it arrives, it is asked by the producer of the series to stack the chairs in racks before leaving, making it complicit in erasing the boundary it had formed. Since some in the audience, like myself in the performance, sit on the floor, it is a boundary defined more by living tissue than a given activity. This labor of collecting itself, distributing its mass, and marking its boundaries is formalized only when the lights go out and on again to illuminate the gaze that seeks its object in performance.

When the audience finds what it seeks, it incorporates the loss of that initial pleasure that comes from the indeterminacy of looking, so that it can now follow the dance. Such active engagement in the face of indeterminacy generates for the audience what could be understood as the idea of the choreography, the dependence of reflexivity on others. Such dependence is now the predicament that the audience finds itself in as it seeks through its gaze what will allow it to perform its object. In this reversal, which is but a moment of the performance event, there is evidence that history as the gathering, critical public reproduces and mobilizes agency.

The glimmers of agency in the audience are also given voice, one gathered from the intermittent throat clearing (to open what had been closed by sight?) and the cascading titters that are more explicitly understood as responses to the situation. This voice does not state what the audience has always been but is educed through audition, as the audience listens to itself. These articulations of agency in the body of history are as unstable as the audience itself.

Ultimately, the gain of agency is the loss of history, for when the audience gets the idea of the piece (the moment of reception), it is moved only to disperse. That what began as a spatial boundary has now become temporalized as the audience departs tempts the reading of the capacity for history as something past, a sacrifice to agency without monument or relic. This is the loss from which “orthodoxy” in historiography takes its cue.

The audience at Judson may have many words for what it saw but is likely to register far fewer for what it did to allow that history made in the past to have been present. In the case of the audience at Judson Church, its inability to speak of its self-constituting activity comes at the expense of its continued mobilization in the larger public arena, and as such, the powers it appropriated during the performance are expended without recognition of their politics by audience, critics, or others. Such politics would be interesting to pursue in the recent conjuncture of anxieties over dance (and other artistic) output that substitute the work of audience with a negative idealization of the public’s capacity for critical reception. Instability of presence has been translated as a kind of moral fragility in need of the protections of censorship in the minds of those willing to talk about contemporary art but unwilling to see it. The invisibility of audience’s participation is misrecognized as an absence, a void into which is projected a fatuous intimacy. The materialization of publicness that performance enables is rendered in terms of an idealized Victorian privacy. Hence, in the recent attacks on performance, public demands for resources are elided with a language of protective (but highly selective) private rights that seek to exclude difference as what is constitutive of the public. Reception gets conceived as a matter of simple transference of the idea of the art object to its audience, rather than a transformative social activity that brings context into performance. In this regard, such terms as “shock,” “indecency,” and “immorality” must be reconsidered as both problems and capacities of reception, rather than properties of the object.

The Judson series was sponsored by another organization called Movement Research that had National Endowment for the Arts funds revoked for its putative foul play (it had published materials on arts and sexuality in a journal it produced that were considered inappropriate to art by the funding agency). It is not surprising that a critically inclined arts organization would turn to Judson Church, which has long figured as an oppositional public sphere that has included involvement with labor and antiwar movements.

Historically, the cultural programming at Judson gave focus to the democratic project implicit in the production and collective appropriation of activity; but it gave equal focus to the context of mediations that inevitably compromised that project and opened the possibility of non-democratic alternatives in art. No artistic movement controls the context that conditions its production, nor can it be assumed to provide a basis for mobilization beyond its particular audience. The democratic project could be sustained only if the critique of representation in regard to dance were to be incorporated into performance itself and if the agency of performance were to be expansively extended to include its public, a public that could then be identified with respect to other sites and activities — namely, the labor that generates any social value, including the sociality and critical capacity of audience.

In this chapter, I have tracked dance activity at Judson Church from the vantage point of a participant and from the perspective of one searching for its traces of participation, its democracy. While these two takes on Judson are different in their ways and objects of writing and even in their historical moment, they share the problem of how to recognize the unrepresentable traces of participation that connect the labor of writing about something with what is being written about. No doubt these differences in perspective are, by now, familiar to those strategizing how to write self-critical history. Yet, whether a historical account offers itself as written from a perspective inside or outside an event, the issue of how to speak of the necessarily unspeakable labor of history remains.

Similarly, the problems raised for writing participation in history by the dance review and for the people's historians in search of their object indicate that the distinction between a history written "from above" and one written "from below" is also analytically insufficient to grasp the internal relations that animate dance performances or history more broadly. If the approaches to writing that inform the dance review are indifferent to the question of participation, those of the people's historians risk resolving the same question prematurely by collapsing the moment of historical idea or voice with the critical public or presence necessary to mobilize agency. The view from on high may refuse to recognize the participation generated by the people in history, but the attempt of historical writing to be the people’s voice is also unsatisfying in its fixity of what, in practice, is always in motion. Ultimately, a revision in historical writing requires more than a shift from one perspective to another—that is, an appreciation of what is unsubstitutable among each of them with respect to the other as they are brought into mutual tension. To the extent that writing can allow the same object or event to admit the “irreducible plurality” of perspective, it will avoid the temptation to overstate its powers of representation in a manner that negates participation.

My concern here has been to expose these issues rather than offering any final resolution of them. In this chapter, therefore, the analysis of Judson has been in the service of encouraging a certain approach to writing dance and history together, and I assume a particular politics, the contours of which I want to indicate here and then pursue in the chapters that follow.

In these more general terms, the analytic gains of critical analysis that incorporates the methodological insights offered by dance, aimed at the relation of agency and history, reveal the bad faith of the colonizing discourse of narrow market rationalities and supposedly noneconomic irrationalities (of race, gender, sexuality). To deny what audience produces in performance is to disavow its capacity to produce its own associations, in favor of an imperative to manage its desires with respect to a world of products run wild. The protection offered trades the unruly orders of difference that constitute society for a representation of harmony that serves as a nefarious performative fiction. But the wonder of fiction is the desire it sustains for another tale to be told. The magic of dance is to deposit this desire with the audience.

If writings on dance acknowledged their own resistance to theory and attempted to theorize that resistance, they would provide precisely the context of self-denial that has been so fruitfully engaged by contemporary critical theories of representation: the denial of history always ends by being and revealing history. Such writing would allow dancing to appear as an agency that familiarizes the strangeness of the commodified world, making that world yet more acceptable as an object of critique by being, as it were, the butt of jokes. Here a critical dance analysis would make its intervention.

The analytic frame that a reflection on performance provides for theorizing history in terms of agency depends both on the distancing of the familiar that makes the problem of representation unavoidable and on the recovery of that unruly familiar otherness for a world that, from the heights of its imperial achievements, will always insist that the incessant disruptiveness of history is merely momentary and exotic.

Bill Dance has trouble staying still, and yet, one convention in writing about dance is to put it in its place. From this perspective, which I term “under-reading,” dance, as a purely aesthetic activity, is partitioned from its social and political context, generating in turn a stable and self-containing divide between what is inside dance and what is external to it. In the preceding two chapters, however, I have argued that dance foregrounds the mobilization of participation that is essential to grasp the dynamics of history, but difficult to notice through the standard means of reckoning with political activity, making dance a key analytic resource to develop a critical understanding of society. 

Here, I would like to use this notion of mobilization to examine the political significance of a single choreographic work, but also to use the internal movement of that work to expand an appreciation of political possibilities in society as a whole. The analytic procedure for enlisting a recognition of the movement in dance to evaluate the political horizons for mobilization in society is what I term "overreading." This approach entails employing dance to read the contours of context as well as reading through and past the dance to overcome what I perceive to be a certain scarcity in the means to imagine the prospects for fundamental social change. Underreading, to the extent that it promotes the isolation of what is, in practice, mutually interdependent, is also a purveyor of scarcity.

Whereas overreading treats the internal movement of dance as an organizing principle in the conceptual ordering of context, when the politics of a dance are approached from an underreading, they are addressed as ever-widening horizons to a work whose putatively stable interior renders it static with respect to that context. The dance performance selected for overreading is the Last Supper at 56 CRITICAL MOVES Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land (November 9, 1990) at the Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM) by the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company, with Jones as artistic director. This evening-length work draws on a range of historical narratives, from slavery to civil rights, Reconstruction to revolution, and through its danced relations, it sets in motion fundamental connections between race, gender, labor, and sexual preference to stage the historical context for the meeting of these political mobilizations.

To heighten what can be learned from this dance, I will use its choreographic structure to inspire the rhetorical structure of the present writing. Before explicating that particular connection, however, I would like to reflect on how dance more generally presents the opportunity to create overreading. Imagine two instances of Western concert dance. In one, a woman from some mysterious, exotic place appears in a man's domain. Her dancing provides his desire. She is pure movement. He, absolute boundary. He pursues her but cannot have her. He must acknowledge complete difference, the loss that returns him to his place. She perishes.

In a second instance, bodies roll endlessly over one another. They rise and fall. Lift and are lifted. Moving forms dissolve into one another. Anatomies appear reconfigured from their pedestrian functionalities as movement is initiated from unexpected sources — the tops of feet, a shoulder, an inner thigh.

Perhaps these two instances could be named. One could be called La Sylphide, and the other, Channel Z. Further, to organize what the names differentiate, the former could be identified as dance narrative, and the latter, non-narrative dance. This would not be the first time that such a distinction was made. But it is one that carries its share of problems. There is apparently a story to be told in the instance of Romantic ballet. It would seem more difficult to plot what happens between the beginning and end of the improvisational performance of the New York-based group of the 1980s Channel Z. But what are the implications of this distinction? Does it suggest that some forms of dance are intelligible and others are not, as Curt Sachs would claim? Or does this imply that dance is fundamentally unmediated by intelligibility, as John Martin would insist? In both cases, we have a pre-structuralist fallacy which assumes that some putatively universal cognitive process, or mind, is but a mirror for a nature that always offers itself to nature in the same way. Yet as Lévi-Strauss and others have made plain, cultural forms of the labor of signification operate in a domain of representation that, as is evident in their very global diversity, cannot be reduced to the world itself. The notion that cultural practices such as dance could be wholly free or independent of cognitive processes is here replaced with the imperative to identify how those processes might operate.

What would happen, however, if we reversed the names and the descriptions? If recent improvisational dance was legible only against the background of what, with respect to Western performance narrative, Catherine Clement has called the “undoing of women” and hence depended on a story of the ethereal female Sylph that gets told in reverse, then certainly the ballet story could be going through someone’s mind during the Channel Z performance. Further, if one were willing to watch and take note, Romantic ballet rests on the kind of defamiliarization of moving bodies from their quotidian habits, associated with the dance form known as “contact improvisation” that Channel Z practices. At this point any facile opposition between what is within narrative and what is not would be troubled, not the least because it would no longer be clear what is inside and what outside the dance.

The very association of dance with narrative—or its absence—is an assertion not simply about how dances are made but also about how they are seen, for narrative assumes the passage, through a given medium, from inscription to reception, that is, from writing to reading. The bodily inscription of choreography no doubt complicates how this communicative passage might take place, particularly given that the body is always a reference within a dance and a reference to what is outside dancing. Even a dance composed of just a body moving is other than a quotidian body, while it cannot escape identification with any body that works for a living.

Similarly, every story told within a dance is legible only in relation to the panoply of tales outside it, and as such, the relation of narrative and nonnarrative aspects are features of both the dance and its context. It is this doubling of the body as referring to itself and something else, operating across dance and its exterior, that makes for the complexity of dancing’s relation to referentiality.

The slippage between narrative and nonnarrative through which dance is inscribed is also suggestive of a certain ambivalence for reading performance that is well appreciated by narrative theorists. As an activity, reading approaches a field of meaning that already exists prior to any given encounter with it, but reading itself is generated only in the course of acting on that field, in a manner that, in Roland Barthes’s phrase, renders the reader “a producer of the text.” Because the reader brings a certain capacity for making sense out of the text to bear on it, the precise interpretive outcome cannot be predicted by the fact of the text, but more profoundly, this very multiplicity of outcomes is what grants each text its specificity. The text is in this sense fundamentally plural. For Barthes, the text has an openness that is a consequence of this encounter between reading and writing which problematizes narrative. Insisting on the plural text, he says: “This necessary assertion is difficult, however, as nothing exists outside the text, there is never a whole of the text (which would by reversion form an internal order, a reconciliation of complementary parts, under the paternal eye of the representative Model): the text must simultaneously be distinguished from its exterior and from its totality. All of which comes down to saying that for the plural text, there cannot be a narrative structure. Against the misconception attributed to Barthes and others that the world is only text, the claim that nothing is outside the text insists that the relation between a text and its world can be produced only through reading, which generates the differentiation of exterior and totality. The stable, a priori boundary that would allow what is within the text (its “internal order”) to mirror or model the world as its representation (its “narrative structure”) is here radically effaced. Hence, the productive practice that yields the plural text also brings what is outside it and what it is part of into view.

Whereas Barthes reads the plural of the text to grasp its “infinite paradigm of difference,” in overreading one aspires to sustain this complexity but reverse its emphasis so as to focus the labor of textual production on the identification of context and social totality. The paradox of overreading is that it cannot directly grasp what it seeks to understand. Rather, it must begin with reading to establish corollaries for the apprehension of historical and societal context, which, Fredric Jameson notes, while not itself narratively constituted, “is inaccessible to us except in textual form.”¹ Here, text and context are both distinguished by their disparate relation to narrative processes (constituted by versus merely accessible through) and are also joined in narrative. What is nonnarrative within the text is the very referentiality of what lies outside it. The efforts to textualize this reference constitute writing and generate the deep affinities between fiction, in the broadest sense of textualizing, and history, as the societally significant, temporally structured effects of human agency, that in turn make context accessible to reading. Paul Ricoeur calls this structural coreference of fiction and history, narrative and temporality, “interweaving.”² The text, therefore, does not reflect context as if it were a passive surface acted on by forces of the real but provides a means to imagine societal order through the fragmentary social referents gathered in the text’s own materiality.

If fiction corresponds to the cultural process by which structures are provided to render meanings legible, and history pertains to the societal forces that move those very processes, then dance may turn out to be a privileged site to attend to their interweaving. For whatever significance dance carries is achieved through self-mobilization, which in turn generates whatever there is to be read of a dance. Recall that it was precisely this mediation of meaning and movement that apparently slipped between (but, more consequential, was what mobilized the interweaving of) my own accounts of the Romantic ballet and improvisational performance mentioned above. Yet dance criticism, as it is traditionally practiced, has not assumed the complexity or ambivalence for reading suggested by narrative theory. For example, Edwin Denby (whose dance criticism for the New York Herald Tribune dates from the 1930s), counsels that “his most interesting task is to describe the nature of the dancing,” while, as performance, its “particular essence . . . has no specific terminology to describe it by.”³ But because this tension between what can and cannot be narrated in dance goes unrecognized by the critic, the labor of reading that allows the critical text to reflect on its own conditions of production also goes unnoticed. The emphasis on a purely descriptive language that cannot account for either its own terminology or the narrative frame within which it operates generates a confusion between the critic's representation of the dance and a document of the dance event, what Michel Foucault called "history, in its traditional form." In reading the dance, the standard critical procedure requires a certain fidelity to the object, trading on what is "elusive" about it for a certain confidence about evaluative judgment. In Denby's words, "An intelligent reader expects the critic—in his role of school teacher—to distinguish between good and bad." The price of this normative critical confidence is to isolate what is internal to dance from its own exterior, thereby purchasing an underreading of dance with respect to its context.

The detachment of text from context, which has tempted dance and other critics, parallels positions in political analysis that place themselves outside the very social situation of which they are part, thus pronouncing an overly confident negative judgment of past or present political possibilities. Like the simplifying normative evaluation of the critic toward dance (that is, "good" or "bad"), political analysis that overspecifies its historical object is dimmed by an inadequate theory of context. As Marx noted for the study of political economy, the forcible separation of what had been joined together produces a crisis for analysis. This crisis has yielded a rhetoric of collapse, the adoption of which ultimately tempts a narration of the end of political possibilities altogether.

Here dance and politics share a relationship that is more than analogical. In the manner of the interweaving of history and fiction of which Ricoeur spoke, Western concert dance has, in the past decade, been subjected to an economic metaphor of boom and bust, and the circumstances under which a political Left could operate have been identified as a narrative that has come to an end. There is, no doubt, a common context that has affected the way in which both dance and politics get (under)read, what I would term the assertion of a rightist idea in the reception of culture. The deepest assumption of this idea rests on conflating the real and its representations with a condition of absolute scarcity. This conceptual regime of scarcity limits, on the one hand, how economic growth and social development are to be coordinated and, on the other, the tolerance of critical self-reflection, or theory, in public discussion.

Symptomatic of this acceptance of scarcity for society and its theorization is the presumed autonomy of the object from its context and hence an autonomy of objects from one another, so that each object must assume the burdens of maintaining its own conditions of production, again, an orientation to analysis encouraged by underreading. The greatest risk that the circulation of this idea of scarcity poses is its assimilation by the Left as its own condition of self-understanding and, at the same time, the misapprehension of this idea as a critical trope for the activity of dancing as such. Hence it is the shared problem of an insufficiently critical self-limitation, of underreading, that urges an alliance between dance and politics in a common analytic strategy, overreading. The impulse for overreading emerges from a conjuncture whose historical originality may be difficult to define, given the way that historical ends and autonomous aesthetics have been twinned in Western thought. But much of current political rhetoric bears, Toward a Narrative of Context in Dance, implicitly or explicitly, a conjunctural language whose criteria are generally expressed in the periodizing terms of the sixties as a high-water mark of left-ist thinking and social possibility and the eighties as the moment of rupture and collapse. Without replicating the problem of origins, one must question and contest the implications of this periodizing gesture for dance and politics. Only by so doing can one counter the narrative of self-limiting scarcity that is said to be constraining art and social life.

The aspiration of overreading, a particular effacement of the stability between interiority and exteriority, is to mobilize the text in the service of context. In this regard, the strength of the very ambivalence manifest in dance toward narrative can serve as a resource to develop both dance and political analysis. The internal movement of dance narrative, what moves the plot, so to speak, rests on the mobilization of what is nonnarrative in dance. What mobilizes a particular dance already draws the context for dancing onto the stage.

As experienced critics such as Denby have noted, this mobilization is elusive or difficult to see partly because what any reader of dance notices are the effects of the mobilization, the describable dance, rather than what Denby calls the “particular essence” of a performance. This latter should not be taken as what is unchanging in performance but, more usefully, as the forces marshaled to accomplish the dancing.

When we place the reading of dance in the service of politics, what is nonnarrative in dance—its conditions of mobilization—is precisely what may be difficult to see in the social context, namely, the horizon of possibilities for politics. The twist here, as Jameson observed, is that this horizon can be read only as a narrative or “prior (re)textualization.” This displacement from what is nonnarrative in dance to the narrative of historical context is one feature of overreading that assumes a commitment to read through and past the dance to the point where it meets its own exterior.

A second feature could, in the spirit of Althusser, be called temporal condensation, that is, the articulation of the differential temporal dimensions of nonreducible but interconnected social structures, from aesthetics to politics, into a “time of times.”* The apparent temporal unity of dance—namely, that any given performance transpires over a given period of time—in practice rests on a compositional assemblage of divergent rhythmic structures. This is the case not only with respect to movement phrases with differentiated meters and sources but more profoundly in regards to the very relation between what dancing bodies 62 CRITICAL MOVES accumulate to produce their motional effects and what they reference in the world.

In dance, the divide between the nonnarrative forces that generate dancing and the narrative consequences of that dancing’s effects is dramatic. Hence, the question of what would both mediate and sustain such radically disparate elements—some principle of totality displayed within the work—is produced by overreading without exhausting what a given dance offers to reception. The exploration, occasioned by overreading, of how dance and politics are joined takes as axiomatic that no simple relation of reflection or expression exists that would unite the two terms and therefore no archetype or model for political dance exists. For the politics in dancing, like anything else, will always need to be specified. Whereas much dance that adheres to its own formal vocabulary might resist such analytic specification, Jones’s Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land (hereafter Last Supper) pushes the ambition for dancing by loading it with politics. It is this encumbrance with the political that renders Last Supper so appropriate for overreading. Beyond being a work of tremendous scale and scope which critically reflects on the history and present condition of racism, sexism, homophobia, and exploitation, the form that politics takes in this piece is particularly germane to the issues that overreading seeks to address. Let me mention four.

First, Last Supper is a form of narrative dance in that it not only makes reference to events but also orders them, starting with slavery and emancipation and proceeding with civil rights and liberation. But African American history is not its only narrative register, nor is what flows within the dancing solely narrative. The work is also replete with dance events whose referentiality is, by contrast, far from explicit, and it is full of dancing that maintains its distance from narrative convention. By neither avoiding narrative nor subsuming choreography to narrative, Last Supper explicitly complicates narrative's relation to non-narrative, on which overreading's production of context rests.

Second, Last Supper provides for this labor of overreading by commenting on its own situation of reception and production, particularly against dance critics' temptations to contain the politics of a given dance and specifically against right-wing assaults on the political resonance of art that culminated in federally administered self-censorship pledges in the year that Jones mounted his piece. By the challenges it makes to those strictures, the dance constitutes an offensive against its own immediate context, therefore enlarging its admitted dependence on its own context.

Third, the interweaving of historical and fictional narratives from the Civil War era (Lincoln's second inaugural address and Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel) and the civil rights era (Martin Luther King's "I have a dream" speech and Amiri Baraka's Dutchman) rehearses narrative displacement for the audience. The effacement of the putative boundary between life and art is both represented in these narrative shifts internal to the piece and accomplished referentially by the way contemporary context is drawn into the dance. This opening of the work to its own exterior undermines any simple process of mimesis that had been attributed to art. Instead, a coupling is promoted between the aesthetic values of the cultural sphere and the institutional effects of the social. It is these two spheres that have been taken by conservative critics to be separate and inviolable when they propose the resegregation of private and public life by the standardization of the former under the authority of the latter.

Finally, if Last Supper imagines a resistance to this mythic resegregation of the private and public, aesthetic and political, it also mobilizes through the dancing of its "promised land" an imaginary terrain in which a social-aesthetic totality is momentarily displayed, one that I term the "utopia of the real." It is on this terrain that overreading seeks a non-reductive joining of politics that have been separated by assuming a context of scarcity that dims the horizon of historical possibility. Expanding the horizon of political possibility requires reading past the conceptual divide between so-called old and new social movements (whose putative process of disarticulation spans from the sixties to the eighties). Hopefully, a Left that had been tempted to narrate its own ends and deny its history can take a dance such as Last Supper as a means of imagining a certain temporal condensation that would recast its own political self-concept. At this level of abstraction, dance, by means of theory, is joined with politics. If theory is to realize the potential for self-understanding that dance offers, overreading must survive beyond its significant debt to this particular choreographic work. Yet precisely because Jones’s Last Supper so strongly takes on context as its own content, it holds out the promise to apply this analytic method to other instances of dance and theoretical form alike. For now, this partnership will serve as the central conceit of the present essay.

The four issues—or, more useful, analytic levels—for overreading just addressed name a certain relation between what structures the dance and what can animate theory. Like a sign, I will take the arbitrary (but significant) division of the dance into four sections and associate these with the rhetorical structure of this essay. But unlike the presumably stable opposition between the material image of the signifier and the intangible signified, here I seek to cross that divide to insist on the materiality of both elements of signification, which I prefer to name “narrative” and “nonnarrative.” In what follows, I first offer an account of the dance; then, a précis of the immediate context for its reception in terms of the conjuncture between the trajectory of Jones’s own career and the tendencies in dance criticism; then, a reflection on the institutional effects between the art and social world that focuses on the National Endowment for the Arts and postmodernism; and finally, an analytic ordering of the social context inspired by overreading Last Supper. This quaternary structure of the essay in turn receives its inspiration from Last Supper’s first act based on retelling Stowe’s Uncle Tom's Cabin; a second act that plays with the issues of authority and its resistance raised by the tale; an encounter of sacred and profane (or aesthetic and social) forces staged between Bill T. Jones and a local cleric; and a finale, titled “The Promised Land,” the danced excess of which belies the scarcities that art and politics were presumed to be suffering from. Indeed, it is that very recognition of excess that moves theory in the direction of overreading, replacing the stable objects of its gaze with a resistant yet irresistible mobilization.

Last Supper begins in the midst of the Civil War. The somber tones of Abraham Lincoln’s second inaugural address precede the visibility of any dance movement: “One eighth of the whole population were colored slaves, not distributed generally over the Union, but localized in the Southern part of it. These slaves constituted a peculiar and powerful interest.” Lincoln goes on to say something omitted in the libretto but enacted through the performance as a danced tension between containment and expansion. “All knew that this interest was, somehow, the cause of the war. To strengthen, perpetuate, and extend this interest was the object for which the insurgents “The stage is bathed in a deep blue light that casts the figures on it in the negative. What emerges from the darkness of this overdetermined past of revolution and apocalypse are dancers in V formation, simulating the prow of a slaver. The darkness of their own history forcibly severed from its root, they stamp out a march in place. They bear long oars that evoke their own movement toward another’s promise of their emancipation. Given that they remain within the “territorial” confines of the performing arena (in this case, the Brooklyn Academy of Music) freedom and the peculiarity of the “powerful interest” will have to be sought and found somewhere within this circumscribed space.

R. Justice Allen, an actor I had initially misrecognized as Jones himself, appears in front of a painted flat of Uncle Tom’s cabin, which has the look of an enlarged, movable theater for marionettes or, more to the point, a minstrel show, complete with curtain and racialized faces that conceal the race of their bearer.’* Here the set serves as a narrative frame for the dancing, connecting Jones’s choreography with Stowe’s story. By reducing the actual area of performance, the set keys the eye to foreground movement in that concentrated space as something virtuosic, against the larger field of scenic space that remains open around the edges of the Bam opera house stage, and it also constructs a kind of human picture book at moments in the choreography when movement is arrested in illustrative friezes. That virtuosity would require such scenic support already indicates a certain distance this piece takes from other strains of dance narration, whose stories are told through the dance virtues of its star-protagonists, and implicates social conventions of scenic perception in what is generally taken to be an intrinsic property of the body.

At the same time, this alternation of the synchronic (frieze) and the diachronic (movement) within the same frame could itself be a metonym for the dilemma of historical representation more broadly. The dilemma itself is, as it were, overrepresented in the very historical content of what is being framed, the textualizing of a foundation for the antinomies of blackness. If my misrecognition of Allen for Jones was attributable to more than my own (in)discrimination or absence of vision, it could be explained by the position Allen assumes as one who interrupts the historical authorial representation of black by white. Here this interruption is choreographic, but the choreography assumes the dimensions of narration, a relation characterized as a symbolic encounter of choreographer and author.

Allen as choreographer and also as narrator introduces the audience to that author, Sage Cowles, the actress who plays Harriet Beecher Stowe. Given that Stowe, the author, appears only in the “Concluding Remarks” of her novel to give account of its message, her presence here is something of a reversal. Her appearance signals both a backward glance through her text, for the epic is greatly compressed here, and an indication that the dance which follows comes after the text. She begins to spin her yarn, but Allen, the choreographic narrator, starts to yawn. His success in quieting the author, textualizing her so that he can resume narration, begins the dancing in earnest. If virtuosity foregrounds the dancing, it also privileges Tom in the narrative. As is here retold, his virtue rests on his standing as a “spiritual leader” who is a “man of principle,” the principle in question being slavery, which, in upholding his end of the Hegelian bargain, forbids him from betraying his master, even as such others as Eliza escape to “freedom." "In Tom's interest, we are asked, "What is there for those who are left behind? Freedom." Because slavery is a system of exchange, Tom circulates among many masters, who, despite their varied dispositions, do not alter his status, until he becomes the property of Simon Legree. This last whips him to death for refusing to whip or betray others. Except for Tom, all the other dancers are masked, leaving their gender, among other identities, concealed but making possible a reassignment of identity on the basis of race. The masks are worn in reverse, on the backs of the dancers' heads. This permits a disorientation of the dancers' bodies onto which are grafted the multiple dance forms from jigs to ballet to gravity-friendly floor movement."

The parade of styles grafted onto a body as so many mastered techniques marks an accomplishment in dance (talent) homologous to the appropriation of a body whose relation of production gets stamped with a falsely singular identity (African), that is, both are, in a certain respect, naturalized. The emergence of modern dance out of the conjuncture between the naturalizing narratives of talent and race as bodily ascriptions/inscriptions is established early enough in Last Supper to become an object of the work's own critical activity.

In his re-presentation of certain sequences, Jones permits the audience to reflect on what catches their eye. For example, in a dance-as-video sequence, Tom is resurrected and the whipping scene is played in reverse, with Legree now peeling the blows off of Tom's body, then in forward motion again, Legree being ultimately forced to confront an endless stream of slaves whose very return demands further repression. Denied the value in exchange, it is now Legree's mastery that is effaced.

It is in this opening scene, with its masked faces, confused genders, citations of multiple dance traditions, and videolike replay, that narrative conventions are most intact and their presumed linear temporality most directly confronted. As Stowe's tale ends, it seems to spawn others less coherent, that together form a narrative of narratives, or epic. One direction of this epic is to pursue the trajectory of slavery into the present, a move already anticipated in recent historiography and struggles against racism.

In subsequent sections, the dance eschews chronology for an abstraction of what might be the persistent presence of the historical, the traces of an authority that will not relinquish its command over the body. With "The Dogs," a men's septet that references and genders the relation of slave catcher and prey, we are treated to the full fleshiness of uncovered flanks with boots and a gas-mask-like facial garb that is suggestive perhaps more of a boar's than a dog's snout. This stomping surfeit of the masculine moves only to the verbal command of two upstage figures. With martial precision these loyal pets are taken through a rigorous but unattached semiosis of gesture until they get their final marching orders and depart the stage. The more they display their affinity for discipline, the more the frailties of sustaining this vision of masculinism are revealed. For it is precisely the exuberant pursuit of command that maintains the flaccidity of the men's buttocks, hinting perhaps that in strength there is weakness, or in dance terms, in movement there is release.

The relation of authority and subjection is further complicated in the next scene, "Eliza on the Ice." "Four women pass the mask of a black female face, first among themselves and then to Sage Cowles, who, still attired as Harriet Beecher Stowe, now assumes the voice of yet another personage, Sojourner Truth. This ventriloquy mirrors that of the suffragette Frances D. Gage to Sojourner herself in recounting the famous speech at the Akron Convention of May 28-29, 1851. Gage was entreated by “timorous and trembling ones” not to let Truth speak due to the presumed havoc it would bring in the representation of the suffrage movement. “Every newspaper in the land will have our cause mixed up with abolition and niggers, and we shall be utterly denounced.” The speech that so effectively “mixed up” race and gender was here being used to accompany a series of solos that pass the word, initially among women and then across gender.

For the first, Cowles incants, “Ain't I a Woman?” while Andrea Woods, a woman whose physiognomy conjures up that of Sojourner Truth's, braids balletic and black vernacular dance movement in a manner evocative of the scene at the cabin. But that legacy seems quickly foreclosed as “the dogs,” newly trained from the prior scene, cross the stage and take her with them, thus delivering the soloist who follows. Next, Cowles pursues Heidi Latsky with a wireless microphone. Latsky recites a text of her own about trust, abuse, and betrayal, allowing the sharp gestures of Cowles's probing pursuit to evince stinging words that then send her spiraling down and across the floor, apparently set in motion by what she says. “I believed my father. My father told me to turn the other cheek.” The microphone effects the prealienation of voice so that when it finally finds Latsky's lips, she is given the word, a moment that also arrests her movement and then, in a condition of autonarration, enables it.

For the solo by Betsy McCracken that follows, that phallic little stub that gave the word is now displaced by an oar from the opening of the piece. Affixed to the dancer's white unitard is a slender chain suggestive of an improbable bondage. The men, constantly intervening as they did from the gallery and pulpit where Truth herself spoke, are momentarily kept in check with the oar. But the leggy men return with their snout masks and jackboots to insinuate a partnership into the final solo that effects the dancer's own motive force as the men pass her among themselves. They appear to serve as her agency, a collective exterior, until the other women enter to save her, not escaping but dancing away the uninvited partners.

Then Stowe returns, twisting Sojourner's “truth” through reversed recitations such as, “?from come Christ did Where. woman a wasn't Christ because men as rights much as have can't women says he, there black in man little that ... woman aI Ain't.” These reversals shatter any simple reflection of identity (Sojourner as truly woman), leaving gender overdetermined by race, precisely the persistence of bondage in the pursuit of desire. The women who have soloed whip their own bodies in a figuration of the curvaceous that has been ascribed to the feminine. As they exit, Gregg Hubbard rises from upstage and, as he does, begins to emulate their movement, while pulling a tube of material down over his buttocks to a point midway down his thigh where it creates that illusion of leg associated with the broadcasting of female sexuality. Shod in high heels, he hops and caresses his breasts and crotch, then follows the path and motion through Sojourner's now deontologized question regarding womanhood." He reverses the orders that had made the men move as men while upholding the “truth” of that final reversed line, “woman aI Ain't.” This concludes the first act. The opening of the second act, “The Prayer,” finds Bill T. Jones in a black suit and white shirt, standing a dozen feet away from his seventy-five-year-old mother, Estella Jones, herself a preacher and gospel singer. She speaks while he remains in silence. “I have a chance to sing for you again tonight, and y/all better sit quiet and listen.” In her melodious prayer, she thanks Jesus and asks that the dancers be given strength. Of the tenth of her twelve children, born into their family of migrant farmworkers and now HIV positive, she asks, “Look down on my son, Lord, I feel that he needs you.” She generates a gospel medley, beginning with “Wade in the Water,” and Jones, at first impassive, is moved. His hand covers his mouth. The inertial residues of the pedestrian appeared contained in one hand that remains in his pocket until this too is freed to the service of Jones's kineticization of his mother's words; treating her phrases as if he were an oscilloscope, he dances in the same plane as she until coming to rest at her side, monitoring her, as it were. Yet in Jones's body, we clearly have an instance of multiple waves that can be set in motion in different directions simultaneously. In a later interview, Jones remarked on the transgressive significance of his mother's agreement to allow him to dance to her prayer. This acceptance was also “a kind of sac- rilege” because such dancing would not be allowed in their church.”! When his mother departs, her evocation of Jesus is transmitted upstage to a frieze of the Last Supper, complete with its long table. A small reproduction of da Vinci's painting, Jones once recounted, had hung in his mother's living room. She apparently did not recognize it as a (great or famous) work of art but rather as a representation of faith.” Allen (in a further suggestion of his placement as Jones's double) faces the (dinner) company, and to the recorded sound of a basketball dribble, shoots an imaginary ball through the frieze image's metaphysical hoop—but the score of a ball softly bounc- ing off into the distance indicates that he missed. Perhaps he, like Estella Jones, faithfully took a shot in the dark and mistook a representation of art for something else. He then joins what he has just faced. The frieze itself breaks up into activities that explore the opposition and effacement of sport and dance, game and play, present and absent authority, suggested by that prior face-off. Dancing is used to block shots or is interrupted with chair games. It accompanies itself as an activity, then is juxtaposed to a dialogue of Lamentations (3:1-29) spoken between Allen and Andre Smith, who had played Tom. The decomposition and recomposition of a work of art whose form and content are considered canonical render problematic the generally implicit authority that frames both art and history. The cast returns to their march formation of the first act and narrates participation in their own civil war as they sing against the “masters” in a version of the “Battle Hymn of the Republic,” “We mean to show Jeff Davis that the Africans can fight.” Now on American soil, the dancers-as- emancipat(ed/ing)-slaves have gained in agency and illumination since that first voyage across the Middle Passage referenced in the dimly lit opening of the dance. They reach a line of chairs downstage that they proceed to reorganize into that familiar musical game, but this time a surplus of places over persons exists. As they scramble and sit, there is an evocation of the earlier question of “those who are left behind,” now not only in life but in death as well. The motifs of gaming slide between more martial authorizations as they move to commands that they parody in the strictness of their execution. They take further what “The Dogs” had only intimated, that the disciplining of the body never seems to exhaust what either discipline or a body can do and that any attempt to manifest the law as action exposes it as a dead letter. In the spaces created between the commands, necessary if they are to maintain their discrete instrumentality, dancers find time to slip into embrace. The embrace is here figured as a moment of volition rather than intrinsically volitional, an instant of freed will that opens up against the impossibility of an authority that could ever fully exhaust what it seeks to command.

In this section, the simpler instructions — numerical, monosyllabic — that had elicited their direct and indirect responses find their way to that most contemporary form of call and response. The company settles back into their “supper” while R. Justice Allen offers an autohistorical rap called "TOWARD A NARRATIVE OF CONTEXT IN DANCE 71" "Somethin ta Think About": "Young, gifted, and black was my identity, but I was blind, no I couldn't see, from Vietnam came dope in body bags, I started hangin' and bangin' and got hooked on skag. . . . I lost regard for life through my forgotten tears, picked up a gun, stick em up cost me fifteen years, hard time is whatyacallit, a ward of the state in a legal slave system full of death and hate." Once in jail, he is now "rocking 'round the world with Bill T. Jones." Such forms of lateral mobility are rarely mentioned in dance, and the movement from street to stage is scarcely done in a way in which art does not suffer for its implication in mimesis. BAM is indeed amid the streets where rap is commonly heard. But that proximity is drawn on in a different manner in the section that follows.

At BAM and all other locations where the piece is performed, a local cleric is invited onstage to recite the story of Job, a biblical test case for faith of a wealthy and "blameless" man. For this performance, the cleric is Michael Perry, who happened to share my workplace, Pratt Institute, some minutes' walk from BAM. Satan ("a Hebrew word meaning 'adversary' or 'accuser' not the devil of New Testament thought"), when asked by God what he thinks of His exemplary follower, suggests that Job's adherence is based on material interest. Rising to the challenge, God permits Satan to strip Job of wealth and inflict "loathsome sores" on him. Job's suffering is the body on which his faith is tested, but it is a dialogic examination in which Job can challenge the principles of the test and in the strength of his intercession achieve the restoration of wealth and faith, body and soul.

This scene opens to the lush strains of "Round Midnight," played live by a saxophone-only sextet led by Julius Hemphill, who has also provided the musical score for the entire evening. That a piece so devoted to the elaboration of difference would find its musical accompaniment in a unity of instrumentation works to suggest the very conditions on which difference rests. That from these horns comes not only the functional differentiation associated with a jazz "combo" but also a musical combination of styles —in this case, from blues to free jazz—is certainly consonant with what Jones's own company can produce in movement equally framed by the incorporation of improvisation. In this instance, however, it is Jones's own dancing that is featured. He is initially flanked by Arthur Aviles and Sean Curran, who effect hieroglyphic shapes and then rip Jones's shirt with a knife as the biblical 72 commandment is handed down. Jones takes on his punishment in dance, but he does so in a way that appears to divide his body against itself. With bare back to the audience, his feet weave rapidly in finely articulated loco-motion. They seem almost weakened and intoxicated by the strength of his back arched in the contortion of pain but displaying in its stolidity the capacities to bear the weight of his sentence. Fluidity below, elegant carving above, he embodies the dualism of the fable while mobilizing the evidence of faithful suffering to the ends of kinetic "sacrilege."

Having used dance once again to transgress the space of the sacred in the act of displaying it, Jones then steps outside dance altogether to engage in a sort of occupational discussion, allowing his dancing to serve as the referent for a foray back into the sacred. His self-emancipation from adherence to the principle that had just governed him draws the problematic of slavery into yet another setting. After dancing, Jones sits down with the Father at the table of the last supper and engages the priest in a reflection on evil and anger.

The good Father answers in the negative when queried as to the evilness of homosexuality, a response suddenly secularized in light of Perry's own referentiality in this context where one's presence is meant to represent another. But he could be speaking equally about the demands of representation when in analogy between dancing and preaching he says, "We are all inadequate . . . there is no way that either you or I in either of our forms can catch the fullness." This most explicit articulation of the relation between the theological and the secular, a historical materialism, as Cornel West would argue, that is particularly constitutive of the African American experience, is twinned throughout the piece.

The former is joined with the latter precisely in the desire (what Perry calls faith) that in Lacanian formulation emerges in the difference between the demands of authority (the impossible fullness) and the drive that makes activity itself possible. For the final act, the cast is enlarged by the addition of forty-five dancers, drawn from whatever community the piece is performed in (fifteen cities in the United States alone)."° This mass, not commonly associated with North American modern dance since the large group works of the thirties, displaces the intimacy of a group of dancers who in the last two hours have begun to impart a certain familiarity. The larger group undermines the feeling of scarcity wrought by aps, defunding, and ideological attack that had descended on the dance world by the mid-1980s and instantly assumes the role of a raucous cheering public brought directly onstage in an effacement of the conventions of dance-viewing etiquette. They also, in effect, occupy the space outside the frame of the initial set for "Uncle Tom's Cabin," constituting a sort of human landscape for that promised land into which those first dehumanized characterizations had sought to escape. This public, however, is available for a display of mobilization in a manner unavailable to the paying audience. They are less a chorus offering commentary than a body that collects the desire for dancing. They are mobilized as witnesses, moving props that ultimately become the excess of movement from which dance itself springs. They hold large, flat, painted masks resembling African deities, covering their heads and chests. Jones sees the masks as tokens of memory, a testament to where they have been. The question is, were they ever there? When one looks at it as a contemporary person, white or black, the memorabilia shouts, "This is a lie." As props, the expanded cast forces contemporaries to look at the memorabilia and see the lie of representation within it.

The dancers shed the masks, resembling African icons, linking them to the physical memorabilia and allowing them to serve as an object lesson. Initially, the choreographic device of masking relies on a hierarchy of dancers and corps, retaining the frame-implicated set of the first act, now as a virtual space.

By the end of the piece, the division of dancers will yield to shared conditions for the recognition of their difference. The final act begins with an alluded opposition of sacred and profane, with positions situated within the black community and words from Martin Luther King and Amiri Baraka. Baraka's words retain their original form, while King's final words from his "I Have a Dream" speech are reordered, suggesting their historical profanation.

The section contains some of the most spirited individual dancing in the piece, with Sean Curran striking a barefoot tap that appears to send sparks flying through his head and upper torso, while his companions file somberly by. Arthur Aviles spirals his way around Lawrence Goldhubber, a man considerably larger than any other in the company. Repetition plays with the movement of time internal to the piece, creating the sense of recurrence as an effect of memory. The referents of the historical past are localized in the work, and the selectiveness of what recurs is given the full weight of a discovery without the apparatus to privilege what is now revealed. Upon Aviles’ return to the aforementioned duet only moments after it first happened, his naked body is offered for revelation. Jones himself remarks, “Whom I choose to show naked first sets up the pariah syndrome.” It becomes apparent that this particular state of difference has less effect on his ability to move than on our condition of watching him. But then there is some recapitulation of whippings from the first act (while the crowd chants “dream a have I”) and a series of falls from the supper table into the arms of the clothed mass. In this singular nakedness, some sacrifice seems to be afoot. There is, as well, the implied sacrifice of race to sexuality—as if these identifications could be subtracted from each other—in the final seduction scene of Amiri Baraka's Dutchman (1964). It is staged here with Sage Cowles, the woman who had played Harriet Beecher Stowe, on the table of the Last Supper. Yet the apparent exclusivity of identities is established only to be undermined through the operation of the dance piece.

In Baraka's play, set in a subway car, a young, well-dressed black man, "Clay," is at first amused by the sexual taunts of "Lula," an older white woman, until she brands him an Uncle Tom. Her reverie makes explicit that it depends on an appropriation of a blackness Lula seeks in Clay. He is incited to warn her of what may be appropriated from her people, who had never imagined their black objects, what Baraka calls "all these fantasy people, all these blues people," capable of such activity, including murder. "Don't make the mistake, through some irresponsible surge of Christian charity, of talking too much about the advantages of Western rationalism, or the great intellectual legacy of the white man, or maybe they'll begin to listen. They'll murder you, and have very rational explanations. Very much like your own. They'll cut your throats, and drag you out to the edge of your cities so the flesh can fall away from your bones, in sanitary isolation." But it is Clay who is murdered instead by Lula with the complicity of the public that has amassed around them.

Now this public in question is composed of the enlarged cast, who begin to carry on their own kinetic business in various states of undress, seemingly indifferent to the textualizing in their midst. But their indifference leaves the other public in something of a bind over where to place their attention, given that the progressive nudity downstage has the potential to upstage the tragic act. The audience is being asked to make a visual decision that rests on Jones's division of stage and identities, one that could be consequential for commitments beyond the theater.

After Clay's body is removed, the stage is reunified in the development of undress that is sustained over the final thirty minutes of the piece. Indifference alternates with involvement. There are exchanges of kisses and embrace and selective rejection but without any immediate principle. Sage Cowles and her husband, John, give "go" commands to the throng who run through one another in a realization of the worst fears of those with an antipathy to crowds. In the density of lifts and tricks that this circulating economy of dancers makes possible, there is over time a loss of the ability of movement in its individual instances to serve as a punctuation for experience by producing in the audience that transcendental gasp, the "ah." There are enough dancers so that one mass can constantly replace another in the stage space. The audience becomes accustomed to the exceptionality of risky movement and the evanescence of human surplus. These dancers taunt those who fear losing art to the popular, familiar neoconservative complaint, as they efface the intentionality of choreographic form with shapeless mass and emit raucous whoops and heys in a simulation of a sporting event that conflates players and spectators. This is a kind of wilding without victims. It celebrates the survivability of the transgressive.

Toward the very end of the piece, bodily difference is most exposed, and the nudity that had earlier marked the deficient pariah for sacrifice has now become an available surplus. Unison increasingly serves as a mobilizing principle. Hand slaps on the floor are propelled by a series of rolls, which distribute to another part of the body the marching to bondage through freedom that had opened the work when the cast first sails from Africa. The slaps soon yield to spinning waves of bodies that disperse themselves through one another. This formation itself breaks down as the dancers file through one another.

Exuberance alternates with a rhapsodic calm sermon that finds the performers in various associations until they are all in the same condition of gentle exposure passing by one another, stepping back so that others may be foregrounded, and singing a few hymnal tones, until they face the audience in stillness. By now they have made the strange familiar and have normalized what might once have been claimed to be so threatening, for in 1990, the piece was performed in the midst of state-administered antiobscenity pledges.

The refamiliarization of the body in its manifest difference displayed on the BAM stage here encountered that conjuncture which had sought to render all its various productions intolerably strange. In the very sweep of this epic, recognition of the shared grounds for identity are joined with several streams of a narrative of emancipation. The freeing of the slaves to choreographer-employer Jones's slavery of a different sort that occurs between the first and third act finds its reversal by the finale in a liberation from the labors (of dancing) altogether.

The "we" who are "last at free," which remains strongly identified with African American history, retains a certain ambiguity of identification at a different level in the light of the work's epistemology of labor. Coterminous with this emancipation from labor, the cast in its fullness presents a socialization of nudity, slipping out of costume, mask, characterization, and role as an escape from narrative altogether. In practice, they offer a resistance to all the devices employed over the course of the evening to singularize dancers' identities or divide the cast against itself, whether visually or functionally.

There is no speculation about what this promised land would look like; clearly any attempt to do so would reinscribe the piece in some further narrative. Rather, the ending suggests a dialectic between narrative and its other as what is constitutive of the historicity shared by dance and disparate social activities. The rhetorical strategy of shifting among narrative ploys to suggest the possibility for an internal movement could be seen as the terrain promised in Marx's unfulfilled account of capital. On the other hand, it could be argued that Jones does present a particular vision of what lies beyond history (which for Marx meant within history, given that everything up to this point had only been prehistory). Jones’s comment in one interview about wanting to “elevate the struggle” so “that out of the fighting we will triumph, that something great and beautiful will come out of it,” is consonant with Last Supper's own historical narrative which evokes that particularly class-bound sixties utopian form, the commune, onstage as the beginning of the beyond of the present. Even with the association of nudity with the primitive (whether taken to mean uncivilized or communally self-sufficient), such references in contemporary political discourse have often become a code word for the very unruliness of opposition produced by the sixties.

At the time of this performance, the initiative of cultural representation could be said to have passed into the hands of the enemies of what the sixties might have produced. At least saying so made it possible for the Right to picture the Left as a force of reaction to those imagined to be politically unaffiliated. In this complex conjuncture, Last Supper was an instance of what the Right feared most: a good (and therefore politically ungovernable) example.

Because of the magnitude of the piece, symptomatic of a certain economy for dance, different sections were commissioned separately. Acts 1 and 2 were cosponsored by the University of California at Los Angeles and the University of California at Berkeley. The final section was developed at the University of Minnesota at Minneapolis, which forbade students to dance without clothes. The uneasiness of presenters was met by special sessions of the Association of Performing Arts Presenters. The president of this organization, Jackie Davis, referred to the piece in testimony before Congress about the NEA’s social impact: “Ironically, The Last Supper, so susceptible to criticism from NEA bashers, came to epitomize the positive social influence of the Arts Endowment before Congress.”

Perhaps the more interesting question would be what makes this type of theory of historical stages (which has now been revised to suggest that history necessitates difference) rest so easily on the art of the stage. It may turn out, on the contrary, that a stage theory of history could be merely a theatrical one and that periodization itself could be only an organizational division within a scheme of representation, like the acts of this dance. And yet, at the same time, the piece has no doubt assimilated something of a larger historical sensibility, which it has applied to narrative, although the movement of this narrative proceeds in dance terms through the continual effacement of each instance of authorization (from the displacement of Harriet Beecher Stowe to initiate choreographic authority, to the lusty pursuit of command that disappoints controlling powers) that gives rise to narration.

This relentless eclipsing of narrator and narration could lead us only to hypotheses about the conjuncture in which a piece such as Last Supper becomes possible, appreciating all the while the indeterminacy “in the last instance” between the moment of art and that of the world. To contour such a conjuncture entails figuring the choreography's own internal breaches and transgressions with those crossings of the line(s) — economic, political, and cultural (what gets articulated more concretely in terms of race, class, gender, and sexuality) — that have provoked such anxiety in the world. In the final section of this essay, I will address the social context for this anxiety more directly as one in which the Right has sought to privatize and depoliticize all manner of social and cultural activities that, like Jones's work, have crossed the line into the public domain. Critique/Receipt

Hopefully, enough has been said of the work of Bill T. Jones and his company to suggest that dance practice can still boom in the nineties. Yet it should also be apparent that Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land operated actively against the ideology of a decline in dance and of the political imaginary by the manner in which a plethora of dancing and of politics was set into play within the same work, thereby narrating a more expansive view of what both could be. For, contrary to the impulses of standard dance criticism, overreading assumes that what is critical in art is displayed most forcefully when it can reflect on its own exterior — which is what links the institutional materiality of art to that of society generally. It strikes me that the practice of (dance and cultural) theory has been deprived of an adequate appreciation of its own context.

The play with the authority of representation in the composition and decomposition of the frieze image of the Last Supper in the second act evokes certain features of the critical reception for choreographic work more generally, while calling some of the assumptions of criticism into question. Inspired by Jones's work, I would like to rehearse a revision of how this context for reception is conceived of, beginning with a reconsideration of dance criticism as framing the immediate context for dance's reception. That dance theory and practice could appear disjoined at all is perhaps symptomatic of the manner in which dance is most commonly represented through the conventions of criticism. Criticism, if not subject to overreading, can elide the intrinsic relation of dance and context by assuming the autonomy of the former from the latter, thereby effecting a politics of containment. Criticism is an authority that can police the boundary between the aesthetic and the political economy of art, often coded as the divide between art and life.

For while critics may claim an impartial distance from what they view and despite any disavowals to the contrary, their words can be instrumental in the choreographer's access to grants, performance venues, and touring opportunities. Hence, it is precisely at the point at which the relations between art and life are most actively denied that their stakes for the choreographer may be highest. At one level, the play with authority, the effacement of command — barely legible in the men's septet "The Dogs"; more insistent in the game of musical chairs, references to sport, and playing with rules in the second act; and culminating in the final collective undress — speaks to the contemporary patrons of the arts whose authority is not supposed to make its presence felt on stage.

Besides criticism, the NEA is especially significant as an absent or implicit authority when it serves as the institutional link between the patron of the old — the state — and the new — the market. What was tacit in these relations of authority was made explicit with government sanction of the agency under the 1989 law introduced by Senator Jesse Helms (Republican, North Carolina). His rider prohibited use of federal monies to "promote, disseminate or produce obscene or indecent materials, including but not limited to depictions of sadomasochism, homoeroticism, the exploitation of children, or individuals engaged in sexual acts; or material which denigrates the objects or beliefs of the adherents of a particular religion or nonreligion." Jones, at one point, made a decision to embody his resistance to the climate in the dance rather than signaling it in the originally selected title for the last act "52 Handsome Nudes" (after a deck of cards owned by dancer Aviles). Reflecting on the previous title for what became "The Promised Land," he remarked: "But then sponsors began to get nervous. It was early 1989 and the beginning of the Helms thing. We didn't want any censorship before we got there." On the other hand, presumably the choreography itself was the anticipation of such censorship in the midst of reception. By loading the dance with what censors had already defined as the source of their anxiety, Jones assimilated their response and incorporated a self-awareness of their very effort to limit the efficacy of the piece. Rather than suggesting any conspiracy with respect to this particular dance (one that received generally favorable reviews nationwide), I first want to look at instances of critics' response to politics in dance generally and then turn to some of the press given Last Supper in order to grasp how the trope of containment operates in the representation of dance to banish politics from art.

In a review meant to acknowledge the overwhelming presence of "content" in contemporary dance output, the byline read "Political Dogma Fades. Social Awareness Remains." Jack Anderson of the New York Times continues: "Choreographic urgency is admirable, but passion needs to be tempered with caution. Dancers should avoid confusing mere vehemence with communicating something clearly. The worst political artworks present such oversimplified images of good and evil that, even though they are inspired by real problems, they appear to exist in a fantasy world of slogans." Another article written in the same spirit of surveying the dance terrain—an unusual exercise for these writers whose more common focus on a single evening's performance seems to limit reflection on the context for dance making to such occasional Sunday columns—was written a month before by Jennifer Dunning. She lauds the work of emerging African American choreographer Janine Williams as "a miracle of taste, guts, and inspiration, despite moments when it seemed threatened by needless political baggage. On the subject of such baggage, a moratorium might be called on pieces dealing with growing up gay—eloquent though some of them may be. And drag has become a drag."

It might be possible to agree with these critics about what constitutes bad political art and to note the particular difficulties dance encounters when it seeks to narrate politics. But these formulations seem to suggest something different: that it is the presence of politics itself that is excessive in dance, a surplus generated elsewhere and somehow uneasily grafted onto the otherwise autonomous aesthetic. That critics of the New York Times adhere to the sensibilities of modernism, with its sanctity of muteness, is surely no discovery. That they should see it necessary to descend from their self-anointed heights of objectivity to give dancers advice and warnings suggests that this very sensibility has now encountered something different. Precisely because it is so difficult to imagine Dunning complaining that she has seen too much heterosexual romance in a season, her comments seem to assume the possibility that dance might return to some normative point of reference from which it had only recently strayed. The type of implied nostalgia can be associated with what Hal Foster referred to as a “postmodernism of reaction,” one that repudiates the conventions of modernism only to uphold the status quo. “This repudiation, voiced most shrilly perhaps by neoconservatives but echoed everywhere, is strategic: as Habermas cogently argues, the neoconservatives sever the cultural from the social, then blame the practices of the one (modernism) for the ills of the other (modernization).” Even among these two dance critics, the nostalgia for better aesthetic and social days can take different inflections. Dunning concludes, “Let there be the kind of hope with which dance seemed to be oversupplied not so many seasons ago.” She refers to recession and arps as the thieves of that hope. But one must wonder whether such communities as that of the New York dance scene, which have suffered the devastation of arps, have been politicized by the fact that people are dying or whether the response has come because those who died were being held to be responsible for their own deaths. All this, while money allocated to the machinery of death ($500 billion to prosecute the war in the Gulf) contributes to the politics of scarcity that is said to afflict dance, as well as other things.

Anderson, who in his review privileged Balanchine, Paul Taylor, and Alvin Ailey (in a 1969 revival of Masakela Language) as instances of “social awareness” against the “political dogma” associated with a list of choreographers who came of age in the last decade, nonetheless concludes, “So, too, the outside world—in all its complexity and contrariness and its possibilities for despair and glory—keeps bursting into dances.” While Anderson is no doubt nervous about what gets in, his statement hints at a problematization of postmodernism in a different direction, whereas Hal Foster located its resistive possibility. This condition of the social “bursting into” the halls of modern concert dance signals dance’s resistive postmodern turn, and it is the agency of those dancers who have most self-consciously taken on this transgressive move as their own that constitutes its politics.

Yet even when Last Supper's notices were extremely appreciative of the work, the tendency to eliminate the political from the aesthetic remains. For example, in the Chicago Tribune, Sid Smith praises the piece as “an ambitious, dazzling, gutsy undertaking” but goes on to say, “In tackling so much, Jones all but promises God onstage for his finale, and the flesh parade is poignant and lovely, but hardly a philosophical breakthrough.” Paradoxically, ambition seems to be what keeps the dance from generating something of philosophical value, rather than being its means. Similarly, Village Voice critic Deborah Jowitt sees that the work “inflates the younger Jones’s shock tactics, formal strategies, topics, and rage to the level of spectacle.” She concludes the review: “You liked Bill T. Jones the man? Now see BILL T. JONES the world.” The scale of the work, the shift from personal expression to spectacle, lyric to epic, is here a matter of degree rather than kind. The world generated by Last Supper is textualized quite literally as a capitalization of the choreographer. It is precisely this displacement from individual to work—which is taken by the present writing to be an enormous critical resource—that Lewis Segal of the Los Angeles Times takes as its principal deficiency. Accepting as axiomatic that the dancer is the dance, Lewis observes that “without Jones, the work has no center—for essentially it’s a quest for context,” and that “we feel his absence acutely.” Rather than writing from this problem of an absent center, he demands of the piece that it make this absence a presence: “But until it finds a place for one of America’s finest dancers—the man who created it—it'll remain incomplete, a personal outcry without a person. In art, some people are irreplaceable and testimony by proxy is never the real thing.” For Segal, then, the authenticity of art rests on its ability to personify what gives rise to it, assuming that these last are sources that can be personified rather than means of dancing. “Proxy” for him is an indication that a work might display more than the labor of its author. He affirms this in his comment that “the work itself seems assembled TOWARD A NARRATIVE OF CONTEXT IN DANCE 83 by committee rather than personally crafted.” It would therefore appear that it is the presence of collectivity that does violence or absents the author, rather than merely standing in for the “real thing.”

The creator as center, the dancer as choreographer as “voice,” recalls what Foucault termed the “author function,” “the ideological figure by which one marks the manner in which we fear the proliferation of meaning.” What this entails for the review just cited is that the attack on collectivity within the dance constitutes an effort to subvert its being “assembled by committee” as a condition of reception. The dance becomes an encounter between dancer and critic, limiting its production and circulation to a closed circuit. In a climate in which censorship has already named the kinds of reception it seeks to limit, this particular critical trope of authorial containment becomes its double. Marked already by loss, by the absence of the one “left behind,” Last Supper operates quite vigorously against the very institutions of reception that would deny what is philosophical in the breakthrough of its own politics.

For the critics, Jones is an author and therefore a well-bounded site for the accumulation of cultural capital on which the practice of their craft becomes possible. By allowing what has concentrated in his name to circulate freely in his choreographic text, Last Supper provokes the critical fear that would deny the critics their own privileged means of accumulation. The critic’s authority resides in an appeal to a system of classification that values dance in terms of where it places choreographers and dancers in that system. Naming the activity of dance after a choreographic personage allows the former to be elided in the latter. As such, whatever their critical disposition toward the work and whether, heeding Denby’s words, they agree to find it “good or bad,” these critics have reason to fear the textualizing of author in the direction of context. For this move would alter the existing terms under which their authority is constituted. When art refuses to accept the boundaries that are intended to separate it from life, the critic can become a self-proclaimed victim, for conventionally, the critic’s authority is invested in policing that boundary. It is just this fullness of context that animates Last Supper. Part of that context was certainly the general anxiety over boundaries burst into and across, which the dance criticism of Anderson and Dunning joined. Jones was the one “left behind” in the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company when Zane died in spring 1988. Last Supper was the fullest evocation in 84 CRITICAL MOVES the repertory of his companion’s absence. At the same time, Jones’s own choreographic assent represents a negotiation within the political economy of art that was emblematic of a concentration of productive resources among fewer companies (not just dance) which characterized a globalizing capitalist economy during the 1980s and which left so many facing the very conditions of scarcity that his work opposes. It is this contradiction between the control of resources for accomplishing social needs (aesthetic or otherwise) and the proliferating articulation of these needs by those who demand resources which Jones confronts and which urges a reappraisal of the rhetoric of scarcity. The dancers’ unruliness in the presence of authority underscores that dance itself is more than just gaming. For contrary to the impulses of standard dance criticism, overreading assumes that what is critical in art is displayed most forcefully when it can reflect on its own exterior —which is what links the institutional materiality of art to that of society generally.

(Ineffective Boundaries) The moment in the third act when Bill T. Jones sits down with the local cleric marks a double movement between the sacred and the profane. Immediately before, when Jones is dancing to the words of Job read by the cleric, his body both narrates the text and is outside it, so as to constitute the means of profanation that in turn sacralizes the word and its voice. Sitting to give back the word to the voice not only displays the hubris of speech before the presumably unspeakable that pertains to religious faith and the real in history (recalling Jameson’s phrase of a “prior (re)textualization” of what is fundamentally nonnarrative) but also profanes what is sacred in art, namely, that its distance from life be maintained. By effacing this aesthetic boundary, Last Supper produces its own version of the shattering of mimesis and effectively conjoins the figures of artistic production and the judgment of taste on which aesthetic reception presumably rests. Clearly, these figures are conjoined within the piece and not outside it, and so the piece problematizes the relation between art and life only by representing, not transcending, the divide.

But even this interweaving of history and fiction with which Last Supper is so replete accomplishes for the dance what I had earlier termed narrative displacement. The narrativization of what is generally left unsaid or unread allows for another level of context to become legible through the work: the linkage of the various institutional effects through which contemporary dance must operate. These institutional effects, which Jones and other artists have increasingly incorporated into their work, entail a grammar of cultural production, or postmodernism; regulating mechanisms for an arts economy whose apparatus of legitimation is the National Endowment for the Arts; and a principle of regulation (here, an overconfident political Right) that has of late found its strongest voice as an opposition to the very thing it regulates. These three domains could themselves be joined through a certain narrative displacement from the aesthetic to the economic. One powerful myth that has operated in the concert dance world is that the sixties and seventies produced a dance boom that had by the eighties gone bust. This myth, I take to be the ideological horizon that joins a conservative antiaesthetic, a policy of defunding, and a blaming of cultural difference for social decline. For now, I want to establish these institutional effects as a context for contemporary dance and will, in the next section, extend it more explicitly to the politics of other domains. It is worth noting that the recent rightist assault on the arts is but the latest manifestation of a rhetoric that links art and decay to keep enemies at bay. Anticommunism too had its aesthetic front. Consider, for example, these words of Michigan senator George Dondero before his colleagues in summer 1949 attacking modern art as foreign "instruments and weapons of destruction": "The evidence of evil design is everywhere, only the roll call of the art contortionists is different. The question is, what have we, the plain American people, done to deserve this sore affliction that has been visited upon us so direly; who has brought down this curse upon us; who has let into our homeland this horde of germ-carrying art vermin?" Following in Dondero's footsteps, Jesse Helms has sought to purge the NEA of HIV-positive artists - living or dead. These efforts acquire added significance whose compound meaning is addressed in Bill T. Jones's figure of the naked pariah. The artist stripped bare, alternately avoided and supported, allows both dancers and public to work through the contradictory accusations of creativity as a force of social destruction.

The notion that what is creative in art could extinguish itself is one version of the modernist imperative for eternal innovation. In dance, a notion gained currency in the eighties that a creative expansion that had spurred the professionalization and proliferation of many dance companies had come to a close. This putative decline in creativity was associated with an economic metaphor of boom and bust that is meant to describe an unceasing oscillation of cyclical growth and decline in business activity. The use of boom and bust applied to dance, however, bore no such optimism of rebounded expansion. This was a dance myth that Last Supper sought to give the lie to, but the claims of the myth first need to be exposed. It is important to emphasize that this mythology not only seeks to contain the aesthetic impact of professional concert dance but also to eliminate from consideration popular forms of dancing that are particularly resistant to any notion of expansion and contraction given their firm placement as daily cultural activities.

As I've already suggested, periodizing is precarious business: the December 1945 edition of Fortune ran a story called "The Boom in Ballet." Suggestive of a very different body image, it showed a picture of a dancer, sandwich in hand, captioned "few ballet dancers worry about weight." But Fortune's perhaps premature discovery of boom also signaled a place to look for the limits to dance's expansionary tendencies. Forbes ("capitalist tool") featured a ballerina on its January 15, 1971, cover, which read, "The Performing Arts: But the Costs Are Soaring Too." Although recession and Reagan had taken hold in 1982, one piece in the New York Daily News declared, "Triumph for the City Ballet and the Dance World Booms." The article provided the following figures: between 1975 and 1982, the number of dance companies in New York City grew from eighty to some five hundred, involving over ten thousand dancers. Companies had enjoyed extended runs and increased audience attendance every year since 1977 at the premier dance venue, City Center. In 1981, there were roughly 2,500 performances. The story hastened to add, "Financial trouble is everywhere. . . . government cuts and rising costs could imperil it all." * Indeed, they did. But this specific economic problem in the arts had long been recognized and was part of the impetus that gave the NEA its expanded funding, an issue I will return to shortly. Suffice it to say for now that if increases in productivity had always put the performing arts in jeopardy, then financial strain could only magnify with the so-called boom, and there is every indication that this was the case. In this regard, then, the bust was unlike the end of the putative business cycle on which it is modeled insofar as expansion is unprofitable and (therefore) market forces were indeterminate. So the bust was never about economic pressures narrowly defined (those constraints were always there) but connected more closely to institutional supports and ideology. It would seem that the ideology was mobilized to unmoor the former. Although it is tempting to say that there was a boom that went bust, I want to suggest that the assumptions which underlie this claim are untenable and to argue the opposite. The bust was what arrested the boom.

Hewing to the bottom line, the 1971 Forbes issue cited above asked, "Can the transistor save the arts?" At least one critic, Roger Copeland, answered in the negative. Writing in the mid-eighties, he suggested that Baryshnikov's appearance in the film The Turning Point signaled the end of the boom that began in the seventies. For him, the antinomy of the boom was not economic but cultural: "The rising fortunes of American dance are directly, statistically proportional to the declining standards of American literacy." Dance, an object that can be consumed visually, without reflection is most like television and in that regard "a respectable form of anti-intellectualism." * Copeland is positioning dance theory and practice as aspiring to fundamentally opposed situations. According to his argument, the expansion of cultural production makes it impossible for intellectual activity to establish (cultural) values. If these values are seen as representing some putatively universal public interest, cultural production clings to a somehow merely private one. Hence, not only is it difficult to imagine grounds on which dance (or any other cultural) theory and practice could join in a politics, but practice also is herein relegated to a private domain and therefore without politics at all.

It is here that the discourse on dance was joined with broader currents of cultural contestation during the eighties. I would like to offer an alternative account of the conjuncture for the theory and practice of dance in the eighties that might refigure a conception of the boom before returning to the politics in/of dance in the present. The standard study on the economics of the professional performing arts isolates dance from theater and concert music as experiencing the only genuine expansion during the sixties." A more recent study documents the expansion of the number of dance companies during the seventies not just in New York but also nationally irrespective of the size of the urban center." But the development in dance has been more than numerical, although its aesthetic dimensions and cultural significance are more difficult to measure.

Arguably, the possibilities and occasion for human movement have been explored with an intensity unprecedented in the United States, resulting in a dramatic expansion of the dance lexicon, for both concert and popular (especially African American and Latino) idioms. Yet, as it has become increasingly specified and specialized in terms of human movement, dance activity has also pushed the boundaries between dance and other means of performance. The different solutions to the problem of minimalism associated with the explorations of pedestrian movement by the dancers at Judson Church and of Grand Union, on the one hand, and the subtle modulations of a choreographer such as Laura Dean, on the other, joined concert dance with developments in music and theater, such as those of Robert Wilson, both conceptually and practically. The Tanztheater of Pina Bausch and a host of other Europeans pushed dance past expressionism in the direction of self-representation that had been largely absent from the generally mute medium so that the dancer appeared as more than a body laboring under choreographic authority.

The presentation of self in much contemporary concert dance initially emphasized relations of gender but soon came to embrace matters of sexual preference, race, and the political economy of dance. The dancing body was now placed in tension with its confinement to movement as something that specified it but also kept it sequestered from other issues. It was not simply that dance took on subject matter, for that had never been foreign to the first dance modernists. Rather, subject was unbounded by media and reached for social and historical context in a manner that had probably had no parallel since the political works of the 1930s.

The juxtaposition between the ordinary and the epic, between affect drawn through movement and drama achieved through the address of audience, amplified the tension between the space of the dancer's body and that of performance in a manner which sought to make connections with social spaces beyond the stage. The presence of this kind of material in so many pieces was indicative of how dance had reframed questions of the relation of structure and process in artistic work more generally. The interest, intended to be shared by the audience, in how the work was generated in the process of performance alluded to the forms of sociality that made dancing possible. Process was allowed to abut structure constantly, just as personal reminiscence increasingly found use in connection with historical reckoning.

That so many small venues that had once been public spaces were able to sustain dance performance (churches, schools, sites of abandoned industry) was indicative of how the vitality of the performing arts could contribute to a very determined project of urban renewal. At the same time, outdoor festivals, environmental pieces, and site-specific works served not only to congregate groups of people but also to raise questions about the conditions under which art was made available to its public. Surely this was not the first time that modern dance had raised such issues —one need only think of Isadora Duncan and Loie Fuller—but they were now being raised with respect to a different set of concerns about access to urban space as a newly problematic feature of society. Nor could it be said that current dance output has forgotten these concerns or its ability to touch them. The persistent search for connections between aesthetic form and social content that transgress existing boundaries can still be found in recent dance, Jones's included. This ongoing exploration raises the question of what could be meant by the term "boom" and whether it can be considered over or, perhaps, somehow arrested in its development. Clearly, the most dynamic initiatives in dance were part of a broader cultural phenomenon, the extension of public life promulgated by the demands of various social movements. The specificity of a dance boom would have to be located in terms of the ways in which this context for the expansion of public life animated the relation between form and content in dance. But the clear expansion of dance activity also needs to be explained in terms of an infrastructure of support.

Given the uniqueness of the economics of the performing arts—increases in productivity do not translate into the reduced unit costs characteristic of other industries—growth comes at the expense of a growing gap between revenues and expenditures. Without the support of a recording industry or the benefit of extended runs, as in music and theater, respectively, this counter-economy of scale is felt most acutely in dance. The solution, agreed on in the literature, is to find some mechanism other than the market to sustain growth.

But social investment within the framework of a capitalist economy scarcely occurs without struggle and mobilization. The initiation of the National Endowment for the Arts in 1965, prompted no doubt by an immediate sense of preserving the national patrimony, of which modern dance was undervalued kin, had its broader context in the implications for civility demanded by, among others, the movement for civil rights in this country. These demands met a response in the establishment of an entire apparatus of state funding. The Great Society programs, while prompted by social movements, were the glimmer of decency in the apex of U.S. imperium fevered by wars hot and cold. The NEA was but one small part of a social hypothesis that claimed culture as necessary to a just society. The Great Society expansion was felt in dance circles beyond the university with the establishment of the Nga, and it was with a grant of $142,250 that Martha Graham was able to make her first national tour in fifteen years in 1966.

As with other constructivist programs, government funding for the arts was viewed as a political palliative, not simply a celebration of the national patrimony. President Johnson, signing the Endowments bill on September 29, 1965, proclaimed, "For it is in our works of art that we reveal to ourselves, and to others, the inner vision which guides us as a nation." As the Rockefeller-funded studies of arts economies meant to rationalize public support to help organize private giving put it, "leisure" could become an "individual and social problem" if not constructively "channeled" into arts activity. Douglas Dillon, a former treasury secretary and chairman of the Business Committee for the Arts, was even more direct in saying that "artistic performances of one sort or another are essential in handling the crisis of our cities." Hence arts funding was a part of a larger strategic response to counter the popular mobilizations ironically dubbed leisure time (uncontrolled by work discipline) with a unifying call that art would civilize this nation (and others) and cover dissent with an aesthetic legacy. At its height in the late seventies, NEA funding was aimed not only at the development of choreographers but at support of presenters and their venues and arts management as well, a field pioneered in 1962 by the Ford Foundation, whose arts director, McNeil Lowry, was instrumental in modeling what the NEA would become. In 1967, the Coordinated Dance Touring Program was inaugurated, beginning with four companies and five weeks in two states at a cost of $25,000. Ten years later, this program had grown to 440 weeks across fifty states and was funded at nearly $2 million. The touring program allowed 30 percent reductions to presenters and generated a list of companies for them to choose from based on fiscal solvency. The NEA even helped bail out the bankrupt Paul Taylor Company in 1976. The NEA encouraged the formation of companies modeled on businesses, requiring them to have boards of directors and to file for nonprofit status (501[c][3]), and by 1987 it was devoting 62 percent of its funds to dance companies as opposed to 9 percent to individual choreographers (of a total $8,723,750).

Interestingly, state support for the arts began not as domestic but as foreign policy. The Division of Cultural Relations of the State Department was established in 1938 to open an ideological front in Latin America. Fifteen years later, the United States Information Agency (USIA) was established as a global counterweight to Communism's good ideas. The USIA's arts initiatives were designed to "correct and humanize the image of the American people held by other peoples ... disposed to look down upon the United States as a nation concerned only with the creation of material wealth and with satisfactions provided by creature comforts and ingenious gadgets." Martha Graham was the first of the moderns to tour abroad in 1956 when touring was institutionalized under the International Cultural Exchange and Trade Fair Participation Act passed that year. She was followed by José Limén, Paul Taylor, Alvin Ailey, and dozens of others as funding for the program expanded precipitously in the late fifties from $5.0 to $22.8 million, despite State Department efforts to reduce it.

Although the conditions for dance's global circulation were instrumental, this did not result in a singular official American art form. Rather, the message sent was of freedom of expression based on a manifest plurality of individual forms. Kennedy, early to recognize the domestic political capital to be gained by arts funding, also saw in it a counter to the Soviets, who "recognize even though they manipulate this desire, the tremendous interest people have in the arts." For him, artistic freedom validated national character: "In serving his vision of the truth, the artist best serves his nation."

The institutional infrastructure of modern dance was being constructed at a national level, and here the development of dance within the university curriculum was a crucial factor in support of touring, employment of teachers, audience development, and choreographic commissions. Paradoxically, the promise of universal education meant as well that educational institutions would be venues that would be susceptible to demands that knowledge be particularized. With respect to dance, this context made possible the creation and expansion of academic departments and performance venues, seen broadly as features of a more democratic culture. By 1968, there were 22 independent dance departments and 110 campuses where students could major in dance. The democracy here had to do both with allocation of resources for the development of social institutions and with the shaping of those institutions by and through participation. As we are all well aware, this dramatic expansion has now undergone a 92 CRITICAL MOVES draconian contraction. The contraction has been as much ideological (in the sense of an idea outside dance that is opposed to it) as financial and ultimately constitutes an effort to reform the polity and to limit public participation. For while it is true that many social programs have been reduced, the federal budget and its accumulated deficit expanded yearly during the eighties. Those who called for less government responded with greater state expenditures — but of a certain sort—simply put, to free economy from the demands of its public. Capital, the putative means and end of that economy, increasingly restless with the social costs of democracy, was looking for pastures beyond our shores, and the government was serving as combined realtor and travel agent. At issue for partisans of democracy was how a massive redirection of resources was politically managed and ideologically legitimated.

The irony for modern dance was that just when it was best positioned in theory and practice to project itself nationally, the possibilities for such a projection were undermined by a shift in the relation of the state to the activities productive of public life. The redirection of resources can be traced to the policies generated in the service of a highly mobile capital (deregulation, tax cuts, free trade, deficit monetarism —in short, the odd assortment of initiatives dubbed Reagan- omics) and a countercultural assault from the Right that sought to pin social decay on cultural difference.

Clearly it has not been the case that every or even most dance works have aesthetically addressed this social situation. Rather, the main impact that rightist ideology had on dance was to create a national climate for its reception that robbed performances of their own immediate context. The significance of the hateful pronouncements of Jesse Helms, Dana Rohrabacher, William Dannemeyer, and the like lay in their ability to bring the subject of dance and art generally from the specialized discourse of a criticism already predisposed to decontextualize aesthetic expression into a nationally public arena with a highly simplistic view of how context operates within an aesthetic. Hence, critic and conservative politician were complicit in maintaining the static divide between what is interior and exterior to the artwork that both Last Supper and overreading seek to undermine. By claiming to value work exclusively in terms of its content, the very voices who brought the matter to the public made it impossible to discuss whether such work could be considered art, presumably their actual question, by denying the ways in which art brings content into tension with form.

TOWARD A NARRATIVE OF CONTEXT IN DANCE 93 The ability of those espousing rightist ideology to trade on the effacement of high and popular, the critique of specialized knowledge, and invocation of the public signaled an abuse of the very principles of democratization embodied in the social gains that supported the dance boom. Most important, the assault on public funding for the arts that took the explicit form of vows of self-censorship to grant recipients, discussed in the previous section, was part of an effort to redraw the boundaries between public and private life and draw art within the domain of the latter. The two frequently used meanings of the term "private" were intentionally blurred: private in the economic sense of market-driven and in the philosophical and anthropological significance of the sphere of domesticity—where all issues of sexuality belong. Hence, the public funding of art was being reconceived as a matter for the private domain of the market to reprivatize issues recently politicized by social movements away from the domain that could guarantee them recognition and resources.

Surely, the NEA gets more credit from its detractors than it deserves for actually funding art. In the mid-eighties, federal funds constituted only 5 percent of the total of public and private support. The NEA budget for 1995 was $167.4 million, which, controlling for inflation, is just over half what it was at peak funding levels in 1979 and a tiny fraction of the $9 billion raised privately for the arts. By 1997, the budget had been slashed to just under $100 million, and the agency that had issued over 100,000 grants was slated for elimination altogether.

Yet, as a mechanism for legitimating forms of art and for orienting the arts economy and as an object of public discussion, its influence is far more extensive. By the same token, the annual ritual of assassinating it ideologically may prove more important to the detractors of public funding than the NEA's actual elimination.

In the early eighties, when Jones and Zane were coming to prominence, cultural policy expressed through the agency of federal funding allocations signaled a turn from supporting emerging choreographers to established artists. Then director of the NEA Frank Hodsoll defended deep cuts to his agency by denying that anything of the vitality in the arts would be lost. By the end of the eighties, appropriation levels had barely crept up to what they were at the start of the decade before declining again. They have continued to decline.

For dance specifically, both total amount and number of grants declined (particularly given cumulative inflation of over 50 percent through the decade), from $9,122,202 and 398 grants to $8,964,738 and 355 grants. While, during the eighties, the amount of money given to individual choreographers more than tripled, this has to be factored against the impact of a decade of inflation and real estate speculation on the dance community, especially its ability to appropriate space—the very premise of its activity—for habitation, rehearsal, and performance.

The relevant frame of reference for assessing these spending levels is the federal budget as a whole, which doubled over the course of the decade. Hence it was certainly not the case that the arts funding was experiencing a discipline reflective simply of fiscal trends in the budgetary process. Rather, funding was subject to an anti-economy. The only appreciable increases at the end of the 1980s were to the NEA's administrative budget (the numbers are $11.3 million in 1982 and $14.9 million in 1987, according to NEA annual reports).

More significantly, something with the look of a national cultural aesthetic was appearing in politicians' pronouncements about what could be considered appropriate form and content in the arts. This, of course, had its very concrete manifestations in the anti-obscenity riders attached to choreography grants and the overriding of panel-approved grants by then head of the NEA John Frohnmayer. These acts did not go unanswered. In 1990, $750,000 worth of NEA money was rejected by artists and organizations that refused to sign the pledge, and some of those who were denied, such as Bella Lewitsky and Tim Miller, sued the wea. The integration achieved between dance and performance art gave strong identification to performers such as Holly Hughes and Karen Finley. Finley had been chosen but declined to cohost the 1990 Bessies, the New York dance awards held at BAM, in light of the fateful triangle the event had formed with the likes of Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds-Nabisco and the art police (Philip Morris, one of the largest corporate donors to the arts at $15 million in 1990,® also gave generously to Jesse Helms). While arts activists from Get Smart passed out leaflets (rolled as cigarettes) on these connections outside the theater, speeches advocating further activism were made about them from within. Two months after the Bessies award ceremony (September 12, 1990), Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land opened on the same stage, drawing into its midst the politics of the dance community's own occasion for celebration and self-recognition. Its internal crossings of art and life, sacred and profane, its interweaving of history and fiction, drew from this exterior of politicized art.

The "promised land" referenced in Bill T. Jones's finale to Last Supper has multiple meanings that resonate with what Houston Baker Jr. has identified as the recurrent theme in African American culture and history of "freedom and apocalypse." * I want to focus on two avenues of interpretation for this promised land. It links the Reconstruction promise of "forty acres and a mule" meant to provide the means of subsistence that were intended to offer the material conditions to break decisively with slavery's exploitation, and the historical promise (with both sacred and secular expressions) of a world transformed, a promise that rests on a system for the allocation of social surplus very different from what a profit-driven economy can provide. Although the first promise was broken and the second remains unfulfilled, the joining together of a politics of subsistence and surplus has much to recommend it, as does recognizing the persistence of the conditions of enslavement under putative emancipation, especially the virulence of racism itself. Jones's powerful synthesis hints at how production and reproduction, public and private, might be located in the same dance and mobilized against the pervasive politics of scarcity and on behalf of a utopian conception of a more livable social totality. Here, again, I want to import some of those dance insights into an exploration of the staging of theory and practice in contemporary politics.

One of the contributions to emerge out of feminist theory has been the demonstration that the relation between public and private spheres is itself a political construct. This reconceptualization of separate spheres ideology has made it possible to problematize the presumed identification of women with the private and the private with the apolitical.* The fundamental distinction between socialized production (where the resources and capacities for making society lie) and social reproduction (the renewal of those capacities) retains logical and structural significance but cannot be neatly grafted onto mutually exclusive domains of public life, with its market-driven instrumentality, and domesticity, with its associations of moral and affective substance. Further, politics that emerge during the 1980s undermine any simple binary opposition that would differentiate public and private spaces. The ideological thrust of the rightist movements that emerged during the eighties maintained the binary of private and public so as to deny political claims on the basis of race, gender, and sexuality as purely private matters inappropriate to politics. At the same time, the Right attacked the very privacy that it saw as harboring identities that deviated from its vision of moral order. The attack on these other bodies occurred in the same conjuncture that a highly mobile capital was fleeing its own sites of socialization, an economic formation also known variously as deregulation, privatization, and free trade.

One theoretical implication of these rightist politics is that the material and political basis for separating the public and the private has been complicated in ways that jeopardize the effectiveness of this strategy of containment. Limiting what could be legitimately considered political was intended to ameliorate the contradictions of privately owned production and socially constituted needs of reproduction. The hypermobility of capital (the disinvestment of productive resources in pursuit of higher rates of return) has a depressing effect on wages and social services and surely complicates the ability to maintain separate spheres.

The consequent unevenness to capitalist development is of a sort different from the clearly bounded zones of inclusion (first world nations with their relatively privileged laboring populations) and exclusion (third world, capital’s as opposed to capitalism’s presumed exteriority—which until recently had been figured as the second world) that have characterized colonial development to date. The assumed condition of labor for the first world was that, despite its own differentiation and stratification along lines of race, gender, and unionization, real wages would rise with national wealth or gross national product. As such, labor in the first world could maintain an interest in the expanded circulation of capital and in imperialist expansion.

The eighties saw certain secular leveling in wages framed within an overall immiseration of wage labor irrespective of occupational strata (as indicated by the layoffs or “downsizing” that became so prominent during the late eighties and nineties, which was itself an adjustment for the centralizing corporate mergers a few years earlier). Indeed, the global recession of the late eighties and early nineties evidenced the extent to which circuits of capital flow through the consumer/service nexus were now depleted of realizable demand. The flight of capital and downward pressure of wages in the first world meant that workers were no longer enlisted to the same degree in the expansion of capital through their collective capacity for expenditure. The society of consumption that had provisionally conjoined the immediate interests of labor and capital had lost some of its economic utility. The absurdist claims, disseminated largely in print media, of rising consumer confidence (an index of the willingness to go into debt) driving an economic recovery are symptomatic. If the deflation of labor’s means to rescue capitalist overproduction (the excess capacity of supply over commodifiable demand) through consumption declines in the first world, it also reconfigures labor in/as the third world. While the third world is where capital has newly (again) landed to appropriate surplus which that labor will never use, it also has the effect of driving a wedge between the category of labor and that of population as such. Typically, third world labor in a global economy is labor whose wages are insufficient to purchase the commodities it produces (and often those commodities are not even marketed to that labor). The low-wage maquiladora, the free enterprise zone, and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) all represent capital’s ability to penetrate the geography of the third world to establish an internal boundary of production activity against the requisites of social reproduction. The freedom alluded to in these highly fluid economic formations is none other than the freedom of capital from the demands of its situation, either in terms of taxes, organizations on behalf of labor, or political institutions (such as the national state) where that labor could redress economic disruptions. The more dramatic impact, however, rests on those whose bodies are not the object of multinational capital’s desire, that population already expropriated from the land and its means of subsistence which constitutes a global level of urbanization that now ranges between 50 percent and 80 percent. Where forced migration to the cities had, at one time, fueled industrial capital, now such migration is an effect of deindustrialization on a global scale. The chief consequence is a surplus population reflected in unemployment figures of from 40 percent to 70 percent not uncommon in third world cities and precisely within the range of unemployment experienced by African American males aged eighteen to twenty-five in U.S. cities and within the range of workers laid off in those industries of the former Soviet Union considered to have made the transition to the market. Slavery, which had once been a means to appropriate populations into the global circuits of capital, is now usurped by more insidious forms of social control that operate to exclude people from societal wealth. This transformation in the generalized economy of desire for African American bodies from forced inclusion to coercive exclusion is fundamental to the turn that racism has taken in the United States. What complicates these changes is their very unevenness with respect to the African American population itself. Both morally and materially, the life circumstances of black people in the United States are emblematic of what is going on in the country at large. Hence, contrary to the well-placed concerns that black politics be treated as wholly exceptional to some imagined mainstream variety, the polarization visited on African Americans crystallizes the national condition. The success of the civil rights movements of the fifties, sixties, and seventies resulted in what Manning Marable has called the “second reconstruction.” The Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 signaled a meaningful realignment of the social and political compact for access to labor markets, higher education, and voting booths. These reforms had their distributional effects, which were quite palpable by the mid-1980s. In electoral terms, the number of black government officials increased from one hundred to eight thousand from 1965 to 1995, with particular prominence as mayors of the major U.S. cities— yet blacks still represented only 2 percent of all elected officials. According to the mid-1990s economic data, one in seven black families earned above $50,000 per year, while a third lived below the poverty line. Half of the black teenagers seeking employment were unable to find it, and nearly a quarter of black males aged 20 to 29 were incarcerated. Contrasting the claims that blacks menace white security, four-fifths of the roughly 20,000 homicides committed in the United States are intraracial, and black men are seven times more likely to be murdered than their white counterparts.

The global market is constructed to exclude whole universes of bodies. The third world is figured in first world political discourse as a trap, a place that forces of modernization can get stuck in. The question of when to intervene in Somalia and Bosnia is not so much the belated admission of oil interests in Somalia, but the disposal of (surplus) bodies in Bosnia not having fully run its course. The fiery Los Angeles spring of 1992 raises questions about the desire for the abuse of many, with the narrative shared by all presidential candidates at the time and echoed by defense attorneys and police chiefs a year later. Despite the formulation of a term such as "new world order" and the intensification of myriad forms of racism on which it relies, this enthusiasm for coercion has yet to find an ideological expression anywhere near as pointed as anticommunism had been. What is more apparent is that the divide between labor and population introduces the grounds for a new episteme of bodily discipline, where surplus bodies encounter a rhetoric of deficits. This rhetoric can be introduced to cleave race, gender, and most recently age over who will get more of less. The scarcity effect that this produces justifies no end of autolimitations on desire, precisely what Jones—by refusing the cleavage of identities against themselves through their shared display of a common capacity for movement—seeks to counter by transforming a condition of scarcity (such as the initial nudity that signals the "pariah syndrome") to one of surplus (communal undress that makes way for diversity).

All this is to say that the body gets privileged in this political conjuncture of surplus desire unleashed from the boundaries of market and in the coercive strategies meant to recontain them. These body politics (on the stage and off) migrate across that oversimplified divide of class/state (or old) and new social movements/identity politics. The migrating body as a globally socialized condition is the counterpoint to the mobility of capital. Granted, most of this migration occurs within nations—from country to city—rather than across national boundaries—an estimated 120 million people globally, yet in both cases the industrializing drives cannot be readily disarticulated from transnational investment flows.

This migratory body is constituted through the crossing of borders (like the Last Supper's migrations into and from slavery, the interruption of speech and movement, and the prolonged passing from a regime of exclusion into the communal of Jones's last act) and hence made sentient of its loss of a locational specificity and its spatial dispersion. I have no doubt labored a point, not only to show the labor of politics where so much effort has been made to disappear it forcibly but also to hint, as Jones's dancers do, at a labor that emerges against the grain of the market. For while emergent politics first associated with the 1960s that continue to develop in the 1980s and 1990s make demands for material resources (for control over both conditions of production [jobs and labor mobility] and reproduction [from health to sex and healthy sex]), they do so in a manner that does not rest easily within the prevailing language of consumption.

The array of social movements that cause the Right such anxiety imagines a politics of the body in which desire cannot be contained by the simple transit between markets for labor and for commodities but rather, as Last Supper ultimately insists, in which desire is generated in transit. At the same time, these deterritorialized flows that overspill economic and cultural boundaries are themselves generated out of a socialization process that focuses on the formation of collectivity rather than individuation. Ever-changing axes of association bring people together in ways that constantly reconfigure the spaces of social life and not simply the objects that surround a person. The proliferation of myriad categories of collective identity is wholly consistent with the segmentation of markets (greater aggregate sales through the constitution of target groups rather than mass markets) practiced by the most recently capitalized sectors of the technoculture. Yet, with all these politics, what we see is the organizational effect of socialization of emerging affiliations, without being subordinated or even included in capital’s aim for group formation—the production and consumption of commodities. Through the political economy of representation that traffics in the experience of the exotic, it is possible to appropriate the imaginary lives of those very subcultures that are then excluded from the formal economy altogether in the hyperactive and destructive mobility of capital. Jones's staging of the mobilization, affiliation, and reinclusion of these masses performs against this exclusionary edifice of representation and for a society where what is excessive, where the production of surplus, acts on behalf of those who produce it. The disarticulation of socialization of labors and circulation of commodities may turn out to be the most profound contradiction of what the decade of privatization produced. Such disarticulation is less surprising, however, than the rhetoric of privatization would concede. It should be recalled that the freeing of capital from the now constraining effects of what were once considered by those same capitals to be helpful regulations was and remains a state-directed project that proceeds through laws, treaties, and ordinances with a still more extensive and global scope. It is the very centrality of the state that leaves the depletion of the material supports of the public sphere confronting less the administration of social welfare than the state's repressive apparatus. For this reason, the supposed disappearance of the state as an institutional mechanism of social regulation generates its own narrative of the return of the repressed, for the calls to eliminate or shrink government bureaucracy allow the scale and scope of state intervention to expand.

That what returns is precisely repression is amply evident to all those engaged in a politics of deprivatization, of decensoring, or, to return to the dance, of necessary exposures of bodies to more than they are expected to bare. These various body politics face the dilemma of demanding less of one kind of state and more of another or, metaphorically, that the dogs be called off (once, like Jones's slave catchers, we notice the foibles of the gendarme's relation to authority). Even if we were momentarily to segregate the U.S. exterior from its interior markets and somehow bracket the forces marshaled in the repression of anticapitalism from Cuba to Vietnam, it remains a quandary why so many troops were needed to put down dissent in the streets and universities of this country, if consent were so firmly intact. Instead, what can be said about the eighties is that the discourse of consent collapses so that repression finds its way into those spaces thought able to police their own desires, especially family, domesticity, sexuality, and corporeality per se (bodies that, so to speak, stick to themselves). This extension of rule by repression is rendered all the more complex in that the discourse of coercion properly effected through the state apparatus is ventriloquized by putatively private interests formally outside it, what could be called the New Right. In practice, the New Right's own confusion of public and private facilitated the circulation of its influence in the corridors of state power. The effort to limit what can be considered public, now enjoined by neoconservatives and neoliberals alike, gives a double meaning to the term "privatization." "It is both a sell-off of social capital to profit interested corporations and an effort to deny political recognition to that whole range of voices and interests that had historically been considered part of the domestic purview of propertied white men. The scope of their ambition to regulate political economy through an attack on what they consider to be aberrant cultural expression has only increased and remains perhaps the most forcefully articulated idea in U.S. politics."

Among social movements, the body is not always represented as the subject of the politics under consideration. Yet dance that is full of these politics offers not only the reflexive display of the body as a site of politics but something of the methodology of the social through which a political site is produced. The question that dance figures most forcefully for the debate is, What becomes of the status of the body when the conceptual divide between coercion and consent, public and private, state-centered and identity-based politics is complicated? This question does not assume that dance could be generative of a politics elsewhere but that it might provide a more comprehensive grasp of those conditions under which politics is already inscribed but scarcely legible through existing figures of analysis.

Let me return to Last Supper to rehearse how some of these connections in a given work could be made available as a more general narrative for the reading of history. A Reception for Overreading Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land moves, like this essay, through a range of narratives that suggest a complex array of temporalities for theory and practice (sited/cited/sighted in the same textualized event — essay and dance—but dependent on different scales and sequences of time). Four moments can be discerned very schematically (to avoid overstating their separation) and are ordered sequentially but in practice permeate both dance and essay as a movement.

To begin, both dance and essay use a particularized narrative (that of Uncle Tom's Cabin and the descriptive account of the dance itself). Each then moves to a contextualization of the reception for that narrative (the play with authority, especially in the second act, which anticipates the tropes of criticism that seek to contain the politics of dance which are themselves discussed in the second section of this essay). Next, essay and dance offer a contextualization of the grounds and constituent features of that narrative. The oppositions of sacred-profane/slavery-emancipation in the dance and the presumed oppositions of art and life, representation and practice, all become problematized when their normativity is dislodged.

From jail cell to freedom, from the profanation of the sacred to the deprofanation of the secular, from cross-gendering to degendering, racial transgression to deracialization, dance labor to the end of that labor, from masking to the loss of that ground for split representation. These are foregrounded during certain times in the piece, but they all circulate throughout it, indicating a complex and differential economy of narrative temporalities. The dance itself provides a context within which to imagine the social and historical horizons where apparently disparate politics emerge and the conditions under which such politics might coalesce without disappearing into one another.

The dance narrates together the times of many historical tales which span different scales of time (Christianity, slavery, civil rights, sexual liberation, rightist triumphalism) and which suggest a means to narrate the historical context for the dance and for contemporary politics as well. By the very fact of its completability, the performance could represent the tension between the local and the global carried through the mobilization of bodies against the domineering presence of choreography itself.

Yet to speak of the dance's representation this way is to identify not its internal narrative but rather what ends its tale serves. Dance cannot generate a narrative of context, a history, unmediated by that context. The refusal to be only narrative helps navigate a way through the stories that conventionally get told about the present and also points beyond those common tales.

Overreading suggests a closer affiliation between form and context than was previously thought to be the case in much cultural criticism and history. The particular move toward social and historical context that dance signals (perhaps unexpectedly for some) winds up mapping the traces of its own possibility. This is why it may be worth the effort to fight the rhetoric of bust that signals lowered expectations for everything from the dance world to the American dream, even while struggling against the displacement of material resources that make the production of dances and dreams so challenging. If, even in its own excesses, a given work of dance generates a larger fund of aspiration than it can sustain in a single performance, it retains the capacity to bail itself out of the arresting strictures of the bust or breakdown in its own system by reappearing under a different guise. For while a given performance ends, it frequently recurs on another occasion, marking a continuity in the desire to see more than a moment can provide, which is itself a crucial resource for ongoing entanglement with the political. A single work can thereby serve to join the figuration of diverse social mobilizations in a dance before they can fuse in practice. The concreteness of bodies moving onstage, which serve as the agents of this confluence of ideas, is, as Marx observed in the Grundrisse, the result of the “concentration of multiple determinations.” What is assembled through these movements are not only specific bodily forms but also the very capacity to make momentarily present the whole context of determination itself and, with this, the ability to generate other contexts.

Offering a theory that combines the politics of production and reproduction, labor and identity, public and private, all of which supposedly divide new and old social movements against each other, however, provides no guarantee of the oppositional strength that those combined forces can wield globally. Theorizing combination does not render each instance of practice a realization of the theory. Nor should the impulse to combination detectable in a single dance work be misidentified as a totalizing framework that exhausts further readings of it. Rather, a desire for totalization is part of what makes reading inexhaustible.

The process that figures the context within which diverse political impulses are combined, or totalization, is but one gesture within Jones's "promised land," but one with the capacity to amplify the shared context for social transformation that may be scarcely legible from within a given political expression. The terror that a gesture of amplification might become the only gesture, that totalization would monopolize and restrict the proliferation of social energies rather than, more modestly, coordinating difference, has sometimes operated in contemporary discourse to threaten the imagination of what is other than the present.

Yet in dance there is a certain insistence that the forces of combination that give a sense of context never ossify into a fixed framework of totality, a rigid image of the whole. Further, the diversity of influences that are displayed in any instance of movement keeps alive the tension between concrete particulars and, under the sign of choreographic authority, the totalizing moment. This amplifying gesture of totalization, one could say, is the utopia that winds up being particularized momentarily but concretely in performance. Performance is utopian precisely in its intimation of an entirely different world that flashes through this one. This is not a utopia that one could move into but a passing state that takes the fleeting movement toward emergent possibilities as its own. While the archetypal utopian community had to retire someplace where no others could see it, the politicality of dance (which is surely not all of it) places utopia on display with all its possibilities and limitations. By making more of each instance of dance (or any other activity) than it could possibly claim for itself, the desire is expressed for an economy other than the one productive of endlessly regressive cycles of scarcity and deficit. It is this desire, this promised land, that partners theory and practice. The nation calling? Or just the music to a fitness warm-up? As the tune changes, the assumed shapes matter. In what follows, I explore whether some of the linkages between "nationalism" and "multiculturalism" that would transform the prevailing usages of those terms can be exposed through two very specific cultural practices—hip hop moves taught in an aerobics class, and rap music videos. While the politics of rap are far from unproblematic and have been subjected to some very incisive and instructive criticism, I will entertain, through the embodied promise of hip hop, a certain "structure of feeling" that is generative of national difference. This search for an emergent societal sensibility, couched in nationalist terms, is significant precisely at this moment of a hegemonic reconfiguration in the ideology and political economy not simply of the United States as a nation but of the entire global system of nation-states as well.

In my analysis of multiculturalism, I am privileging the category of race because of its centrality in the constitution of national identity in the United States. I do this with the awareness that as multiculturalism has been mainstreamed, its conventional uses have greatly confused matters. As a watchword in the circuits of media and policy, multiculturalism has alternately been deployed to reduce all cultural difference to racial categorization; to displace the political economy of racial divisions with narrowly defined cultural expressivity; or to omit racism from consideration of the national polity altogether. I seek to avoid both the reductions and the elision by sustaining the tension between the specificity of a particular historical formation (in this case race) and its operation within the whole field of cultural difference (here, multiculturalism).

Acknowledging the dilemma of continual (mis)appropriation of the critical vocabulary of an oppositional political project by forces hostile to its politics, Wahneema Lubiano reminds us, "We cannot give up the ground because of what they can do in the name of the ground on which we have chosen to fight." Hopefully, elements of a nationalism and multiculturalism that efface the power of this nation-state's racist imaginary may begin to emerge from these two nonreducible but related moments of an internally differentiated hip hop culture.

The articulation between nationalism and the global framework of nation-states, posed by the ideological confluence of foreign and domestic policy, will serve as the point of reference to join two questions concerning the conceptualization of nationalism. First, if nations are historical and not natural phenomena that must constantly reconstruct their basis for existence as human communities, what principle of societal association gets asserted in the process? Second, what are the practical means for communicating and insinuating this historically bounded assertion of societal order as nation in the everyday lives of the populace?

The first question assumes that nationalism is ideological without specifying the content of that ideology. The second suggests that ideological form must be realized through some material communicative practice and technology. That neither the specificity nor relation of ideological form and content can be assumed from the fact of any given nationalism opens up possibilities from which politics spring. In the case of rap and hip hop, the analysis of "form" and "content" (to the extent these terms remain conceptually distinct) of a particular expression may produce diverse images of nationalist politics. One could say that multiculturalism of a certain sort is at least as old as nation-states, particularly when the exclusion of some cultural difference that resides on national ground, but is considered alien to it, is taken as a founding moment for a national polity. Yet the present manifestation of multiculturalism represents a recognition by the state itself of a certain discrepancy between the fictitious unity proclaimed by the nation-state, and the multiplicity of identity which that state must now contain if it is to retain its legitimacy as the warden of a national entity. In this regard, multiculturalism marks and divides a double relationship. From the perspective of the state attempting to police a national monoculture, it is the refusal of any given identity to be contained within the center, to abide by the institutional boundaries by which the state allots recognition (a predicament from which social movements themselves are by no means immune, insofar as recognition and other material resources are mutually constitutive). From the perspective of those multiple identities, it is the insistence on the unruly polyvocality of difference that hints at what is formative not of nations but of society. Between these two perspectives lies the politics of recognition— the state seeking to determine the form of what gets recognized, versus the multicultural forces that are themselves agencies of self-recognition.

In the present context, multiculturalism is not only the name given to cultural diversity but also the terrain where opposing ideologies of culture are in contention. When multiculturalism is deployed as a negative point of reference (a bad other or an ontological threat) to consolidate the new order, it is as a discourse and as a political economy of racialization. This political economy wields race in word and deed as a principal means for dividing society, seeking legitimation in no small part by treating the divisions within society as natural consequences of the differences among cultural groups. By means of these racial divides, those who are as authentically domestic as any others are linked to the foreign, both in terms of their origins and therefore fidelity to the national way of life and in terms of some putative cultural association to whatever ails peoples in less resource-full parts of the world.

To reimagine nation along more fully multicultural lines, I propose a conception of body not as a stable presence already available for appropriation but as a composite entity mediated across a conflicted space of the imaginary (literally the representational domain where images appear) and the performative (the practical means through which imaginary forms are enacted). Dance both appears in the conjuncture of imaginary and performative spaces and puts the constitutive features of a composite body on display. For dance is both a bodily practice that figures an imagined world and a momentary materialization through performance of social principles that otherwise remain implicit. In particular, hip hop moves are constituted across very different kinds of space laminated together to configure a composite body. While the electronic media provide a mapped virtual space in which bodies can circulate, these composite bodies always seem to be getting away, disappearing in the moment of reception only to reappear in altered form in that virtuality. The idea of a composite body may invoke associations with the bionic synthesis of flesh and machine or the cybernetic hybrid that rejects the dual In "Critical Moves," the concept of the composite body is introduced as a means to grasp the cultural processes that emanate from diverse sources and never fully come to rest. The composite body is not a fixed empirical type but a heuristic for thinking the physical constitution of complex social relations. This idea is exemplified through the example of hip hop, where the debts to immediate enactment and images from distant airwaves are vividly on display.

The composite body is examined through two moments in the larger process of production: the dissemination of the composite body in Ice Cube's music video "Wicked" and the seemingly discrete site of reception for hip hop in an Orange County, California, fitness club aerobics class. These moments are juxtaposed to the conventional means through which an image of the monocultural nation is constructed, notably through the nightly television news broadcast, which relies heavily on racial representations, particularly of crime.

The author's purpose is not to represent the "Wicked" music video as representative of rap music video, nor to depict the aerobics class as typical of how the non-black population relates to hip hop culture. Instead, the goal is to specify how instances of popular culture are situated in and figurative of a certain multicultural and national context, a context that mediates their relationship. The connection between these instances, which never actually meet, is described as "weak links."

Through this study, the author emphasizes the importance of understanding mediated relations, irrespective of the medium through which they pass, in order to comprehend the idea of society. The author also traces their own composite body through this one mediating link, as the study of culture in capitalist society is the study of such mediations. The spirit of this inquiry is to consider my own suspicions about the demonization of nationalism (which, as an internationalist of a certain stripe, I am susceptible to) and multiculturalism (of which I am a partisan in search of practical affiliation) to see what may be repressed in them. By reflecting on my own process of incorporation into the body politic, I am mapping the scene of what mobilizes my affinities and affiliations within the multicultural nation.

As the seemingly uninvited guests of the new world order, a barrage of nationalisms (ideologies, movements, political formations) have been tearing at the claim that we are living through a happy, if hasty, consolidation of global society. As with the Communism of old, there is still a spectre stalking, but unlike Marx's formulation in the Communist Manifesto, this specter appears to be not just haunting Europe but also disquieting its old colonial haunts. While these nationalist impulses may threaten to fracture the unifying consciousness of a new global order, it should be clear that they are the negative point of reference for a particular nationalist project, that of the United States, which takes as its own interest the role of capital's global guardian. For the United States, at least, anticommunism animated the ideology of how America came to be seen in the world, but anticommunism was also intended to make it impossible to speak of labor's domestic desire in political terms that were fundamentally opposed to capital. I would like to suggest that nationalism, when it is encoded for consumption at home as multiculturalism (though more can be placed under this sign), effects a similar slippage of foreign and domestic policy. What is at stake politically in this slippage, however, are the principles used for encoding the policy toward foreigners with precisely what the state finds difficult to manage domestically. Yet multiculturalism can also name the aspiration for a post racial constitution of difference. By postracial I simply mean that the structures of institutional division by race would yield to a societal context for identification in which associations formed by people through all manner of activities would be mutual and self-constituting. A post racial politics does not preclude an ongoing cultural or historical significance for racial or other categories of identification. Rather, this post racial politics acts against the history that made racial classification such a fundamental aspect of colonialism. Further, it is implicitly internationalist in that the attainment of national sovereignty as a defence against divisive and appropriative incursions to which a population or territory is subjected would no longer be necessitated for the articulation of any people's process of identification and differentiation.

What complicates this discourse is the tension between the historical formulations of race as tied to the biological and ideas of culture as linked to some notion of civilizational destiny. One risk of multiculturalism is to efface this history by subsuming race to culture, where the latter is simply an attribute shared by all members of a national polity. The global proliferation of nationalisms against the singularizing national project of the United States already indicates that the time when nationhood could be imagined to be sufficient as a condition for even limited societal and cultural development may have already passed. For now, the one (nation-state) is attempting to excise the (national) others from its own body politic by weaving an attribution of societal decline through a narrative of crime, race, immigration, and scarcity. Rather than providing a model for development as such, these emergent nationalisms offer a newly displaced perspective on the relation between cultural and economic development. Taken together, the global emergence of so many nationalisms can be read against what is conventionally seen as their splintering impulse to figure a different principle of composition, association, and ordering of people in the world. To promote a more comprehensive understanding of the composite body of dance, it is not helpful to assume that every single instance of nationalism can be recruited to a counterhegemonic project (one that opposes what is coercive in the global order). Rather, it is the task of critical analysis to raise questions about the field within which the whole range of nationalist phenomena emerge, in an effort to locate what might constitute adequate terms of opposition.

Beyond the particular identity claims that are made for social groups, something of the context for identity lies entangled amid the repressed. Hence, precisely at a moment when nations and national boundaries are being violated on an unprecedented scale by forces as varied as markets and armies, questioning nationalism can reverse the moralizing binaries of international politics to reveal the identification of dominance.

From within the United States, the spectacle of disorder attributed to those without globally legitimated state power has been offered as an object lesson whose truth (that so-called tribalism will succumb only to a rationalizing — read external—force) can now be applied with equal vigor to the domestic population, whether by better policing communities or incarcerating those who deviate. The representation of coercion as a force of reason is central to the current ideological conjuncture (though hardly new). Time and again, media images of violence perpetrated by those most subject to the disordering effects of the system are substituted for any portrayal of the coercive power of the system itself.

To the extent that this substitution is accepted ideologically, it assumes the place of a popular desire for state intervention to redraw society along racial or national lines. The problem of this generalized desire for coercive intervention (even if, like all desire, it remains unfulfillable) to reinforce boundaries (whether of nations or neighborhoods, domestic spaces or private properties) that have supposedly been transgressed underlies so much of the racialized narrative of crime. (Although this narrative is decidedly gendered as well; consider, for example, the daily discursive allotment of street crime to black men in the public sphere and a version of domestic crime attributed to the very existence of pregnant teenagers and welfare mothers —typically portrayed as black and unwed.)

This incessant overrepresentation of crime—even as crime rates decline, whereas incarceration numbers increase—provides the ideological grounds for the isomorphic identification of foreign and domestic policy along the newly redrawn racialized lines of those who savage society’s order and whose presumed wildness can be tamed only by applications of state violence.

Within the United States, multiculturalism is treated, by its critics and among some of its proponents, as a nationalist expression (black, Chicano, Puerto Rican, Hawaiian) without the power of a state that can undermine the claims to cultural sovereignty that support the prevailing political order. So too, critics and proponents can contest the notion of a single, monolithic culture that bounds and bonds the nation. Clearly, the challenge to the idea of a uniform national character has many inflections and tendencies. Some appear to present a mirror reflection of what they oppose, particularly if it is said that a nation is composed of many cultures, but each is essentially and internally the same. Yet the views which I find most valuable and which dis- pute the claim of a national monoculture accept diversity as residing both among and within cultures.

National culture is conventionally understood as a set of collectively identifying attributes shared by a group of people. Following from this perspective of culture as a set of common values, one could presumably discover America in the features of a typical American. But, surely, such a procedure would produce a portrait of exclusion, a face of one that would leave others outside it. Once the definition of culture as a common content that defines a population is accepted as credible, the result is likely to be a conception of identity that is as rigidly homogenous. If national culture or cultural attributes are instead defined with respect to the socially and historically constituted context in which they are generated, the United States can sensibly be spoken of as one such context in which identity and difference are defined. The matter of how people fit into that larger social setting, however, is by no means settled by invoking the name of the country where people live.

The problem in need of explanation is how processes of identification operate within the national context to establish the range of diversity through which people come to know themselves and act with respect to others. If multiculturalism makes any sense as a force that transforms nation-states rather than one that conserves either the privilege of or discrimination against a particular cultural grouping, it is as the theory of that national context and not as an assortment of supposedly discrete minor monocultures held out against some putative national majority.

To realize the critical possibilities of multiculturalism, one must first appreciate that the meaning of the term is far from settled. It then becomes possible to enter into a contest over the various conceptual deployments of the term within the scene of national politics. Given the increasing currency of its corporate, administrative, and monocultural manifestations in public discussion and institutional practice, simply flying the banner of multiculturalism is no guarantee of a critical and renovative politics committed to both diversity as national identity and substantive inclusion in the design of social life.

Part of what makes the use of the term “multiculturalism” so complex in contemporary discussions is that the grounds for embracing or rejecting it differ so dramatically. Multiculturalism has developed into an entire discursive field capable of classifying positions (of both proponents and opponents) as conservative, liberal, and radical. But these positions clearly do not compete in some grand supermarket of ideas; rather, multiculturalism as a concept circulates within institutional and discursive arrangements, such as media, schools, and legislatures, that eclipse the very political differences the concept was intended to mark in the first place. More specifically, the state has acted to convert the demands of social movements (from civil rights onward) into entitlements that can be disbursed individually, upon verification of the citizen-subject’s identity. "Surely, this attempt at decolonization has cut in both directions, as more and more kinds of demands can be directed at the state for redress. Hence, discussing multiculturalism can itself generate enormous slippage of just what identities, issues, and frameworks are being considered. Surely, such confusion is promoted when culture is defined exclusively from the perspective of commonality rather than as the very incorporation of diversity, as, for example, when culture is taken to be what demarcates one group from another or one kind of practice from others considered political or economic. If culture is taken simply as a certain type of practice or an identifying boundary of a group, then culture can be constructed as external to political economy. Once the discursive and institutional division of practices and groups is accepted, it is possible to define one culture as normative and see it as contaminated by another, to take culture as an autonomous sphere of the life-world (from which cultural values issue) which can be colonized by the instrumental reason that dominates the capitalist political economy, or to suggest that culturally inflected politics replace structural transformations of society altogether. Each of these positions may critique multiculturalism for different reasons, but they all accept the conception of culture as an array of activities shared by a group that set the group apart from society as a whole.

The picture of society as one that is composed of cultural groups (or communities), on the one hand, and social structures, on the other, recalls the sociological conceptions of Gemeinschaft (community) and Gesellschaft (society) that were enlisted by Ferdinand Julius Tennies and Emile Durkheim, and many who followed in the twentieth century, to account for modernization itself. Community is here invested with an archaic status as the repository of traditional particularisms that are surpassed by the universal rationalization wrought by modern society. Community can then become an object of nostalgia, rather than being the associational aspect produced within contemporary society.

At the most general level of understanding, culture is the principle of association present in all forms, sites, and expressions of social practice, not simply a particular type of practice. Culture animates social movements and political parties; it is what moves people in the workplace and at home, what drives the experience of love and death. This conception of culture relates to a sociological perspective in which the production and circulation of value (economic) and the regulation and articulation of contradiction (political) are, like culture, aspects of all social activity. The workplace may be a privileged site for the production of value, and the dance club, a scene where identity is noticeably mobilized—that is, it is meaningful to speak of economic and cultural institutions—but the practices that these settings organize should be grasped as all sharing economic, political, and cultural dimensions. It follows from this understanding of how society works that multiculturalism cannot be seen merely as the diversity that delineates one group from another but as the contest over how diversity mobilizes the entire process of identification. Part of that battle concerns how multiculturalism is recognized as a political force, one version of which focuses on what gets recognized as a legitimate cultural entity." The politics of recognition can then take for granted the stability and legitimacy of the institutional forces, namely, the state, which is in the unique position to grant recognition to those presumably without the means to recognize themselves. Recognition is a resource possessed by the state rather than a cultural capacity generated by those demanding recognition.

This officializing version of multiculturalism is appealing to conservatives and liberals who enjoy government prerogative insofar as the state remains the sole arbiter of what and who receives recognition. Hence, whether the debates center on the curriculum, civil rights, health care, or employment, diversity will always end up being contained within the regulatory apparatus of the state. For the state, diversity will be treated as a problem to be administered and managed, like all others, whose importance is measured by the funds disbursed to solve it.

The homogenizing powers of recognition (by which the welfare state, such as it is, individualizes structural and historic inequities as social problems of disadvantaged persons that can then be rectified through government administration and assistance) attempt to confine multiculturalism to the monocultural protocols of the nation-state.

What is omitted from discussion is a different politics altogether —that is, the contention over what would count as recognition. If the means of recognition are not assumed to be monopolized by the state, some of the powers of granting recognition to multicultural practice could be transferred to and through critical analysis. With this transfer of power, principles of association may begin to emerge that compromise the claim to universal recognition vested in the state’s self-legitimating authority to arbitrate all difference within the nation.

National states have only ever been composed of many distinct cultural groups and identities. And yet national identities are themselves projected, to both citizens and foreigners, as if they made up some coherent whole, a unity. Given the actual cultural diversity within national borders, such claims of unitary identity can only be fictitious (that is, cultural inscriptions with political effects) or, in the words of Benedict Anderson, “imagined communities.” For Anderson, “fiction seeps quietly and continuously into reality, creating the remarkable confidence of community in anonymity which is the hallmark of modern nations.”

Because nation, as a geopolitical unit, is stamped with the highest value in the global currency of identity and marked with the greatest freedom from external sources of exploitation, struggles articulated through multiculturalism as an oppositional form of self-recognition through difference can themselves take on the calling of national formation. This observation seems consistent with Paul Gilroy’s claim that “the politics of ‘race’ in this country is fired by conceptions of national belonging and homogeneity which not only blur the distinction between ‘race’ and nation, but rely on that very ambiguity for their effect.”

As in other articulations of culture and political economy, the United States appears to follow Britain (Gilroy’s “this country”) down the road of imperial decline. But the very different global projection of the United States would seem to indicate that racialization here is more than a national effect. As such, this racialization raises the possibility that formations like "black cultural nationalism" are something other than the "inversion" of their hegemonic counterpart that Gilroy suggests. It is not that a politics of racial exclusion could counter the global effects of capital in an era of decline in the system of national states. Rather, analysis of nationalism cannot simply begin from within. Any call for separation must be read in the context of, first, a prior penetration of global forces (the trajectories of colonialism and imperialism) into the terrain of a given population and, second, a subsequent flight from or expropriation of what is valuable in that terrain, both of which sustain ongoing relations of under-development. In this regard, the collective self-centeredness, or centrism, of certain cultural nationalisms cannot be seen as equivalent to the centers of state power that organize hierarchies of identity along racial lines, for that centrism is an effect of a racializing hierarchy and not generative of it. Such rhetoric of centrism must be placed within a multicultural frame to indicate the attempt to assert ground within a field of difference from which an identity could be voiced. Juxtaposing one conception of nation to another exposes the violent complicity of the state in the process of racialization and points to some other location from which the imagining of community could take place. While the state concentrates violence, even terror must seek some distance from what it terrorizes.

This is one reason why the sociologist Max Weber understood the state as the monopolization of the legitimate means of violence. Because state violence can always be applied to a population, legitimation would seem to rest on the ability to imagine that violence will be applied elsewhere, generating both the anonymity of association and "remarkable confidence" in community that Anderson described. He also appreciates that imagination must have a means of constitution and expression and that it must link together a desire for association, an acceptance that power is exercised, and an experience of the movement of that particular form of society as the only possible means for the passage of time.

In chapter 3 of Imagined Communities, Anderson locates this massive and multiple process of ideological coordination in the ability for the representation of collectivity to circulate within a given population, creating a means of participation in the process of national self-reflection. He calls the political economy of information that supports the apparatus of imagined communities and precedes electronic mass media by several centuries "print-capitalism." Accordingly, cultural production in general and the production of the written word in particular become both a site of capital accumulation and a means of its extension. This capitalization of culture assumes that the control over writing that had delimited the state from the rest of the body politic and had defined the state's hold on truth now passes into a more general circulation of the written word, through books and newspapers, that will serve to recognize the necessity of the state. As a strategy for constituting state power, writing shifts from an interiority to an exteriority, from a self-containing technique monopolized by those directly affiliated with the state to a more general ideological economy that stands formally outside the state in order to justify it! Here Anderson has gone a long way toward bringing cultural processes into the center of political economy, as well as articulating the materiality of cultural forms with something like a mode of production. But he seems to take the persistence of nationalism as evidence that the cultural processes work in the way he describes, hence introducing the possibility of granting to nationalist ideology the unifying effects that it seeks for itself in practice. One question that can be raised is who and what is excluded in a given instance of print capitalism’s circulating representation. Anderson claims that the experiential dimension of the nationalist project is most clearly consolidated in the novel. Yet, one might ask how well this theory of nationalism travels when applied to other parts of the globe and whether theories generated from situations that have experienced colonialism can deepen an understanding of nationalist yearnings in the United States, which, after all, was once itself on the other side of the colonial divide. For example, John Rowe and Vivian Schelling, writing about Latin America, have puzzled over the efficacy of such forms of nationalist ideology (even as they are quick to identify the nationalism of Latin American literary output) for countries with vast non-literate populations or where mass literacy comes after national formation. They have pointed instead to popular culture, from religious figures such as the Virgin of Guadalupe to political ones like Simén Bolfvar, as the circulating images for collective self-reflection.

Roger Bartra, reflecting on Mexico, understands well the cultural effectivity of the state project when he says: "The nation state is the most traveled and at the same time the most impenetrable domain of modern society. We all know that those black lines on the political maps are like the scars of unremitting war, plunder and conquest; but we also suspect that, in addition to the state violence upon which nations are founded, there are strange, age-old forces of a cultural and psychological nature that trace the frontiers separating us from strangers. These subtle forces, subjected to the harshness of economic and political oscillations, are nevertheless responsible for the opacity of the phenomenon of nationhood. Among other things, this opacity obscures the profound motives that lead men to tolerate a system of domination and, by the forbearance they display, to give a seal of legitimacy to injustice, inequality, and exploitation." In the twentieth century, cinema, television, comic books, and video constitute these "subtle forces" arrayed against the unnuanced presence of a "system of domination." Among Bartra's contributions to the discussion is an appreciation of how nationalism circulates between the levels of the popular and the dominant. It is crafted out of a "handful of stereotypes codified by intellectuals, the traces of which are, however, reproduced in society, creating the illusion of a popular mass culture." For Bartra, nationalism is sustained by a certain anti-modernist impulse that gets thrown up in the face of modernization. But for him this anti-modernism is ultimately an imaginary figure that is impossible to sustain, and its collapse hints at an anti-capitalism that the nationalist intellectuals (of Mexico at least) had refused. People such as Anderson, J. A. Armstrong, and Anthony Smith view nationalism as more tenacious, the latter two especially because they trace it to cultural formations that antedate and are sustained through capitalism. Whether or not one can find more continuity than reconfiguration in these nationalist tropes over time, the question of whether one can see the nation-state as containing a single nationalist ideology remains problematic. As Aijaz Ahmad suggests, we may be better off picking our nationalisms on the basis of their particular politics in a global context that renders nationalism a central idiom of historical shifts of any sort (a point that would now seem to hold for multiculturalism as well). "The issue of nationalism is much more difficult to settle, because nationalism is no unitary thing, and so many different kinds of ideologies and political practices have invoked the nationalist claim that it is always very hard to think of nationalism at the level of theoretical abstraction alone, without weaving into this abstraction the experience of particular nationalisms and distinguishing between progressive and retrograde kinds of practices." With respect to postcolonial situations, Partha Chatterjee has grasped the double bind of seeking national autonomy by securing a place within the system of global capital. According to Chatterjee, political expressions may critique the language of Enlightenment discourse while succumbing to its effects. He notes, "There too the fragility of the forced resolution by nationalism of the contradiction between capital and the people-nation is shown up." For the United States, the most politically interesting and complex nationalist expressions have emanated from those quarters closest to postcoloniality, especially from the African American community. Spike Lee's film Malcolm X, based on the life of the figure with the greatest contemporary resonance for issues of black nationalism, illustrates the intricate relation between the form and content of nationalist ideology. I would insist that the entire racist formation of the United States and the Reagan-Bush-Clinton racializing terror (from their fiscal policies to their campaign pronouncements) has to be included, along with the agency of cultural personae such as Lee, to account for Malcolm X's ongoing appeal among diverse sectors (and for different reasons) of the African American population." In a recent collection of essays on Malcolm X, editor Joe Wood pointed to a reappropriation that proposes a counterhegemonic reception: "We need to put Malcolm to better use. Malcolm, in the end, gave us no coherent ideology, but he did leave us a site for Black political discourse. Recently I asked Justice Thurgood Marshall what he thought of Malcolm, and he said, 'All he did was talk.' The Justice meant this observation as a complaint, but I see it as Malcolm's most appealing characteristic. He stands for Black talk about Black thinking; we use him as a starting point. We seek, as Malcolm did, to name ourselves, and we begin, as Malcolm did, with the Black mask given us. We take the baton from Malcolm: we take our humanity for granted, and we realize that our community is made up of people of all sorts of colors, genders, classes, ethnicities, sexualities, etc. We have always known that African Americans weren't the only 'niggers' on this earth, and now we invite all other people who are oppressed to join us." The promise of Wood's comment is that blackness could be understood situationally rather than constitutionally. A nationalist project built on the former premise could only operate against the dominant language of nationalism offered by the latter term. Gianni Vattimo puts the matter well when he discusses the immediacy of encounter with "other worlds" that become possible in "a society of generalized communication and the plurality of cultures." As he says: "Other possibilities of existence are realized before our very eyes, in the multiplicity of 'dialects' and in the different cultural universes opened up by anthropology and ethnology. To live in this pluralistic world means to experience freedom as a continual oscillation between belonging and disorientation." While we could wonder what language these "other possibilities" are dialects of (I would call it socialism) and whether "plurality" could refer to a present society so dependent on exclusion, Vatimo nonetheless can be read as pointing out what has become socialized under the current circumstances. He then adds the caveat that "we ourselves still do not have a clear idea of its [freedom's] physiognomy." I would suggest that physiognomy has been altogether too absent in discussions of freedom insofar as they assume the form of a nationalist project. A conception of nationalism as an embodied affiliation might temper the separatist impulses of national liberation (flights of freedom from the old order aimed at taking some possession of territory rather than a potentially more radical collective self-possession) with a fluency of movement on a terrain shared with others.

Moreover, it is curious that in an ideological form often noted for its display of irrationalism, the analysis of nationalism's technologies would assume such a strong cognitive basis. When we look at nationalism's strongest articulations, it is not at all apparent that reason is what holds the nation together. Although the enforcement of boundaries may keep others out, there remains, beyond the question of legitimating the state, what keeps those within in touch (at least virtually) with one another, for even an imagined community must maintain a sense of itself. Unlike the image of a national border, which presumably contains a static void, the real forces of society are constantly in motion. Yet the recognition of this social motion's materiality is scarcely recognized in the literature. It is as if the once vibrant notion of nation as the body politic had lost all its kinesthesia. Some of this may no doubt be the effect of choreography's slipping out through the palace gates, thereby rendering the relation of dance and state, body and nation, more opaque. But it may turn out that even if dance has lost the political instrumentality of its courtly manifestations, it remains a place to locate the practical embodiment of nation. I will now turn to theorize this possibility, bearing in mind one of Homi Bhabha's very suggestive formulations with the hope of applying it beyond the practice of writing on which his analysis depends: "The nation reveals, in its ambivalent and vacillating representation, the ethnography of its own historicity and opens up the possibility of other narratives of the people and their difference."

The double relationship of multiculturalism and nationalism—the state's containment of identity, which multiculturalism refuses, and the unruly polyvocality of difference, which it promotes —has certainly been present in dance. In the most general terms, what precedes and follows dancing is the ongoing capacity for the differentiation of physical activity, namely, what is constitutive of the cultures of dance and dancers. It is this aspect of self-constituting differentiation, the creative energies assembled across dancers' bodies, that points to the capacity of dancers to make instances of society. Typically, dance labor is not recognized by the state and is often attributed to making dances, minimizing its political efficacy. This unrecognized capacity for society that results from the encounter of difference is, from the perspective of those who create expressive forms, what might most properly be termed “multiculturalism.” The state does not recognize this capacity, and the means of representation are inadequate to promote their interests.

Popular culture, conceived in terms of its circuits of expression rather than any determinate aesthetic content that would differentiate it from art more narrowly, can be said to be where production and reception of knowledge and aesthetics come together for the majority of the population. The state appears absent, despite an uncanny willingness to prosecute signs of difference as if they were sources of social ills (for example, 2 Live Crew, the "obscene" rap group) or as if they represent the world (as in the news coverage of the Gulf War).

Nonetheless, it is in mass media and popular forms that the multicultural presence is most fully represented. Yet these abundant displays of difference (although certainly much difference is excluded from the most accessible venues of commercial representation) are often taken to be the very indicators of and explanations for social underdevelopment. Specifically, in the strident tones familiar to the disciples of reform for the laboring populations over the last two hundred years, the pleasures of popular culture are said to have eroded the work ethic (to say nothing of the social wage).

In short, no matter how much difference is displayed in popular culture, for the disciplining gaze of production, it cannot amount to much. A consumer-driven economy runs into serious trouble when profitable acts of consumption are attacked as immoral. But this apparent immorality in the marketing of cultural forms sundered from a concern with their content, to which corporate agents express such hollow bafflement, reflects the very disarticulation of production and circulation that Marx identified so clearly.

It is important to identify a multiculturalism both of form and of content. Emblematic of such content is the emergence of hip hop culture among young African Americans and Latinos over the last two decades. While initially apparent in street forms such as break dancing and in clubs where contemporary rap developed out of the work of disc jockeys in the seventies, these expressions quickly found representation in mass media. The capacity of these circuits for appropriating images from emergent styles, again without respect to their use or context, is characteristic of commodified culture generally and, insofar as it results in extensive distribution, signifies capitalism's democratic promise. Yet appropriation presupposes control over some means of production, in this case cultural production.

With respect to black popular culture—itself forced to confront a whole history of cultural appropriation—the claims to ownership over traditions of stylistic innovation come tinged with the politics of racial domination. Beyond the compensatory dimension to these cultural economies for those excluded from other circuits of capital, the demands and consequent capacities that are features of all cultural creativity attain a concentration and social reflexivity that informs particular aesthetic constitutions of blackness. In this regard, the generative capacity for innovation cannot be subsumed to the control over the dissemination of cultural output, what gets seen and heard in the marketplace. In this larger respect, the trajectory of hip hop is unexceptional; rather, it is the context in which appropriation occurs where any novelty in the process must be assessed. Indeed, within a few years of the appearance of break dance, it was performed before President Reagan at a national arts awards ceremony. By the end of the 1980s, it had left nary a trace on the streets. As Alan Light remarks, “Maybe it was just too obviously contrived to last, but the break-dancing sound and look quickly fell into self-parody — much of it was dated by the time it even got released.”† Yet other dance styles continued to emerge from hip hop culture, in a generative capacity for style that was not exhausted by the incessant appropriations and commodifications.

On the contrary, because hip hop emerged at the same moment as that visualization of sound, the music video, the image of African Americans, especially was now expanded in the figuration of youth more broadly. Simon Jones has appreciated the constitution of youth culture across racial lines, which effectively “unleashed a new phase in the popularity of public dancing”:

From its very inception, the production and consumption of the “new” music was the site of a complex of power relations linking both black and white musicians and consumers to the entertainment industry. Those relations turned on the contradictions of using forms inherently opposed to white hegemony, and forged out of the experience of racial oppression, as sources of meaning and pleasure. At the heart of them lay a fundamental tension between white youth’s struggles for more responsive and articulate modes of cultural expression, and black musicians’ struggles against white cultural and economic power to redefine their music. The result has been a unique cultural dialectic of white appropriation and black innovation that has supplied one of the inner motors of popular music’s evolution.‡

While diverse in their own right, these images of youth generated through hip hop often suggested an ungovernable economy of motion, a pleasure in speed that does not find measurement in productivity, a celebration of the capacity for celebration. It is not that these qualities are adequate to specify hip hop moves, for these features can be found in other dance forms. Rather, they pertain to some of the generalized features of multiculturalism with respect to its refusal of containment through commodification and disappearance through appropriation. This last claim would be particularly suspect if popular African American dance were confined to music video. Although mtv displays hip hop as part of its programming content, hip hop is a form of multiculturalism that occupies a range of public spaces. The rapid editing techniques used to represent contemporary popular dancing in video suggest bodies that are continually spliced, fragmented, pursued by the frame, and consummated beyond it. The resulting visual density of these videos assumes a kinesthetics of reception among bodies whose pleasures are taken through these mediated paces. Indeed, these dancing bodies are composite bodies, part mediated image, part club-based referent, part Walkman interiorization. Given the emergence and reemergence of multicultural forms in the already represented spaces of popular culture, the body is never available for dancing as the authentic, original experience suggested by certain notions of modernism. This compositeness troubles the kind of originary tale told above in which hip hop is wrested from its humble beginnings to be selectively digested by the culture industry. For contemporary black popular culture is already inside of and penetrated by electronic media. Consider the following from what is generally taken as the most authoritative cultural history of hip hop:

Street culture has always been a good sales pitch for pushing vicarious thrills on the market. For a brief pause in all the phoney realism of The Composite Body of Dance 127 Flashdance, the hyped up dance movie of 1983, one of the sources for Jennifer Beals' overblown dance routines comes to life. Like a revisitation of Bill "Bojangles" Robinson teaching Shirley Temple how to tap, the heroine takes in a few seconds of The Rock Steady Crew doing their robot routines in the park to the accompaniment of a huge portable tape box. The music on the box is a hip-hop anthem—Jimmy Castor's "It's Just Begun" —a hard dance track from 1972 which fuses one-chord riffing, a Sly Stone pop bridge, fuzz guitar, timbales breaks and an idealistic lyric applicable to any emergent movement, be it dance, music, politics or religion. It gives an impression of the breadth of Jimmy Castor's music and its reflection of the New York mix, encapsulating an involvement which dates back to the beginning of rock and roll. [Caster himself had his start in music with Frankie Lymon in the 1950s.]¹

One could go back to the formation of slave culture and its articulation of nationalism, as Sterling Stuckey has done, to trace influences that confound origins. But as an intervention into a world saturated by mass media, the observation by Rush Communication's Carmen Ashhurst-Watson that rappers used turntables as instruments after music programs were cut from the schools is quite useful for thinking about the conditions of hip hop's emergence.² By the early nineties, some of the physical manipulation of recorded music displayed in scratching had become computerized in the relatively affordable sampling machines. And yet this reappropriation of the ability to sample material from across the cultural spectrum simulates, through its own capacity to construct an imaginary terrain, the very powers of the complex media-market-state constitutive of nation. This simulation creates a virtual community expressed in one volume of "hiphopology" as "nation conscious rap," a cultural emulation of what states accomplish without the powers to impose a sovereignty of exclusion by reason of territory or citizenship.³ Hence, although there is nothing novel in the fact of cultural reappropriation, these current manifestations are constituted out of a penetration of national and global airwaves, that may insinuate a larger scale of imagined community than was available to the song and dance hybrids (jigs, tap, jazz, rock) of earlier times. Further, these prior appropriations occurred under the star of a framework of nation-states that was still in ascendance. With today's cracks in the edifice of national sovereignty increasingly visible, the pathways of appropriation may have changed. This only raises the stakes for cultural borrowings, whether in the direction of more strident exclusions and prohibitions or in the service of new grounds of affiliation. That multicultural bodies are composite bodies, constituted across sites that are themselves fundamentally different from one another, hints at what is so disruptive about multiculturalism to any effort at appropriation or containment. In this regard, multiculturalism presents a radical difference of form and content, as the above example of hip hop dancing suggests. If this radicalism of cultural form is to be made available to politics, it might be useful for fuller reflection on those social relations made palpable through dance. As I suggested at the opening of the chapter, I want to adopt a conception of a composite body as mediated across a space of the imaginary and the performative in order to rethink how nations are imagined. As imaginary, the media provide a mapped virtual space in which bodily identities can circulate. As performative, composite bodies elude any simple representation or appropriation.

Before moving on to the workings of the composite body as it is figured in hip hop culture, I want to indicate the national geography of race in the ideological technology that the composite body is up against. For all its limitations, the most comprehensive figuration of nation in the media is the evening news. It could be said that the limitations of the news belie its principles of operation. The very redundancy of the news, its repetition of formula, and its marking of the day’s end provide a stability of representation that constitutes a field from which being called or interpellated into the nation becomes possible.

The problem that this interpellation poses is above all that of scale. How can the enormous expanse of nation be reconciled with the privatizing limits of the citizen body? Insofar as it is a technology of national ideology, the news functions to invert the order of that national scale by reversing the spatial values of the globe with the internal temporality of programming. In effect, the smaller the scale, the longer the coverage. Twenty minutes of “local” news, two minutes of national, one minute of world, and the separate voices that mark the time of sports and weather typify the ratios of coverage in a half hour punctuated by the different spaces of advertising. Taken together, the broadcast could be said to provide viewers with a map of their own emplacement in the world that also reduces that world in and to a single stroke.

Sports reporting, too, narrates what are projected as local affiliations in the field of the national, and weather literally maps the process whereby an eye is placed on the national space as it converges on one’s own backyard. The content of those twenty minutes of local stories, the unspeakable crimes brought to you live, are perpetrated by entities frequently described as savage, wild, or tribal. The civilizing voice of the news anchors one at home by effectively racializing the space of the private so that irrespective of one’s own racial identification, the domain beyond the private is a space of terror for all to fear. This space of terror is, of course, the public sphere, where no demands can be made (we can only seek protection from it) and therefore no politics are possible.

While the news is putatively local, the spatial hierarchies of affiliation, the very conformities of the genre across locality and network, establish it as a technology of nationalism. Negatively by the spaces its sanctions, as much as positively by the security offered through a placement in a virtual space, news locates the citizen body in the national field. The crime story, rather than being an account of what economic forces are doing to the country, becomes the most abiding figure for narrating the nation. This imputes a great deal to what the news signs and almost nothing about how it signifies to people. While its nationalizing strategy may be perfectly legible, the efficacy and effectivity of this strategy are more difficult to read. Nominating the news to lead the national imaginary does not mean its authority will be elected or its rule followed. However people attend to the news, they are implicated in the very transgressions it proscribes. For they do go out into the very public space that the news images as impassable and impossibly dangerous. They are unglued from the set. They even circulate unevenly through television’s own offerings. This very unevenness suggests that on the same surface there can be a variety of reflections that permit different imaginaries of the virtual space of nation. Presumably these also set the composite bodies in motion in different ways (to say nothing of introducing different principles of composition).

One of the commodity forms to emerge in the uneven development of print capitalism is Music Television. Its emergence derived in part from the very weakening of a certain configuration of the technologies of nation ex- tant at that moment—network television and the music industry. As Lisa Lewis has argued, the appearance of cable television had already signaled a 130 CRITICAL MOVES move from mass to segmented markets in the emergence of demographi- cally driven programming. This, in the midst of what Ernest Mandel called the “second slump” of capital (the global economic downturn of the mid- seventies) but which could be viewed in less economistic terms as a con- juncture formed internationally by the U.S. defeat in Vietnam; the oil crisis created by the response of the Seven Sisters (energy multinationals) to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC); capital’s flight from labor and the cities and the connected decline of labor’s standards of living; Reagan’s first presidential bid; and so on.

Demographically targeted marketing could be seen as print capitalism’s attempt to recoup culturally the fragmented critical publics of the 1960s, now redubbed the baby boomers. The panic in the music industry over declining profits established the other component for the creation of MTV in 1981. While commodification was hardly new to rock and roll, its doubling in the music video had a certain appeal in an industry that had to focus anew on its own problems of realizing value (selling its products). Yet with production now coming from outside the conventional television studio system, the permeability of pro- gramming to the vagaries of the popular only increased. Although MTV began with quite narrow and exclusionary musical selections, its own marketing drives introduced certain openings so that the forces of internal differentiation would belatedly yield programming even for such African American popular forms as rap. Rap, in the words of one of its prime movers, Public Enemy’s Chuck D, is already the equivalent of “black television . . . a network for communication.”

Rap, it turns out, is as internally diverse as any other cultural form. Among its variations, however, are some of the more critically minded instances of popular culture. The particular instance I want to examine here is Los Angeles-based rapper Ice Cube’s music video Wicked. It is intriguing both for the imagination of a (dancing) body for nationalism and multiculturalism and for the way it functions intertextually (as television so extensively does) in relation to music videos generally and the claims broadcast news makes as history-in-the-making. "Positively 'Wicked'

When a record is put on a turntable to play, there is a tangible space between cuts, a ring of silence, that separates and frames each tune in that field called THE COMPOSITE BODY OF DANCE. Compact discs seem to have turned that opening into an edge, a perforation that nonetheless serves as a distinguishing mark between what are assumed to be discrete aesthetic units. The way a music video is inserted into its field of reception lacks the temporal seriality of its aural counterpart. Beginnings are difficult to discern. Because one is already looking and at a box that makes implicit (although infinitely interruptable) claims on focus, the start of a video seems to have already happened when one attempts to notice it. The density of change in the visual field renders the perception of difference difficult to identify as a marker of an autonomous aesthetic object.

Music video in its broadcast format takes advantage of these circumstances for viewing to present an aesthetic form that emerges intermittently from its cultural context — that is, whose form and content force the periodic display of that context. This is not to say that all music videos begin in the same way but that they share a problem of beginnings as what gets them started.

The origins of Ice Cube's Wicked lie way beyond what is perceivable on the screen, no matter how much repetition it is subjected to. Indeed, the elusiveness of exactly where it is coming from invites a certain repetition of viewing that mimics some of the work's own internal tropes. The kinesthetics of performance and reception are thereby joined in ways unanticipated in other media.

The first words — more indecipherably textural than textual (“boom, boom, boom, zoom-zoom . . . 007, James Bond”) — are churned out at an incredible pace. In grainy footage, a young black man is visible being pushed into the back of a car. Two white youths run across the screen. A searchlight scans a neighborhood. A black man holds his head. A jet flies over. Black boys run through rubble. The jet again. A man wears a T-shirt that bears the message, “L.A.P.D. ‘We Treat You Like a King.” “Wicked” is the first signifier to achieve full audibility. Barely seven seconds have passed. This is the pace kept over a little less than four minutes. A lot of ground is covered. You're expected to stay put.

I kept putting it on. Dozens of times. The speed of the video splintered the illusion of cyborg fusion between myself and the video screen. I would attempt to catch a detail (like what the T-shirt said) and hit the pause button only to miss the picture. The labor of intellectuals was here mired in the machine and forced to confront its manual dependencies and inadequacies. Trying to stop the flow put me out of time. This temporal conundrum is a process Sean Cubitt has uniquely attributed to video, the “timeshift.” Whereas television presents the prospect of national simultaneity whose real time is demolished by videocassette recorder, with timeshift, TV is no longer a slave to the metaphysics of presence.

Because a mass-broadcast video recording cannot be watched for the first time, the spectacle of viewing is shifted out of the eternal present from the immediate authority of the symbolic to the “variable capital” of the imaginary. As such, video (here in significant departure from its documentary functions and conventions discussed in Chapter 1) bears a certain resemblance to history, because it “remembers the process, the hard work of forgetting” but also “has the potential to be less a medium of forgetting and more a medium through which is recorded what has already been lost, the memory of absences which once motivated desire, or which can still promote anxious, guilty or—modified — nostalgic emotions now." There is something curious in this militancy of the detail, an understatement in a style noted for its overstatements. But such would be the problem of trying to view the video as if it were simply the words of the rapper, namely, from the perspective of auteur. Yet Wicked is distinctive for the persistent disappearance of Ice Cube into the fabric of video and sound. This movement of the rapper’s image is amplified in the motif of pursuit that runs through the piece. The early insinuation of crime and apprehension takes its twists and turns in a confrontation with the discourse of blame to the point where Ice Cube as both suspect and investigator is placed in circulation.

While the two white punks (they are stylistically denotative of what they connote in the narrative) of the opening take hammers to a building, we hear, “Looking for the one that did it / cause you know you’re gonna get it.” The “it” in question is particularly mobile. The two whites are the most recurrent dancing figures in the video. The white boys confound dance and destruction; their kicks that break the glass windows of a vacated building are literally moves in hip hop vocabulary. This doubling of form and function calls into question the social innocence of the dance step, which relies on its relation to an activity—unlike the movement gesture of modern dance, which retains its position with the so-called autonomy of the aesthetic and therefore has no effect other than its own expression.

Some of the movement of the two white dancer-hoodlums is more like a self-inflicted hurl of the entire body and so lacks the coolness that comes from keeping the full explosive power set in motion within the body. It must also rely on the work of the video that surrounds it to give it its cool. THE COMPOSITE BODY OF DANCE 133

One of the most contrastive absences in Ice Cube’s video is the display of female sexuality (this from a performer who had once directed the full wrath of his anger on “bitches”) or the body of woman as dance against the arm gesticulations of the rapper. Ice Cube does gesticulate here, but he places white men in the structural role of the dancing feminine, leaving these men with the culpability ascribed to woman in so many rap narratives.

While certainly not a refiguration of the feminine, the absence is worth reflecting on in the context of such intellectuals as Angela Davis and bell hooks, who have engaged Ice Cube on these issues, and given his ongoing willingness to participate in conferences and public affairs programs. The mutual respect this cross-participation displays for all too often segregated public spheres is suggestive of the potential that lies in a deeper exploration of the practical conjuncture of culture and politics.

While women are still at great distance from self-representation in his work, the anger that had once been directed at black women is displaced without necessarily being dissipated. Hence whiteness is feminized in the kind of impossible desire seen in MC Hammer’s hit video Can’t Touch This, in which women are made inaccessible to the star by dancing on a part of the set that is separated from him.

Later in the video, in one of many reversals of who must run and who must hide, or of the expected figures of panic, Ice Cube and friends chase the two whites through the streets. In similar moves, a middle-aged black woman snaps a young black man’s gold chain and keeps him at bay with a pistol as she backs away with her shopping cart. Two masked men are involved in a beating. One mask is of Reagan, the other, an almost subliminal occluded Bush. The former vice president is visible behind his mentor only in an instant of one of many searches for evidence with the remote control that the video invites. It is precisely this type of investigation that articulates and enlists the composite body through the work of reception. The presidential delinquents subject a cop to a fire hose. A fireman torches a car. Two women stomp on a man who is down. "Kick-it, wick-ed, see what they done," goes the refrain. Near the end (like the beginning only an approximation, a direction, not an endpoint, nor an endgame), the cadence remains but the words become, "We're wicked, we're wicked, but we run this town."

Through the thicket of images, the question of culpability has become more complex (who is responsible for what, and what is the agency of responsibility?) so that a visual display of something like a structural account is produced in the movement from persons to the relations of effects. Certainly Ice Cube has not totally abdicated from the culture of personality that lends attention to his voice. But in the context of the highly instrumentalist discussions of the efficacy of rap, his willingness to take himself out of the (video) light affords a reappropriation of the conventions of star focus to other ends. The ethos he constructs banishes the good to a division within the wicked, a running from destruction and toward power, that also introduces a double entendre into the identity of who the "we" are that "run the town."

For if Wicked sketches an urban landscape or, for that matter, a nation, it is one defamiliarized out of the myriad clips of representational cliché. The slippage between city, or inner city as colony, and nation is particularly significant both for black nationalist movements such as the Nation of Islam and for the state project of containment. The former treats the urban core as its national terrain, and the latter sees in that same territory a looming threat to public order that could spill over into other precincts.

The principal trope of visual terror in the coverage of the Los Angeles uprising was screened as the transgression of the inner colony's borders into the nation proper, the so-called multicultural riot. In the video, this black flight appears to have already occurred in a vacated landscape, for this is a town which people inhabit but which no one can live in or work in. There are emptied buildings but nothing like homes, and closed storefronts but no traces of capital, except perhaps the fly-by jet that exists in a different plane.

From within the terrain of the video, it is possible to see capital but not touch it. This visual context gives a certain irony to the line, "Take your job and stick it, bigot" that immediately precedes an image of two boys on a bicycle, one sitting on the handlebars with a shotgun. No job is offered, and the employees of the state (police and fire personnel) don't seem to be doing theirs. It is worth mentioning that these kinds of spaces vacated by capital are common settings for rap music videos.

Digable Planet’s Rebirth of Slick (I’m Cool Like Dat) trades on capital’s flight, making room for the avant-garde in a New York, SoHo-set deindustrial nightspot. In an interview that follows, a band member claims, “We’ve carved out our own slice of America.”

Yet as the popularity of rap across racial lines indicates, the pies of culture and economy remain stubbornly distinct in this country, so that even successful cultural projects (like the joining of hip hop and bebop that the Rebirth of Slick video references) are segregated from the failure of increasing segments of the population to occupy their proportional segment of political and economic resources. In this regard, the insurrection — past and future—referenced in Wicked is a figure for the burst bubble— in this case, not the ruptured economic miracle of Los Angeles or Tokyo but the hyperspace between them. If Rodney King was a spark, it was ignited in an emptied gas can that was full in the mid-eighties, when Los Angeles was the nation’s leading manufacturing center and transpacific trade surpassed exchange across the Atlantic.

All this is to say that features of mapping do not specify a particular vision of social space. This becomes palpable only at the level of a principle of assemblage of the visual. So just what is the space mapped in Ice Cube’s video? The alternation that appears early on between the view from the street and that from the sky (the helicopter searchlight) evokes the marxist geographer Neil Smith’s notion of “jumping scales,” which suggests a strategy for suddenly enlarging what appears as a merely local social and political instance.

Other mapping devices appear in the video, as it were, from above. They are literally taken from broadcast news, a medium claiming to remain above the fray it depends on capturing if it is to have content. One is a sampled image of a map of central Los Angeles, placing a dot on the hot spot. Another is an icon of that index, an aerial shot of the freeway that displays cars in motion without indicating where they are going. These two shots construct planes, perspectives, or scales that are joined momentarily when a jet is shown flying downward, and a soft impression of the word “crash” flits by. One is reminded of the accounts of people firing at aircraft during the uprising, or of the fleeting reference to 007, also the flight number of the Korean Airlines (KAL) jet shot down by the Soviets in 1983, in the first mumblings of the video, now allowed to have growing coherence. If the networks shoot footage, the feet just might shoot back. In this exchange as in so many others, the sign breaks up or crashes when it hits its multifarious uses. But there is also the hint of a crashing of the presumed distance between representation and referent when broadcast news assumes responsibility for mapping the imagined community of nation. Not only because of its sampled content but also because of its hypermobile format, Wicked acts as the double of the news. “We're like reporters,” Ice Cube had once remarked, but rappers are also unlike reporters in that they appear as already situated in the event rather than as merely passing through or over it. In an interview on MTV, the rapper hinted at one connection between the video of the Rodney King beating and his own: “It’s been happening to us for years. It’s just we didn’t have a camcorder every time it happened. "Lacking the omniscient vantage of the panopticon, Wicked suggests that total surveillance — what network helicopters, following their police equivalents, project —is not necessary to document the effects of state. If, despite its claims to be the scene, the news pretends that its visual underrepresentation of events is complete coverage, this video, in the very activity of viewing it, denies any such comfort of sufficiency. It breaks up the self-emplacing ground of the local, implicating an elsewhere and a need to know something else in each passing display. In this regard, for all its references to mapping, the video is also something other than a map.

For all its historical references to musicals and the coterminous and articulated histories of rock and television, as a genre within television, MTV is closest in form and function to a commercial. The aesthetic resemblances result in part from similar techniques of visual sampling and the compression of production values into a few moments that, if budgeted for prime time, could provide hours of programming. Unlike that programming, whose content needs only to reproduce the activity of viewing it, commercials and MTV aim to make a particular point, which is that a certain commodity must be bought.

Further, while it has many stories to tell, music video is visually defiant of narrative. Music video corporealizes sound. It is no accident that the biggest pop music stars of the eighties, Madonna and Michael Jackson, are kinesthetically robust in a way that makes the shimmies and shakes of such predecessors as the Beatles and the Stones (though not, significantly, James Brown or Little Richard) appear incidental by comparison. Rap is the art of tearing into the endlessly sampled surface of popular culture, and it exposes the edges of production in the sphere of consumption. At its best, it treats the silencing barrage of noise to particle acceleration.

Madonna certainly puts popular culture on display by using her body as a screen on which the desire for infinite transformation promised by stardom is projected. Michael Jackson, as a bildungsroman of the star system, is that transformation. His has always been a voice whose agency is the body, his spindly legs like a filigree, a note that plays itself. Jackson is even filtered through Wicked in a variety of ways. In geometric terms, Jackson’s seminal video hits, Beat It and Thriller, constitute a sphere to which Wicked is a tangent. Beat It is a soft, multicultural West Side Story blanched of its tragic moment. Dance heals the wounds of racism, and Michael teaches the steps. Like Wicked, it complicates the discourse of blame that suffuses the race-crime complex, but it imagines a moment prior to conflict when blame can be suspended: “It doesn’t matter who's wrong or right, just beat it.” That conflict is taken as Wicked’s interiority with which it seeks a break.

Another iconic Jackson video, Thriller touches on this interiority but psychologizes it as the other within. In a film within a fantasy within the short film, Jackson, after asking the woman he is with to be his “girl,” confesses, “I’m not like other guys, I mean, I’m different,” and promptly proceeds to turn into a werewolf. The woman, now shown in the theater terrified of this flight from commitment, leaves, and the two find themselves outside on the street when Jackson launches into song and dance. The street they walk down, it turns out, is Union Pacific Avenue in what could (still) be described in the early eighties as industrialized East Los Angeles." The scene (in video and life) quickly becomes deindustrialized, as the couple walk past a graveyard, where Jackson confronts and then becomes one of the foreigners, again changing face and sending his girl in flight, this time to an abandoned Victorian mansion, where, in danger of imminent gang rape by these dead others, she is awakened to the comfort of her suburban couch by Jackson himself, who in the parting shot flashes those other eyes. These eyes, embedded in their skull, with a bangle of hair, bounce in one double-exposed image of Wicked before we see that they are on a T-shirt that Ice Cube is wearing. Bobbing up and down, he appears to be giving the Jackson image a shake to see what will come loose. Against the ersatz mobility from the vacated urban scene, Ice Cube defiantly stays put. He won’t dance his way out of this one.

But I would argue that unlike Madonna or Michael Jackson, for whom video places their dancing on display, Ice Cube’s video work is itself the dancing. It takes its territorializing reach as the reincorporation of an otherwise fragmented cognitive map back onto the social body. It twins its visual jumping of scales with rhythms double-timed within other rhythmic figures, setting the underlying tempo into motion. Taken together, music and image press beyond the borders of representation, while dragging some of the representativity of the video into the virtual space of reception. If TV news is a window on the world, music video is a door that opens in, filling the privacy of one’s living room with a world’s worth of visual economy.

While a piece like Wicked is too thoughtful to be free of worldly images, it takes aim at a body in a way that its more spectacular video cousins cannot. But the body it takes aim at is not confined to the particularized space of reception but rather imagines joining other bodies in a variety of ways. Just as Wicked itself is a condensation of a vast urban space held taut in Ice Cube’s voice, these very parameters of the social are what are loaded onto a (given) viewer’s rocking body, joining it with its virtual society of reception.

Yet this crossing between the image and the body is none other than the dynamic of popular music-dance forms as such. Here the high-low model of cultural dissemination (and dilution) is not collapsed but effaced in the impossibility of fixing a single direction of dissemination/appropriation between the box and the street. It is this ligation between body politic and imagined community that generates a media/performance crossover between social practices and their representation.

Particularly with rap it is difficult to say who’s whoing whom. And yet this seems to be precisely what has provoked so much anxiety about rap (whether Ice T’s Cop Killer or Ice Cube’s Wicked); from the perspective of moralizing authority, representation and practice are collapsed in a different direction so that the word becomes the deed. The studied conflation of image and referent came not only from the likes of Reverend Wildmon and Tipper Gore but also from within the Reagan administration (as well as the campaign trail of candidate Clinton). In detailing the opposition to popular music, Serge Denisoff relates the following: “Surgeon General C. Everett Koop told a southern medical school audience: ‘Violence and pornography are at a crossroads now. One place they are crossing is in these rock video cassettes that have become so popular with young people. He warned that youngsters have become 'saturated with what I think is going to make them have trouble having satisfying relationships with people of the opposite sex.' When it comes to the music industry, rock music uses both pornography and violence, which has a significant impact on the youth. This mythos of the power of simulation makes for much entertainment, but it is clearly not the ideology of people like Ice Cube, who insists that his work is about “raising questions.” But it also carries a certain transitivity — not of emulating its depictions but in joining in the movement of connecting what has become separated by the virtual economy of terror.

Certainly, a single video (no matter how many times it is viewed) cannot carry the weight of imagining community in some still emerging multi-cultural nation. Nor is it apparent, either in terms of production or reception, in what sense a music video — that most intertextual of forms—is ever single. What is most problematic, however, is how the textual multiplicity of the video appears in the social realm bearing those connections that array the composite body.

The way a rap national imaginary proliferates within the boundaries of the nation-state complicates any picture of reception that might assume a one-to-one correspondence between video and virtuality. Without doubt, an ideological technology, whether novels, news, or music videos, will have strong and weak effects. As such, we should take seriously what can be learned from Wicked about disturbing the apparently local instance with the global context, a rerun of that old favorite, the particular and the general, so that its cultural resonances will not be contained by reference to a monocultural nation.

There is no simple correspondence between an artistic voice and the people it invokes or addresses, as if one fit neatly inside the other. Without denying that a video such as Wicked can have its strongest effects of identification among those whose lives find a visual resemblance to it, the work also admits of a kinesthetic sensibility whose weaker effects have a more comprehensive reach. Privileging these weak effects may go further than a study of the obvious strong resemblances to enunciate how hip hop's composite body constitutes a national sensibility in ways that run counter to the dominant imaginings. 

It would seem that rap lies at a great distance from these examples, until we recall that it is precisely the specter of warfare, the hints of a principally, but not exclusively, racially based genocide in the talk of generalized sacrifice, that society is currently being subjected to. It is here more specifically that Wicked imagines a kind of countertalk to the news. Although so-called gangsta rap displays this situation directly both visually and lyrically, other forms of hip hop expression, thought to be thankfully softer, may turn out to share a more profound affinity at the level of the kinesthetic out of which the composite body is assembled. Rap in its totality can more usefully be understood in terms of common sensibilities in its musical form than in continuities of lyric content. These formal affinities become particularly significant for thinking about politics enacted by fewer people than those who are affected by the changes wrought, a situation closely associated with the scale introduced by modernization itself. Rather than assuming the liberal model of majoritarian politics, we may have to recognize that actual political mobilizations invariably draw on what turns out to be a minority of the population.

What may therefore emerge out of a study of the weak links drawn by composite bodies is an appreciation of the context out of which mobilizations themselves are constituted and to which they refer. Rather than the study of who political actors can claim to represent, the focus on weak links asks how political activity is connected through the mediations of a cultural kinesthetic of a composite body that is unequally shared with those not considered to be activists. The gain of this question is to offer context as a materiality actually assembled out of the real social fabric, the composite body politic.

If an ideological technology such as hip hop is to be seen as more than the provenance of a particular cultural group and as a structure of feeling for embodying a multicultural nation, the weak links that mediate the affinities between seemingly disparate identities must be foregrounded. THE COMPOSITE BODY OF DANCE 141

Let me suggest one unlikely network with an even more uncertain outcome in which hip hop traces connections in a multicultural nation, namely, the fitness club. If disco opened the pop kinesthetic in the late seventies to a live encounter with the vinyl surfaces that would get torn asunder with the development of hip hop, aerobics had made those bodies come clean a decade later. At its most sanitized, the circulating sexuality of the disco was transferred to a 900 phone-sex number. The proliferation of fitness clubs in the eighties indicated a transfiguration of bodily publicity that encased each body in a machine or subjected it to the rigors of the workout.

As a countermove, we might see in the aerobics class a distant cousin of the jook, what Katrina Hazzard-Gordon calls the "dance arena" that provided a space where differences within the African American community were negotiated. The eighties were not the only time to see popular dance move from indoors to the streets and back inside again in the form of the house party. Hazzard-Gordon reminds us that in the 1940s in a move that anticipated the civil rights movement, black dance left the jook joint for the streets where gangs filtered through the block parties. The fitness club certainly lacks the economic supports of mutual aid that the jooks provided and offers little respite from discriminating effects elsewhere. The images of the perfectible body emanate from beyond the pulleys and weights where the work-to-fit body is manufactured. The unrelenting music that accompanies each stroke of the fitness regimen attains its greatest functionality on the dance floor of the aerobics class. The making of bodies uninterrupted by other kinds of social division constitutes the club's tacit kinesthetic democracy. Although I grew up amid sport and sought many venues for dancing, I had always resisted this move into the aerobic, until, in what seemed a safely temporary stay in the Southern California of my youth, I found myself a member of the Irvine Family Fitness Center. There, as indistinguishably elsewhere, in addition to the various instruments of corporal adjustment, is a full complement of aerobics classes and their derivations. Among them was one called funk but inflected with hip hop.

At my first class, well over a hundred Anglo and Asian predominantly female bodies obediently followed the steps of the instructor — usually the lone African American in the room. The image of this face-off fits neatly within the visual rhetoric of race that has come to dominate the airwaves, where the non-black masses attend to their own pleasures by watching their black idols at play (despite 142 CRITICAL MOVES the highly problematic recruitment of Asian Americans into the mythos of assimilation). These particular demographics seemed consistent with the notion that aerobics is already gendered as a scene of bodily transformation under the regimen of the gaze. That such a setting would be a site for the reception of hip hop, with its nationalist associations, introduces certain confounding prospects into the construction of nation that are themselves generally absented from political discourse.*

The teacher, it turns out, despite assuring us that she assembled all the combinations herself, also went into Los Angeles to take hip hop classes with those who were really down. There, by her account, her teachers' bodies could be found somewhere on MTV, but her fellow students, clad in baggy pants and oversized jackets, were all drawn from the "hood. Such sheathings, of course, would never do in the fitness club setting, where shiny skins that look like they were newly molted are de rigueur. There also seemed to be little doubt in the teacher's mind that transforming the flesh took precedence over doing hip hop in order to reflect on the broadest possible contours of its national kinesthetic. Surely, this most bland of assimilative processes was no more radical than adding fruit to frozen yogurt.

Like fruit, steps can travel. But it is interesting to reflect on the shape those aerobicizers were getting into. It is probably fair to say that nothing actual is ever typical, and ethnographic description carries with it the burdens of specificity. Here I will attempt to specify a practice of composite bodies based on some five months of attending these aerobics classes. My aim is to explore what sensibilities might emerge in this unexpected site of reception for hip hop. It could be placed somewhere between the privatized space in front of the television screen, where the demands on the body are difficult to discern by way of its response, and the mythological "hood itself, where the presumed identification with the representation of hip hop may get in the way of noting its effects. Let's see what I learned. The faithful gather on the sidelines of the long, mirrored hall. They await the completion of the class before theirs. There is a moment of congestion as the two waves of bodies filter through each other. The earliness is intended to secure the class taker the most desirable placement in the room. Some come early so that they are assured a place in the front center, and others in the back corner. Based on conversations and greetings, people seem to know each other, but only a few others. For the class as a whole, corporeal knowledge is assembled in anonymity. Given the width of the room, it is difficult to see everyone, so that even at this scale, the community must be imagined.

The reference for this imagination is the instructor, Teri Kotinek; the interval of five to ten minutes between classes scheduled in the same studio allows for an anticipation of her arrival not entirely unlike that found at a rock concert. She comes in with a handheld microphone and greets the class in the larger-than-life tones of an entertainer (her credits include a stint on Soul Train), while being buffeted by the driving music that she slips onto the tape machine, quotes the excitement of the concert (or, more precisely, a live television show) as much as it references an aerobics class. She builds on this sense that something is about to happen that people can get swept up in while she offers a process of enlistment in the mutually created event that will follow.

Invariably she surveys those in attendance to ascertain who is there for the first time. She offers a mixed message, enticing frenzied output while admonishing people to "go at their own pace." Beyond juridical considerations of torn bodies, this last phrase, which she will often couple with an exhortation to fuller expenditure, signals the impossible but ongoing conjuncture of the demands that this community fulfill its ideal imagery with the constant slippage or pacing of a particular body through the pictured ideal.

Against the enveloping tide of synchronous movement and stereochronic music, going at one's own pace as a common strategy for taking the class hints at the differentiation generated by this socializing process. Despite the common commands, bodies may come out moving more differently from one another than they went into the class, for difference of a certain sort lies amid what they learn.

The initial synchronizing gesture erupts out of the alignment of spatial polarities, the face-off between teacher and students, desire and mirrored demand. The initial rocking side to side with arms punching the air is simple enough to accustom one to getting the movement without having to see it; it calibrates what will become the central fact of dance and music and establishes the strong lateral emplacement in the space that aligns bodies with the structures of dancing.

The architecture of the room is such that visual depth based on frontal reflection in the mirror (some four bodies deep) is more superficial than the invisible linear pull of thirty bodies across. The choreography adheres in its Cartesian precision to these two forces of visuality and viscerality.

At least several times during the class, Teri will interfere with this opposition, selecting those who can't be seen to demonstrate a phrase of movement or routine. She is clear about her didactic principles in this: "I selected these people because they all do it differently. She does it hip hop. This one does it with technique. And this one just does it." She also plays with hierarchy in the course of her teaching, offering different variations for "new" and "advanced" (which I sometimes hear as "dance") people. Having introduced this distinction, she then makes fun of those who would adopt it as their own. "Now look at these people laughing like they think they're advanced people. No, just kidding." Whenever she disses someone, whether that person is inside the class or outside, she will add "just kidding" to put the point in play. This relation of inside and outside is itself interesting, for all her references to popular figures, which she places in the familiar (for example, Michael for the young Jackson brother), name the anonymous forces which place demands on the body and which are rendered familiar and offered in miniature within the space of the local. These references also help break up her own discourse as composed intertextually of the authority of techniques for the perfectible body with the pleasures of popular culture.

These two texts are structurally related as well in the organization of the class per se. The first half hour is represented as the "warm-up," a movement phrase which accumulates out of a series of moves that she shows through constant repetition and which remains basically the same each class. In the second half, she teaches a "routine" whose newness to all is intended to level differences in familiarity and aptitudes for movement and allow the focus of the class to slide from getting in shape to getting into hip hop. Yet, from the very beginning of class, she herself offers hip hop as the means to a style rather than simply a fit end by opposing her authority as teacher to that of performer when she invariably takes liberties with the very movement she has presented. Hip hop proceeds as the very movement away from its pedagogical conditions toward its performative promise.

Rather than speaking a language of performance as that which is other to technique, she offers something else to compensate for the urge to follow her technical imperatives too closely. To modulate any fixation on getting the steps right, Teri provides commentary on the context that has brought people to the fitness club which draws out and on the contradictions of the situation. One evening, before offering us a special extra segment of the class to work on "abs" (the sculpting away of the body's center as an offering to beauty), she delivered a testimonial on the vagaries of anorexia and a homily on the beauties of a size 12. Another evening, in a pitch for a benefit for a community organization in Long Beach that assists persons with a1ps, she asked the room what they "had done for a1ps" in the last year. Here she made the connection between the (re)construction and the ravishment of the body that was presumed to divide the class from its outside. The curious syntax of doing something "for" aps, like multiculturalism itself, introduces the class into a field where difference became the figure that made the imagination of community possible.

Thus far, the account has been a teacher-centered one, assuming that she was the medium for introducing hip hop where it would have been presumed absent. The shift of focus to those who take the class is one into the heart of the problem of weak effects. Even a casual glance around the room reveals a range of affinities with hip hop, from professional associates of the teacher who occasionally take the class to those evidently knowledgeable of the music, to those who clearly hip hop on their own, to the interested neophytes and novices. Dancing together, this diversity is assembled. In the last minutes of the class, difference is put on display. The dense packing of bodies in rows and columns that affords the immediate supports of emplacement is loosened a bit. The group is divided in two, and performance is given the status of a mutual offering common to many practices of black dancing, including hip hop, where one half performs while the other watches and then applauds. These last moments signal the end of restraint that comes from the problem of pacing through an aerobic situation. The faucets of sweat have already opened and closed several times, and the heartbeat has raced and settled. The aerobicized body has been made pliant to the point where it need no longer attend to its own aerobic situation. For in these last minutes, when the phrase is learned (such as it will be) and available in its entirety as an activity, the roomful of people is suddenly in a position to draw on its own local history. The same process of vamping that initiates the class now serves as a kind of gating device out of which the dance will spring. The accumulated phrase generally occupies something in the vicinity of a minute's worth of dancing, enough to provide the thrill of navigating one's way through its landscape.

For me, the experience of dancing hip hop is that of a process of rhythmic self-containerization that, at the moment it has put its fourth wall into place in the endless obligation of four-four time, provides a way out into another space in the making. Part of this has to do with the process of assembly of bits of movement that are one measure long. But part seems to lie in the pleasure of hip hop's own syntax, which establishes the patterned expectation of breaking with itself, a desire for indeterminacy of outcome that rests on an initial move toward repetition. If break dancing itself had formed in the spaces the disc jockeys opened up in the records for instrumental passages, hip hop's own increasingly dense layerings disseminate these spaces throughout the music. In these classes, unlike earlier forms of hip hop movement such as electric boogie, we never touch. Rather, the sense of connectedness to others in the room is made available in those moments (offered in practically every measure of the music) during which the body breaks out of its recently acquired containment within the square space defined by the steps, in the direction of what lies outside it. The little box the body had made for itself is broken in order to inhabit an area just left vacant by another dancer. That outside then becomes the anchoring point for the next constituting move. It is this ready availability of exteriority that joins the dancing bodies.

Against the rather diffuse openness is the persistent linearity of how the dance moves in space. Viewed from above, it could be said to be confined within a screen not unlike a television. Viewed from within, the composite body dimensionalizes effects not available on a screen. Beats are incorporated that are never seen. The fissures of rhythm in the composite body allow it to break in several directions at once. Finally, there is the question of the movement itself, its deceptive simplicity. Rarely is there more to the choreography than steps with alternating feet in the horizontal dimension and jumps in the vertical. There may be more demanding coordinations, such as a hitch kick, which requires sequentially placing both legs in the air, but these are the exceptions within the vocabulary. The demands of the steps themselves come in the speed with which they pass, the precision with which their reorientations are executed, and, most elusively, whether the body in question looks like it is dancing them. The Composite Body of Dance 147 Dancing the News Away

This account has already anticipated, as has the teacher, the unmeetable demand to look anything like her, But precisely in this impossibility a fairly wide space is opened up between the correct sequencing of the steps and the sense of dancing them. This is where dancing itself touches on its imaginary, for it is only from the perspective of the entire dance edifice (here what fills up both time and space with motion) that it is possible to assess whether one is getting it. For this “it,” or what we could call “style,” is what joins langue and parole, lexicon and syntax, presence and absence, in short, the totalizing frameworks for the imagination of community with instances of performing the danced connections that would make the composite embodiment of community possible.

Because the body in question emerges from beyond the mirror in the electronic reflections and splicings that hip hop moves circulate through, the irreducibly composite affiliations take their place on the aerobic dance floor as well. No doubt, style comes late in this game, but the notion that hip hop is the key to these folks’ bodily salvation approaches something of Raymond Williams’s structure of feeling, bringing an embodied desire for racial difference in through the back door of a county constructed (under the ancien régime of spatial apartheid in Southern California) to be free of racial difference.

That is not to say that the desire for blackness long activated in the white imagination that takes the former as a transgressive rapture that always returns to its place is not also in operation, but simply that other forces are at play. Put another way, one could ask whether in the appropriation of otherness that has been profitable in myriad forms over centuries of capital, you ever really get it for free.

Here, dance insinuates a difference from what the body had been to now enlarge its capacity for being. It inserts into that model of sameness contained in the obsessive gaze in the classroom mirror an other truth of body’s ideality, one that never quite fits and helps to break up the authority of the ideal. Style contends somewhat uneasily with perfection in that getting the style down makes it appear as if you are looking at someone else in the mirror. No doubt, the constitution of a gaze always bears such complications, only now the divide between body and image is converted back into a difference to which dancing itself is the negotiation.

There is also another sense in which dancing negotiates the mirror, namely, that in the very industrialization of fitness that packing over a hundred bodies into a room displays, getting “the routine” is not routinized behavior for most, and therefore people must glance at one another not simply to make hostile comparisons but also to try to get it right. Value returns in the use people find to make of one another. Hence the authority of perfection is used at least partially to subvert itself. Those bodies may go out into the Orange County night with a wedge of complicity with the culture they are normally called on to oppose, before turning on the evening news. Given the rapacity of racist narratives broadcast on any given night, checking the facile absorption of the savaging tales may require a bit of a running start. The bodies leave the fitness club not only aerated with multiple racial inflections, but also with a complication of the gaze that is less likely to look into a mirror (or television screen) and see a simple other. This body of one coupled with another is put into circulation through the social kinesthetic without passing through the impossible first step of consensus. As part of a structure of feeling that supports a disposition to politics prior to the experience of a shared predicament that might incite people to action, consensus in the newly imagined multicultural nation is not necessarily a requisite for mobilization. Perhaps even so mediated a transfusion of another corporeality could offer a counterweight to that fragile unanimity within the body politic. This prospect could be joined with the problematic status of my own political and cultural authority of representation. I speak now of the risks entailed in speaking for others. I would hope instead to effect a movement counter to representation, in allowing other kinds of practices to introduce silences into my own affiliations with certain subject positions interpellated specifically with respect to dominance. Whiteness is possessive, but it is not a possession; it calls but does not offer an already consolidated response. While whiteness may emit a persistent drone, its call may also encounter a busy signal. If dancing can momentarily silence that me whose ascribed situation has historically been deployed in the effacement of difference, with the commands of an other, then those very noises become complicit in interfering with my own privilege to speak the world. This is an interference that would well serve the discourse of nation, for all its aspirations to assert the monologic voice of the patria against the possibilities of all others taken together.

The only globally realized, capitalist nation-state insists that it be heard as an already consolidated and singular voice. Against this consolidation of order, it is possible to introduce a certain silencing of those standard representations of self (in terms of gender, race, sexuality, as well as the class and national privileges of global capital) that are affiliated with dominance. Paradoxically, the silencing of those particular voicings affiliated with dominance through other means of identification among those who have but a partial stake in the whole apparatus of domination may go far in permitting the mobilization of practices of difference to emerge. For this re-affiliation to blossom into a different kind of national kinesthetic, one that is properly multicultural, the desire to be the other must transgress that partition which is said to divide the cultural from the political.

What has been registered here are simply two moments in the imaginary and performative from which the composite of what I call my body is emitted. That I would dwell on the timeshifts of Ice Cube's video and all those aerobic steps could in no way stand as an inventory of where any body has been. Nor can it suggest a project of aligning a national sign with its embodied referent. The challenge for grasping the distance between these two moments is not how to identify the body that they typify but how to map the national landscape they imagine —that is, to imagine a kinesthetic context in which what is different between the production of a black nationalism and a national fitness craze might be joined. Ice Cube's video incessantly jumps scales; it breaks with the spatial frame it inhabits rather than occupying a space over which it claims sovereignty. The violence done to a body to make it fit into a putative national ideal is itself made crazy or split by that very body's desire to be an other. The subjection to this order of difference is typical of what and how contemporary bodies are composed within the diversity of spatially engaging practices, or "heterotopia," we all inhabit. This topos is a multicultural landscape without fixed boundaries, whose referents must be constantly and sentiently mobilized. The multiple affinities to racial and other identities that are drawn to hip hop are precisely what compose a heterodox national body. In actuality, as opposed to virtuality, the nation too is itself composed of countless such tenuous connections.

Against the confidence that all these weak linkages might be held together by a solitary narrative of nation, such as that proposed by the evening news, this diffuseness of the composite body can introduce some very productive doubt. Between that desire to cast oneself against the flickering screen and the desire to emerge from the other side of the aerobic mirror is a bodily space that admits of an unconsolidated diversity that I would here champion as properly multicultural.

If the imaginary proposed by the news posts a nonnavigable divide between bodies of innocents and criminals who are essentially different from one another, the surfaces of hip hop that emit identity hint at a different principle of bodily composition that circulates across national media borders. Whether or not I ever moved to those pictures on the myriad screens and mirrors in this cultural landscape, there is no risk that I could become one with them or fuse into any one of them. The beats that fuel my desiring machine mark a structure of feeling that has no purchase on singularity. They make no claim to be the news. But to begin to recognize those disparate spaces where I am not structured in dominance, I must do other than listen for the sound of the monolith. I must be moved myself through the nations (and not simply the notions) of others. Silencing that autonarrative that claims such omnipotence, the walk that separates my two hip hop encounters stretches on to alloy itself with the desires of others whose pulses I can just begin to feel. The heartbeat of America? No. These are the rhythms of a body that dances to a different composition.

Modern dance technique is often enshrouded in the myth of an individual creator, whose urge to be free of convention gives rise to new expressive forms. This trope of freedom through self-transformation is at the root of the claim that modern dance is one of the few distinctly "American" art forms. To create this mythology of the national self, (American) modern dance is most frequently juxtaposed to (European) ballet to signify a break with the cultural influence of colonial powers. This cultural break occurs more than a century after political independence but adapts the latter's revolutionary rhetoric to an aesthetic domain. From this perspective, the establishment of modern dance is treated as evidence of the belated emergence of an authentic American character. The distinctiveness of modern dance from other dance forms can therefore come to stand for the freedom of Americans more broadly, a name for a national universal that grants equality as a birthright. But because this is an equality of opportunity and not of allocation, the explanatory emphasis of modern dance as a trope for national character is placed on access to means, not assessment of ends. Inequality in society can therefore be attributed to differences in individual competency rather than to differential treatment within and by the social order. It is the assertion of a practical competency that springs from an individual creative genius but can be applied to all that marks the primacy of technique as what grounds the modern dance aesthetic, namely, “that making stage work is inseparable from teaching an approach to dancing.” Modern dance can be seen to situate the technically accomplished self as the foundation for a universal American identity. Based on talent and hard work, this self can transcend both cultural diversity and a hierarchically divided social structure. As such, modern dance is enlisted ideologically in a larger political project where the language of national identity serves and complicates the formation of a (nation) state.

Like all mythologies, the story of modern dance turns out to be many stories. To call modern dance American is a particularly freighted misnomer, not only because it standardizes the relation of self to society as a national brand but also because it suppresses recognition of those other places that have been forced to share the same name. The seemingly innocent wordplay collapses the name of the colonizing power within a hemisphere with what it colonizes. For, outside the United States, among certain Latin American intellectuals, “Our America” has come to designate those who struggle for national and hemispheric identity in the shadow of the North. Hence, what is taken from others, both within and outside the United States, goes by the name of “the land of the free.” In this respect, the very powers that allow for the omission of the many by the one, that continue to colonize America in its hemispheric totality, are mistaken for the guardians of independence as a national ideal.

On closer inspection, modern dance tells this story and suggests an account of why the history of colonialism remains incomplete, in this hemisphere and the rest. In this tale, which exists in tension with the mythos that I described above, modern dance develops as a very complex matrix of appropriations of different movement sources, not the least of which are dance expressions generated by those subject to the colonization and enslavement that enabled the United States to form as a national state. While others such as Isadora Duncan preceded her with nationalist pronouncements, and many others followed in the constitution of the form, Martha Graham is the quintessential modern dance self whose body gave birth to a technique for being American. Yet from her own perspective, it is the bodies of others that constitute her “sources.” She alludes to this process of appropriation (the possibility to “adopt a dance” of “another people”) in a statement about her technique that argues for African and Native American dance as “our two forms of indigenous dance.” 

"This we is, in turn, an amalgamation of what is primitive and what is modern under the singularity of nation. The politics and the institutions needed to affect this fusion go unnamed but not unreferenced. For Graham here argues that the development of dance technique is but an instance of those powers that enable national formation. Hence, she suggests a more programmatic theoretical tie between American dance technique and the state that sustains this capitalist nation than she makes explicit in the quote above. For at least one facet of nationalism strives to adhere the identity of a population with the administration of that which divides that population against itself, whether in terms of class, race, gender, or sexuality.

Graham, by connecting the development of modern dance in the United States with nationalism, in effect makes two claims. Such a linkage first implies that this nation was initially formed by taking as its own what is foreign to it and that it did this in a way which masked its own origins in violence by identifying the newly born with the (recently subdued or adopted) primitive. Second, her words indicate that dance reveals how these “forces” operate.

This chapter is an effort to take seriously the dual claims of this dance pioneer who reminds us that national self-discovery is an ongoing process that occurs in the space between technique and the state. Such spaces are not always easy to recognize, particularly if the colonization that sustains the national state is taken as unproblematic and complete.

To identify what moves the more subtle features of appropriation on which nation building and dance making rest (and continuing the analysis of appropriation begun in the previous two chapters), it makes sense to turn to a setting where the efficacy of pioneers such as Graham may still be felt: a university dance technique class. But her influence does not stand alone. Distinct, though related, principles of modernist dance movement, which I will abbreviate as torque and release, circulate within a class of students and among instructors who rotate teaching during the week.

In the studios where dance is taught and learned, the legacies of technique cross with the institutions of self-formation. Even more, bodies are held together by the unrecognized authority of the state, their progress is marked, but there are also powers generated here that remain unstated. The question that the study of the dance technique class helps explain is how, despite a decline in the percentage of the population for whom the 154 CRITICAL MOVES prophylaxis of participation in the political public sphere may still be directly offered by the state, an imaginary affiliation with the nation-state’s regime of authority may still get produced. Even given the coercion of institutional subjugation and of exclusion from available social goods, this consent occurs through authorities not formally associated with the state. These guardians of technique mediate the rift between what local bodies produce and the general condition of a sustainable social order that those bodies may credit with the possibility of their own production.

This ethnographic study of one dance technique class is intended as an occasion for theoretical reflection both to illuminate how the state operates to secure the legitimacy of its command over the nation and to explore the resistances generated in that process. There is no doubt that modern dance choreography (Graham’s own work included) has, at times, been critically disposed toward existing political arrangements." By separating technique from choreography, I want to focus on dancing itself as a political practice rather than on the politics of its aesthetic. This is not to suggest that dance classes are somehow free of or prior to any aesthetic; quite the contrary, I will argue that modern dance has often aspired to a universalizing aesthetic. Rather, a politics of the aesthetic can assume a formal unity to its object that takes for granted its internal relations of production and grants the observer who makes this aesthetic claim a status of objectivity.

The stably separated binary of observer and observed, of subject and object, is reminiscent not only of conventional positions within aesthetics but of discussions of technology as well. Bruno Latour, one of the more prominent contemporary writers on issues of society and technology, cautions against viewing these two terms as if they were "ontologically distinct entities." Instead, he recommends treating technology as "the moment when social assemblages gain stability by aligning actors and observers." Thus, the durability typically attributed to the presence of things is here reinscribed as a feature of a form of domination that renders subject and object as identical to each other.

Dance technique, whose initial relations of domination and authority appear founded on the very separation of subject and object and of observer and actor that joins conceptions of aesthetics with those of technology, ultimately unsettles what is facile in each of these oppositions. Thus, dance, as a site where domination and its subversion are actively negotiated, may avoid certain of the traps of thinking relations of power through technology that forge a nonnavigable divide between the transcendent freedom of progress and the alienating instruments of subjugation.

Bodies can be treated like machines, but then, like machines, they must be produced to produce. While the study of dance lends itself to the sense that Latour makes of technology, the shift in emphasis to technique, where what is objectified must be put into practice by an active subjectivity, may go further in realizing and generalizing his aims. The more restricted meaning of technology as the study of techniques makes plain that even the use of machines comes about only through practical human applications, hence discussions of technology are always already about social relations.

Further, by treating as inseparable the domains of science and art, dance technique may display more clearly the powers of their irreconcilability. The formalization of teaching and learning dance is but one technique, or disciplined practical competency, among many in capitalist society through which the contest over the articulation of the state and its subjects takes place; it is, however, one that is particularly useful in terms of what it displays about that contest.

The articulation of technique with the political economy of capital is made quite forcefully by Michel Foucault: If the economic take-off of the West began with the techniques that made possible the accumulation of capital, it might perhaps be said that the methods for administering the accumulation of men made possible a political take-off in relation to the traditional, ritual, costly, violent forms of power, which soon fell into disuse and were superseded by a subtle, calculated technology of subjection. In fact, the two processes—the accumulation of men and the accumulation of capital—cannot be separated; it would not have been possible to solve the problem of the accumulation of men without the growth of an apparatus of production capable of both sustaining them and using them; conversely, the techniques that made the cumulative multiplicity of men useful accelerated the accumulation of capital. For dance technique, with its productivities that amass steps for the trained body, the structure of the university curriculum—from grading to successively numbered courses—may mark one of the most explicit sites of technical accumulation. But, particularly in the college classroom, the “accumulation of men” may encounter certain disturbances in what frequently amounts to a virtual city of women.

Dance technique can be considered a political practice precisely to the extent that it represents a moment where bodies that are primitive with respect to their subordination to a given authority develop the means to move for and against that very authority. In this dialectic of appropriation, technique is doubly complex. On the one hand, the gain of practical competencies in a particular technique (be it one that is explicitly licensed, such as driving, or juridically inscribed, such as home ownership) provides a framework that both enables and limits participation. It is not that there is some specifiable threshold beyond which participation can no longer be tolerated. Rather, the fact of participation as what makes things happen within society is always problematic from the perspective of regulation, which is the functional terrain occupied by the state.

At the same time, the ability to claim credit for promoting that participation which exists as a feature of what is productive in society, and not of regulation per se, is fundamental to create the legitimating consent necessary for a particular population to be governed by any authority. Consent is not consensus or mutual agreement but a general assent that the rule of law marks the conflicts through which people locate themselves. To the degree that acquisition of techniques frames the participation that produces consent to be ruled, technical accumulations effectively conceal the hold on the body—coercion—that is the state’s ultimate recourse to regulate society.

Institutions of coercion, such as the military, are generally absent from most citizens’ daily experience. Yet the manner in which all sorts of techniques (dance among others) take hold of the body suggests a more insidious and pervasive presence of coercion. This coercive presence is concealed in what would be taken as otherwise benign and voluntary institutional sites of consent, from workplaces to agencies of social welfare (broadly construed as schools, hospitals, and social services).

On the other side of this double complexity, the direct exercise of coercion by a state against its own citizenry is far from unproblematic and not simply for reasons of legitimacy. The social body that the state seeks to hold and wield can also stand against the state and loosen that grip. It is not that the state stands as one social body against that of the citizenry but that the state is above all a nonproductive mechanism, a device of regulation, whose existence depends on the appropriation of what other bodies produce (whether for revenues, performance of functions, or applications of force). Hence, the notion that the state is without a productive body generative of participation suggests that coercion itself is not simply a force directed against bodies but a bodily capacity that could be directed against the state.

The breakdown in the U.S. fighting machine in Vietnam might be understood in these terms. So too could the long history of resistances to the draft (as evidenced, for example, by the thousands who participated in the bloody New York protests against the 1863 Federal Enrollment Act), whose degree of resolution under the guise of a professionalized armed services has yet to be put to any persistent test. While the soldier is clearly defined with respect to the ambiguity of coercion, the citizen is less so. The direct linkages between military and state are dispersed and mediated in everyday life, in which the implication of the state with coercion is not so much distant but immanent and concealed. So, while the demands of state authority are carried in the institutionality of daily life, that authority is seldom named as such. As a consequence, where the state appears as formally absent, the role that putatively civic institutions play in the mediation of its authority tends to go unrecognized. If the words of Martha Graham can alert us to the relations of appropriation on which authority rests for dance and nation, the examination of dance technique can expose what is problematic in these relations. In the dance class to be studied here, Graham is an absent presence like the state itself, a force made palpable through its exertions on the shape that technique takes. So too, dance technique serves as a site where the state is thought to be absent but in practice exists as a mediation of the state’s relations of authority. It offers an instance of institutionalized social life where the otherwise concealed relation between coercion and consent (the hold on the body and the legitimating powers of participation, respectively), are palpably articulated, indeed, taken as an explicit and accountable object of reflection and development. While sport and fitness activities certainly take hold of the body, the bracketing of the dance class from other dimensions of dance practice (rehearsal and performance) places the relation between authority and technique on display in a uniquely reflexive manner (to schematize: coaches command technical performance, aerobics teachers offer their bodies as 158 CRITICAL MOVES technical mirrors with little self-reflection, and dance teachers reflect technique in their verbal and gestural commands). Yet, because of its self-reflexivity of the relations of authority, a dance class also registers the conditions under which the legitimation of authority fails. In class, the first steps toward the failure of that legitimation are taken. These occur in seemingly incidental but visible moments when authority is superseded by what any functioning institution depends on for its own existence, namely, the practical competencies that are both socially organized and released through technique. Although Martha Graham died in 1991 and Hanya Holm in 1992, the architectonics of their pedagogy is still practiced in many dance studios across the nation. That they did embody a claim for absolute authority over what could transpire in a given space (and spaces colonized throughout the world where people can say, for example, that what moves their bodies—what they do—is something called Graham technique), in the form of a demand for productivity in others, concisely states a body politic (as discussed in the previous chapter). Competitive games are governed by established rules that are meant to assure a certain disjunctive result, but the indeterminacy of aesthetic outcomes (what does it mean to win in art?), especially in the ideology of modernism, privileges means (techne) that must provide their own ends (in this case, dancing). Where this convention operates most fully, teaching is not done by example but with the word, for technique is a vocabulary that carries choreographic will and insists on the apparent translatability of what is otherwise untranslatable between different media of expression. The ability to organize an entire symbolic domain under the authority of a single signifier is also consonant with what is here being called the state. That the dance technique class bears relations of authority that are stated as such cannot account for how technique itself comes into being within the space of the studio. While named after an individual choreographer, the naming may already be weakened by the time the teacher summons the class to order. More generally, modern dance is an attribution made to a body of competencies, the naming of which momentarily arrests the movement of those competencies on their own terms. Even if the relations of authority remain intact over time, the auteur-ity has already been displaced onto bodies that are only referential of it, especially in the university setting (one, however, that is stated in its own right and whose own curricular requirements foreground constraint over the freedom that might be associated with selection in a dance class market such as New York). But the teacher is also, more often than not, referential to other dance techniques, and more profound, dance must of necessity reference other corporealities, for it cannot render the body newly born so that it could give rise to technique as such. The capacity for transformation, the machinery, so to speak, must already be inscribed in the dancer's body long before a choreographer gives her first technique class, thus while dance may be uniquely reflexive among techniques, it by no means originates or terminates the means to subject the body to authority. Yet here dance foregrounds the problem of authority in a manner that makes the latter available to contestation. By denying that formal power derives from an appropriation of productive forces that are external to any given authority, it is possible to maintain the appearance that power has been successfully consolidated by that authority. The apparent autonomy of the dance class from its physical and political world rests on the denial that the appropriation of what others produce even takes place. Instead of being one instance of the more general relations of appropriation that govern society, the dance class can seem wholly exceptional, consumed in its own world. But, as I have been arguing throughout this book, dance is in and of the world, in a very special way that can make global dynamics all the more legible. In this case, dance technique exposes something of the fragility of legitimation more broadly. But precisely how legitimation is threatened is difficult to imagine in the abstract and now warrants a turn to that certain space of dancing where I will address the above questions ethnographically.

The room is full, densely packed to the point where there is already the feeling of scarcity. Nothing much has happened, but there seems to be a deficiency of space. But this is a density unlike a crowded subway or an elevator. The deficiency is in relation to demands which these bodies could put on their surroundings and which in fact are being put on them. Out of the doubt as to spatial sufficiency comes a sudden shift that finds each of the bodies aligned with the others in synchronicity of movement. The room now accedes to its specialized function as a dance studio once the teacher's self-assertion calls the class to order. The neat rows of potted dancers, fronds upward, have yielded their immediate sense of spatial inadequacy to the authority of that single figure who stands with the reflection of the many behind him. The wall of glass is as uniform as the ground on which they stand, but seen through him, it becomes a surface of their self-estrangement. I am taking this class as an auditor, a corporal listener who promises to tell. Besides the teacher and the accompanist, I am the only male. From where I typically stand in the back corner of this large, packed studio, it is difficult to see the teacher, and so his instructions are always mediated for me through the bodies of others.

Like other technique classes I have taken, the initial phrases of movement, designated as part of a warm-up for the body, are fairly consistent from one class to the next. These phrases do more than serve to prepare the body for an activity that has not yet begun, enabling it to be poured into a certain mold that the warm-up itself helps to construct for the body. This reformation of the body, its internalization of a subjection to certain coordinates, or coordination, does not occur without resistance, and I, at nearly double the age of many in the class and a decade's remove from when I last engaged in this particular regimen on a daily basis, am of a body that admits of a rather extreme version of such resistance. Complicating this further is my own ethnographic gaze on the activity that is mastering me. Hence, what is already apparently interiorized in the bodies of others is still hovering about me, which is to say that I am aware of the degree to which I depend for my own movement on my affiliations with others, who are more accessible visually and kinesthetically than is the teacher.

There is something of the fluidity of accomplishment termed "getting it" that reveals its pedagogical means only when it breaks down, namely, when a mistake is made. There are times when the mistake can be localized, as when the bulk of those in the room move in one direction and some few in another. And yet, if I am following someone who is herself discrepant from others in this respect, I experience the double shifting of assimilating that person's movement along with the uncertainty into which it is now cast. Clearly, there are different orders of mistake and different ways in which mistakes form part of the pedagogical order. Early on in the class, mistakes can be entirely functional or nondisruptive if, say, a variant of a familiar movement sequence is not done to the proper counts or done on the right side of the dancer's body instead of the left. Such variations of the variation are things that we already have names for.

But to take the evenly spaced markings of time, or counts, that are meant to coordinate the movement in the room, there is clearly the kind of internal variation that Ferdinand de Saussure said was constitutive of the linguistic sign when he asserted that a given signifier could be recognized only as a relative difference rather than a pure presence. It is this passable range of difference that technique is intended to regulate with respect to the body's capacity for movement.

Mistakes, then, are not absolute values but depend on a certain economy on which the class itself is structured. During the class, which passes through certain phases, various demands are made on which of the student body's capacities are to be placed on display. Hence, it is only when a movement sequence is framed as something new that the question of whether the class is getting it or not even gets posed. Given the persistence of certain coordinations over the course of studying a given technique, what appears as new is immanently relativized in part through the function of the mistake. 

This opens up a pedagogical moment in which the teacher is no longer acting as if students acquired movement through visual mimesis, or the mimicry in their own body of what they see in another. Instead, by breaking down the components of the physical phrase, it becomes possible to speak of the more general principles through which the movement as a whole is constructed and of how the movement itself is learned or referenced.

The teacher says, “You have to stop looking at the mirror when you do this, because if you don’t it will be impossible to do the movement. Imagine that there is a mirror on the ceiling and that you see yourself as you make the final gesture.” This statement is more than a tip about what to do when a movement phrase places the body in a position where the focus of the eyes shift from horizontal to vertical. It also indicates how mimesis becomes virtualized as a figure of the imaginary that stands in for the authorized image of self. The ability to see the correct(ed) image of self wherever one is looking is key to the experience of getting the movement, which perhaps makes it possible to have the movement at one’s disposal as well.

This crucial shift from other to self and from a real reflection to an imaginary one points to what is modern in this dance, namely, the fixation, the obsession, with getting identity that frees it from its fixed place. This is what Michael Taussig refers to as “mimetic excess” or “mimetic self-awareness, mimesis turned in on itself, on its colonial endowment, such that now, in our time, mimesis as a natural faculty and mimesis as a historical product turn in on each other as never before.”

For Taussig, the divide of self and other is reinscribed through colonial conquest. The creation of this culturally displaced other made possible the ascription of the savagery and barbarity of the violence of the colonial self to its object. The necessity of the history of colonialism as such is thereby attributed to nature (naturalized). But since that necessity must be made through the successful subordination of the other, looking for the other is identical with a destabilization of the self.

The culture of mirror in the dance class is founded on this mimetic economy. The twist, however, is that for the dancers, the other is initially the very image of correctness, of “getting it,” of perfection, that is sought in the mirror, which represents that authority which colonizes their bodies by seeking to repress what is primitive in them. This command over what can properly be seen of the self attacks the body but is also, when generalized from the mirror to appear anywhere, what allows dancers to “attack” the movement, in the sense of moving as if they already had the authority or approval of correctness that they sought.

Letting go of the mirror allows mimesis to proliferate. The process of acceding to the rigors of training a body to dance creates consent to the treatment of those bodily sources of a nature that must be colonized so that it, too, can devour the space around it (an attribute of the confidently trained dancer). Attacking the space, which could be taken as a dancer’s nature, should be understood not as the start of colonization but as its continuation through other means. This class, like many others, is structured so that movement which is initially contained within a space of the body is taken into the space immediately around the body so as to culminate with this body in motion traversing the space of the studio. In the course of ninety minutes, dancers move from stationary positions into the practice of a traveling movement phrase that is often performed in small groups while others watch. That is, it is structured very much as a sort of modernist progression of expanding horizons for the colonization of space, although this progression occurs only through repetition. Typically, phrases of movement across the dance floor (maximizing the linear space of the studio by dancing along a diagonal that transects the space from one corner to the other) accumulate by introducing a basic pattern of steps and then adding turns and aerial vocabulary in subsequent crossings. In this way, learning the movement occurs once one is already doing it, as the final version of the phrase in all its complexity is already motivated in the initial steps toward it. If the class is structured to support a certain myth of progress whose trajectory extends beyond the class to the promise of a career, it is but one of the myths and one with its own ambiguities.

The centrality of mimesis in Taussig's account of modernizing colonization depends greatly on the work of Walter Benjamin, whose own imagery for progress is worth quoting at length here:

"A Klee painting named 'Angelus Novus' shows an angel looking as though he is about to move away from something he is fixedly contemplating. His eyes are staring, his mouth is open, his wings are spread. This is how one pictures the angel of history. His face is turned to the past. Where we perceive a chain of events, he sees one single catastrophe which keeps piling wreckage upon wreckage and hurls it in front of his feet. The angel would like to stay, awaken the dead, and make whole what has been smashed. But a storm is blowing from Paradise; it has got caught in his wings with such violence that the angel can no longer close them. This storm irresistibly propels him into the future to which his back is turned, while the pile of debris before him grows skyward. This storm is what we call progress."

The wreckage of the dead in the dance class is the image of the dancer herself in space that she must discard if she is to continue to weather the storm. She progresses through the self-savagery of her own aspirations to attain the perfection in a mirror that recedes as she approaches it. But the pile of discarded possibilities is also the foundation of an extreme self-criticism that is generated through dance training so that she can blow her own storm not from paradise but toward a horizon of doubt defined by valuing that which is out of reach. At the same time that this kinesio-cognitive activity of self-reflective learning is going on, however, the opportunity exists for dancing full out to occur, that is, in certain respects, less watchful of the self. Going across the floor is both the telos of the class and its just reward for the dancers. The surreptitious copying that had characterized the earlier phases of class now becomes an explicit pedagogical principle, not only because two dancers are selected to go first and therefore model the phrase as dancing but also because the students have an intermediary period before this occurs to learn the phrase during which they explicitly enlist one another's help. Since the teacher will tend to indicate the movement rather than dance it fully, it requires someone in the midst of the room to emerge as one who corporealizes it. This person may or may not be one of those selected by the teacher to lead the pack, but through her own activity, she gets featured in this instance as a model. This, too, may have an influence on what the phrase ultimately becomes, hence shifting the authority of movement from teacher to dancer. At this point, therefore, mistakes can have a role in renegotiating what the phrase of movement will be for the movement toward the final accomplishment of the class in ways more directly and reflexively embodied in the students. Students will also make demands on the teacher for clarification that highlight possible discrepancies between the choreographic idea and the practical functionality of the phrase as dancing. Such shifts may be noted by the students when they call attention to the fact that the phrase has evolved as it has emerged through their bodies, as in the statement "But this isn't what you gave us before" or "Oh, so you've changed it?" This last statement keeps the teacher in his place but reminds the student of where the ultimate capacity for correcting the mistake lies.

Corrections made by the teacher usually take the form of personal attention in which the teacher instructs the class through the body of one of its members. While this may appear as a pedagogical synecdoche, the one dancer standing in for the whole, it also marks an economy through which dancers accumulate the teacher's favor. The point the teacher makes on this woman's body is not simply substantive; she is also made exemplary by being an instance of what receives attention. The struggle to incorporate the correction prolongs the ordeal of being instrumentally molded by the teacher's hand, but it means that she is now the one that momentarily directs the duration, though not the terms, of appropriation.

This sort of lesson differs from the mastery of coordination on which the class is initially founded and marks a reversal in the logic of how mistakes and corrections between technique and the state could function in the authorization and disruption of technique through the means of technique. In the technique class, the mistake is the hinge that mediates the relation between the figures of repetition and progress. It is the acknowledgment that change is possible in relation to the recurrence of certain patterns, patterns that sustain authority while they indicate something of the powers of change over which that authority has command. This intricate display and this process of mediation are evident in the state as such. Its incorporation of the universal will relies on both repetition and progress, the recurrent applicability of law as repeatable standard, and the claim to legitimacy of any given administration to pursue and deliver the most efficacious path of progress.

For dancers, the law is said to mark their training, the repetition of daily practice that, over time, will yield measurable improvement. From the perspective of this happy consciousness, instrumental and substantive rationality, means and ends, delivers the harmonious relation of repetition and progress. The prospect of progress is instantiated in every gesture, every exercise, every class attended. But, paradoxically, improvement within a technique is marked by greater fluency in its repetition, the pleasures of dancing being sustained through the ease with which the dancer moves through the inaugurating commands of a phrase to make it her own. When this pleasure is identified with the law, the name of technique, the affective consequences are something akin to a nationalism in which the civic movements of a population credit their own capacity to a state account. But to the extent that the pleasure of dancing emerges precisely when technique is surpassed, the affiliation with the process of naming can never contain the desire it establishes. Both the state and the dance class seek to assimilate this contradiction within the figure of progress itself. While good government can be a goal for one whose deep political schisms are said to be resolvable through adjustment in administrative techniques (cutting bureaucracy, for example), the perfectibility of technique is not sufficient to sustain a discourse of progress. The government must appeal to a development of society and not just to the perfection of the state itself, if its populism is to appear convincingly as an ideology for the people over whom it has authority. In short, the rhetoric of ends through which the figure of progress is displayed must derive from beyond the state itself. This problem gets articulated well in terms of the limits of technique in the dance class. When dancers are saturated with the technical, they can be requested to “forget technique.” References to being “an advanced dancer” are generally made qualitatively, as, for example, the ability to embody images that would animate a given dance phrase in certain terms that here credit the already danced deed through its approximation to a word. A teacher remarked to the class, “I’m very impressed with your ability to use the images I’m giving you today.” Substantively, the images reference what is outside the studio—eucalyptus trees after a rain, the sun reflecting on a wave, the feeling of warm sand on the skin (the university is in southern California). In this case, all these references to nature, familiar as they may be as authentications of movement, also serve as a form of naturalization of the body’s own technical accomplishment as a pure, uncoercive interiority that could generate only consent to such commands. While naturalization of what is politically contingent into something immutable is common to the legitimation of authority, it is not the sole means of reference for what technique could be in the service of. In one class, we are instructed to dance a routine movement pattern of alternating steps with “mambo hips” after doing some steps called “mambo” as preparatory to the modern dance phrase itself, as if this source beyond the studio, even when bracketed within it, were to animate what transpires there. This example recalls Martha Graham’s formula of appropriation of “sources” for modern dance that would grant popular Latino forms the status of the indigenous. Beyond such incidental encounters, a well-known African American choreographer who teaches at the university employs the synthesis he developed of modern and African dance during the fifties in the technique class. And yet, in its own internal structure and its classification within the dance curriculum of the university, this class, called “Modern III,” is not referenced in terms of its multiple cultural influences but, as we shall see shortly, is instanced in more than name only by its technilogic. On the other hand, although the music is synthesized and synthesizes various rhythmic influences, including African, it does reference an entire field of dancing, of which these young (predominantly white and Asian American) people also partake, that is appropriative of African American culture, namely, popular music and dance more broadly. While the students await their opportunity to try the African-inspired modern dance phrase across the floor as part of the formal dance class, they break out in African-inspired dancing in the margins of the class (literally in the line in which they await their turn). The margins of the class, both spatially and in terms of its interface with other movement activities, specify that place where the technically driven class projects its own sources as part of its exterior, as a range of dance activities and opportunities that are not directly aligned with the authority attached to technique. Yet, as is already apparent, this exteriority of physical culture, manifest in the popular dancing that occurs in the margins of the class, is also already appropriated within the formal movement of the class, thereby effacing any simple distinction between art and popular culture. It is this practical effect, that dance technique could lead to further dancing not simply in a professional context on another stage but also as an end in itself in a space generated by dance, that carries the figure of progress that is developed through the class furthest into society.

It is not so difficult to imagine that a given technique is drawn from and disseminated to multiple sites and activities of dance. But when actual dancers are being referred to, it is also important to appreciate the multiplicity of techniques, dancerly and otherwise, that reign in their bodies. Examining how disparate technical sensibilities are embodied in the same dancer could be of assistance in imagining the larger question of how any body gets multiply composed, where this multiplicity nonetheless allows for a practical continuity in that person's movement. As with the composite body discussed in the last chapter, there is no single source for physical identity. Yet, in the dance class these various sources are already within the performative mode and make much more oblique references to mediated images.

In a formal nod to the desirability of such diversity as constitutive of a dancer's training, the technique classes at this university are taught by different teachers on different days. Within a field called modern dance, substantial continuity no doubt exists between the two teachers that establishes the conditions for differentiation of technical competencies among dancers. The differences between the two teachers establish the parameters for the breadth of that field, in its historical, multicultural, aesthetic, philosophical, and pedagogical dimensions. To map each of these dimensions would take us further into the intricacies of modern dance than the terms of this chapter call for.

For the purposes of contextualizing the particular diversity of this dance class, it is useful to sketch certain affiliations between the emergence of modern dance and its techniques, with the universalizing project of colonialism more broadly. Where nineteenth-century ballet tended to displace women's labor on stage onto the prior image of an exotic other that could not carry the weight of intention and hence could not work, the women who inaugurated modern dance restored this relation of act and meaning. The dancing of Loie Fuller, Isadora Duncan, Ruth St. Denis, and Maud Allan provides an image of agency that had previously been denied women on the stage. Yet this very celebration relies on an appropriation of the exotic other as the source for dance that is identified with the Romantic ballets of the nineteenth century. Like the figure of the Orientalist ballerina, the modern dancer Isadora Duncan is represented in standard accounts as an originality, a singularity without history. An appeal is made to Duncan's essence as a performer to account for the emergent character of the dancer's work. Her contemporaries provided emotional or poetic responses to Duncan rather than describing her work, hence suggesting an opposition between a rationalist mode of science and an intuitive mode of human and cosmological nature. In her own work, Duncan denies having been subject to any influence, suggesting her own experience as her only inspiration. Yet, Duncan had studied the movement systems of the French professor of declamation Francois Delsarte (1811-71), which he claimed was a fully scientific approach to the body. Delsarte represented not simply a technical influence for the emergence of modern dance but also, with thousands of practitioners of his method, part of the larger physical culture that provided the context for the development of dance. Like the folk dance movements in education of the late nineteenth century, the practice of Delsartean exercises permitted Victorian-era women’s bodies to congregate in the public domain.

Under the guise of elocution and pedagogy, speech was referenced by a perfectible body that occasioned a public gathering of women at the height of the ideology of privatized domesticity. The aestheticization of this feminine public sphere both defused the challenge presented to the conception of women and, as Duncan’s self-presentation made clear, rendered the politics of women’s appearances difficult to contain.

The problematic character of any interpretation of Duncan lies in an opposition of nature and science, conceived of as an obligation of analysis that divides dance’s essential sources from the activity of dancing. Modern dance constituted a set of universal foundations that could transcend the very cultural differences that it appropriated. Duncan claimed that the “primary or fundamental movements of the new school of dance must have within them the seeds from which will evolve all other movements.”

Thus the motion of veiling and unveiling, culture/science and nature, is inscribed not merely outside but also on Duncan’s body as a body. That is, it both reveals and is an act hinting at a desire to reveal. While Duncan sustained a coterie of disciples who have sought to perpetuate her work through her ideas about movement, hers is not the most influential genealogy in the history of modern dance.

The institutional base for the emergence of concert dance lay more strongly in the ability of Ruth St. Denis to shuttle fees and fame from vaudevillian tours toward the development of what was then termed “legitimate theater” and the support of the Denishawn schools (and company) formed with her partner Ted Shawn in Los Angeles (1915) and then New York (1921). Orientalism was no doubt the bridge between these two performance idioms, the colonizing continuity between the high and the popular. St. Denis first toured what she considered her own choreography in 1909-10. She traveled with ten “Hindus . . . labeled ‘colored’ in Jim Crow America.” Six pieces were performed: The Yogi, Radha, Lotus Pond, Nautch, Cobra, and Incense. These Eastern materials were subject to Western relations of property before they were ever performed. The initial incarnation of her concert pageant, Egypta, was copyrighted in 1905. In her colonizing gaze, nature elided her cultural situation: “All the motions one needs to study for dancing can be found in nature.” The imagery of the veil receives attention in writing on Duncan and St. Denis. In the latter case, the modernist impulse is connected to the more "universal" Orientalist roots of Western dance. In the spectacles of nineteenth-century ballet such as Filippo Taglioni's "Revolt in the Harem" (1833) or Hippolyte Monplaisir's "Brahma" (1868), the Orient is appropriated in the service of a single colonizing gaze that disciplines gender, race, and class in the ballerina's romantic loyalty to the heroic male figure who authorizes her labor. Modernism psychologizes this appropriation as an interior division of the self into consciousness and the unconscious. In this myth of modernist "absolute self-creation," Orientalist content is replaced by an aestheticized appropriation of the artist-as-origin. The external "real" or concrete veil and its hint at a nature beneath is replaced by an internal territorialization of self, one part of which is populated by the exotic other as the labor of the creative process.

These Orientalist tropes in the antecedents of modern dance recur in the work of Martha Graham (for example, "Cave of the Heart" [1946] and "Part Real-Part Dream" [1965]) and can be read more obliquely in the attribution of Merce Cunningham's aleatory choreographic techniques to "Eastern philosophy." But their iteration is perhaps most significant in founding the universalizing claims of modern dance technique as the acculturation of a given exotic nature. Louis Horst, who became Graham's musical collaborator after the two left Denishawn in the mid-1920s, said of the dance modernists that they "recaptured the relation that the primitive has to the body—an intimacy with the muscle tensions of daily movements which have been lost to modern men." It is in the claims to be a set of movement principles for any occasion, transcendent of any given situation, that the repressed figure of science returns through modern technique. The scientific is an omitted influence that circulates under the guise of an unmediated relation between nature and the body.

For example, in denying that she has founded a "school of movements," Martha Graham asserted, "I have simply rediscovered what the body can do." Here the artist's own body is but an instrument for the discovery (with all this term's colonial connotations) and subsequent adoption of what the universal body can accomplish. Nature is given the force of an absolute reality that instructs and authorizes the body. But by attributing the Oriental other as that which lies closer to nature, it is the power of colonization that ties the Western nation to the self that is hereby secured. Consequently, the appropriation of labor itself can be naturalized as what founds the Western nation. This reversal is apparent in Doris Humphrey's statement, "The adventurousness and restless spirit of a still-young nation certainly permeates everything about us; we are notorious for being less leisurely than most other peoples in our ways, and more demanding of variety." The aestheticization of the work ethic as an imperative of modernist innovation was written in 1959, and already the primitive that gave rise to the modern is now posed against it. Yet if the history of modern dance is viewed from the perspective of its process of appropriation rather than from that of its product, the self-generated through technique is not that of a singularity but of a diversity of forms. This diversity is more fundamental than that suggested by the curricula of private dance schools earlier in the century. In putatively discrete classes termed Eastern, religious, or folk dance, these generic names homogenized internal differences among the subaltern cultures that were presumably the authentic sources of these classes. Today the names applied to dance classes in colleges and universities conceal through their own administrative categories the internal differences that compose such contemporary generic techniques as ballet, modern, jazz, or ethnic. Under these conditions, the ideology of modernism can persist even as the form and content of its techniques change.

The resistances attributed to the primitive or archaic forces that belong outside the studio are now agents of the disparity between the diverse principles of movement which organize any body and the singularizing figure that authorizes which of those movement principles is appropriate. The singularizing authority arrayed against an internal diversity that it names and appropriates constitutes a kind of contradiction in the theory or ideology of modern dance technique and its practice. Dancers, in the class I attended, and others confront the gap between the diversity of influences that reign in their bodies and the plurality of named styles and techniques, each of which, at any given moment, claims the status of a singularizing universal — that is, as technique it asserts itself as a grammar for every utterance.

Among the resources that dancers develop in the course of their study is the deftness to negotiate this contradiction. At the same time, this antinomy is sustained, no doubt, by dancers’ ability to allow their bodies to serve as a site of accumulation for the fully mastered self. It would be tempting to end the account of the dance class with this fantasy of self-mastery as a compensation for an impossible division of the body into separate quarters of command, but dancers learn far more than to assume this mask of identity: they also learn to mobilize activity as dance. If the resistances to learning dance are also what assemble the dancer, mastery will always be inadequate to account for what it commands.

Rather, I want to focus on those differences in technique which assume different coordinations of the body that are, nonetheless, negotiated in the same body. One way to think about these coordinations abstractly is in terms of the orientation of the interior space of the body to its exterior. The notion of a fundamental resistance or tension between the two spaces constitutes what Hillel Schwartz has referred to as “torque,” which for him is a kinesthetic trope foregrounded in modern dance that displays something of the physiognomic logic of an industrializing society. A quintessential movement that indicates this trope is the muscular contraction of the torso foundational to the technique of Martha Graham and evident in the first of the two teachers who share responsibilities for instruction in this particular university class. Bearing in mind the perils of reductionism when describing the physiognomic characteristics of a given technique, much of the innovation in approaches to movement initially associated with Judson Church and then finding dissemination in a range of modern dance practices from contact improvisation to the work of Trisha Brown could be summarized under the term “release technique. In contrast to the defiance of gravity through muscular exertion associated with earlier modern techniques, release technique assimilates gravitational flows in the body's interior space to its exteriority. Rather than accumulating muscular resistance in the service of a coherent shaping of the body, release technique emphasizes motional qualities. In practice, what appear as polar opposites of these two technical platforms are more a matter of emphasis within a relation of interdependence between what holds the body up from gravity and what the mass of the body marshals in its own movement.

While torque is a foundational principle of modern dance, release technique is still part of the heritage of modernism, emphasizing transcendence of the deformities that culture has wrought and is willing to entertain a pure bodily logic unencumbered by mindful speculation. The question is what these differences are meant to emphasize. It could certainly be tempting to associate torque and release as the dominant social kinesthetics that correspond to a periodizing schema of capitalist development, from industrialism to postindustrialism.

The forward march of such prevalent modes for organizing the bodily sensibility of an age perpetuate the universalizing oppositions of primitive and modern, Oriental and Western, through other means. The clearly defined shapes and vectors of force are evocative of the Newtonian mechanics that inform the movement of an industrial economy. The more indeterminate flows of energy suggest popular images of quantum physics that have been applied to identify an info-atomic age. But such simple and all-embracing contrasts, reliant as they are on discrete chronological identifications, can confuse more than they clarify.

The term "postindustrial" is itself symptomatic of such confusion. That industrial capital has intensified its investments in machines over people within this country and has also left the United States to shift productive capacity to places where labor and other costs are cheaper does not lessen society's dependence on such production but, rather, indicates the global and technological dimensions of the division of labor.

Further, that the bulk of workers in this country are employed in what is called the service sector (which aggregates together low- and high-wage jobs from food servers to software designers) indicates the extension of commodification and industrialization to new activities or spheres where it had been absent. Rather than this global socialization of labor and development of productive techniques freeing the body in any absolute sense, the body stands as a terminus within the vast integration of inputs and outputs of the fully commodified economy.

Hence, for all its references to more natural ways of moving, release technique—to the extent that it emerges within and displays the broader social kinesthetic animated by the ongoing reforma- tion of capitalist society—attends to a more profound socialization of the body (and not simply with regards to labor but in relation to gender, sexu- ality, and race as well) than could those methods based on notions such as torque. On the other hand, because dance movement, like the capitalization of society itself, develops unevenly, we can only expect those technical influences associated with certain historical formations to persist as residues within culture as a whole, as well as the body in particular. Some information about how to jump, leap, or fall, generated within certain technical domains, will retain its resonance in others. It might appear that the differences between the two teachers of the university dance class, operating as torque and release, respectively, are generational, but this would overstate the progressivism in dance technique at the expense of what gets repeated within it. Yet, torque and release actually are of some heuristic value in identifying what are at times necessarily contrary principles of motion operative in any body, including that of the dancer.

The traces of the state that instantiate relations of authority in the dance technique class override what may be irreconcilable differences within a given body. This subordination of otherwise contrary orientations to movement is accomplished within the always continuous demands to abide by whatever immediate commands are disseminated in the class. Indeed, it is the effort to reconcile contradictory movements in society under a consistently nameable authority which identifies the state function wherever it appears and whose problematic character is particularly recognizable in the dance class.

It is equally important, however, to maintain that the effort at reconciliation presupposes other efforts that sustain what is contradictory in body and society, and this is what the students in their practical accomplishment of relegated multiple techniques to a given body provide (albeit always within the limits of a given range of plurality). Where these contradictions are most visible is in bodily details through which the residues of one technique may collect even in the midst of another. The hands are often a place in the body where the tension between moving and thinking about moving is displayed, for the hands, especially when learning technique is foregrounded, serve to hold onto the information that directs the body in movement.

This tension is not neutral with respect to what resides in the body about techniques, and therefore it is not at all uncommon to see hands held in a shape stylistically associated with jazz or ballet (which are the other technically defined sequences of dance class in the curriculum) in the modern class. In another example, the persistence of the vertically held, torqued body evidently provided resistance to the apprehension of a fall forward onto the hands that was called for in the more release-affiliated class. One of the more accomplished students had difficulty executing this particular movement because she was holding her body in muscular tension which would be perfectly correct for a different type of fall but which made this one impossible to execute.

Hence it is not a matter of being trained or untrained as some generic condition of the body but how one form of training may come to interfere with another. This interference is not dysfunctional to dancing but what makes the movement toward the accomplishment of movement palpable for the student in the class. In this instance, the mistake emerges where the seam in the intertextuality of techniques asserts itself. Counterexamples exist as well in what could be called the torque class, such as when a student is asked to hold a contraction in the pelvis while maintaining weight on one leg with the other extended in front of her. Although it is supposedly the strength of the torso that is holding up the body and defying the gravitational pull, sustaining the position while the teacher discusses how to accomplish it, a quiver is produced in the dancer’s thigh. This quiver could be taken as what is archaic in the dancer’s body in the technique in question (recall Graham’s notion of the primitive as emergent), in the sense that it displays something left behind in the dancer’s body—not as some primordial recidivism but as a present resistance to technical subordination. But it could also be seen as the already released body of the other technical influence asserting itself in the midst of a torquing command.

The prospect that contending principles of movement reside within the same body suggests that part of the effort entailed in learning a technique has to do with the dancer’s ability to generate terms of mediation among different demands on the body. In this process of self-governance, a technique for regulating techniques, the dancer must generate her own authority. The dancer’s ultimate training as the amalgamation of all these technical presences in her body is what emerges as this broadening field of mediations.

Susan Foster has indicated that this heterogeneity of technique marks a certain moment in the history of dance technique when, particularly among professionals, commodification itself usurps a given technical affiliation. If that is so, this present situation of technical intertextuality, illustrated in the university curriculum discussed here, may more closely approximate the situation of bodies generally in a fully commodified physical culture, both within dance and without, that, as we saw in the last chapter, brought together the weak links of mediation and affiliation within the composite body.

Intertextuality itself needs to be viewed as more than a random collection of difference that adheres to what is other to it by virtue of mere contiguity. The principle of authority is, always at the very least, a mediation of the state beyond its formal institutional apparatus, given that it incorporates some of the power to which it is ultimately answerable. Hence, it is important to grasp how this principle recurs in each instance of difference and thereby provides what may be continuous in the movement within both subject and object. In this, I refer not only to the range of identities through which a given subject is positioned but also to that subject’s implication in a range of relations of dominance through which it is always at least partially constituted.

Put in terms of the dance technique class, we see that it is always against the continuity of authority (maintained across different teachers) that the multiplicity of physical capacities (even when these are in kinesthetic conflict) is available to the dancer. This range of available capacities circulates between what authority denies in the way of corporal self-government and what its demands on bodies afford as an occasion for dance practice.

The intrinsic oppositionality between state (mediated through authority) and body (negotiated through technique) rarely gets mobilized as an explicitly counter-hegemonic expression even in the politics of the classroom. But as an oppositionality, it renders the movement toward the participation that generates consent also a move against the coercive hold on the body whose necessity appeared absolute in the process of learning how to dance. This was evidenced symptomatically in the example of the mistake and in the displacement of authority in modeling the ideal from teacher to student. Dancing against the State The logic of the state as the authority that is present in every site of activity—even those seemingly farthest removed from its command—presents a negation of that logic as well. At least, that is, insofar as what is continuous as an authorizing object permits each of those sites to appear as if they were themselves discrete domains of authority. It was precisely this apparent autonomy of the object in a context that provided for that object’s obligatory interchangeability (or exchange for the sake of exchange) that Karl Marx analyzed so cogently in his account of the fetishism of the commodity. In the terms of this analysis, however, the state is the ultimate object subject to fetishization, insofar as it objectivizes a form of authority which serves circulation in a manner that is indifferent to the value of what circulates. What appears as the state’s own imperative to maintain order turns out to obscure what is systemic in this imperative. And yet what was thought to circulate merely as a world of objects turns out to be constitutive of a certain type of subjectivity as well, one that can be grasped only as embodied. The commands to which a state subjects its citizens go way beyond repression in the face of the transgression of law but get instantiated in the very incorporation of what spans the productive citizen from the regimentation of labor to the identification of desire.

In one of his final reflections on the capitalist state, Nicos Poulantzas remarked: "To be sure, the body is not simply a biological entity, but a political institution: the relations of the State to the body are thus considerably more complex and extensive than those of repression. Nevertheless, the State is always rooted in its physical constraint, manipulation and consumption of bodies. In every State, this takes place in two ways: through institutions which actualize bodily constraint and the permanent threat of mutilation (prison, army, police, and so on); and through a bodily order which both institutes and manages bodies by bending and moulding them into shape and inserting them in the various institutions and apparatuses."

It is to the "bodily order" that technique contributes, but what is here an important addendum to Poulantzas's understanding of the state is that once inserted in the institutions and apparatuses, bodies engage the technical through their very "bending and moulding." When the regimen that is contained within the dance technique class gets applied to what is beyond it, the practical contours of this order begin to emerge. It is not simply the ability to hover precariously on the edge of the curb waiting for the traffic light to change, the ability to negotiate one's shopping cart through the crowded aisles of a supermarket, or the incessant pushing on the surfaces of machinery, characteristic of so much contemporary wage labor, that draws affinities with the dance technique class. The misrecognition of the accomplishment of each of these activities with the authority putatively given out by the state makes it possible for people to identify periodically with a capitalist project even as the latter abandons them to their corporal capacities without reward. For while it is unremarkable how little the state does for the bulk of its citizenry, it is more surprising to consider that the same bulk would see a place for the state (beyond any given governmental administration) in what it does for itself. For Lauren Berlant, The American subject is privileged to suppress the fact of his historical situation in the abstract “person”: but then, in return, the nation provides a kind of prophylaxis for the person, as it promises to protect his privileges and his local body in return for loyalty to the state. Dance technique is a situation in which the process of production and its product — the body dancing and the dancing body — are tightly joined in local bodies and in which an ascribed affiliation far short of the kinds of participation in the political public sphere promised by substantive citizenship may, nonetheless, be keenly felt as a depoliticizing form of prophylaxis.

Hence, the form of bodily exchange Berlant describes for the abstract citizen operates in those institutional spheres such as the dance class that provide the grounds for consent without the political content promised by the full privileges of citizenship. It is the coercive aspect of this consent, the mastery of technique as such, that acts to limit the scope of bodily demands to the immediate instance of institutional competency. The abstract citizen finds its corollary in the universal body conceived (but not put into practice) by the modern dance technique class. The promise of gain, of progress, if the particularized and primitive body is abandoned in favor of the modern marks the class as the scene of an origin for the body, rather than as a site of the body’s appropriated labor.

Yet, exactly in the midst of such a domain, where an idealization of citizenship could readily be constructed, we find so much capacity for difference and differentiation generated by the very efforts to meet the demands of measurable competency that appears as a kind of technical imperative. Thus, there may be more space than was previously imagined by political theory for the state-initiated social contract on behalf of capital to generate something other than an assimilation to its authority. Here, but also in the aerobics class, at BAM, and at Judson, what is kinesthetically exceptional in dancers not only proves the rule but displays something of what, beyond adherence to such authority, is self-constituting across a whole array of technically accomplished subjectivities.

If in a domain as strictly regulated as dance there is more than domination, it may be easier to embrace what authority gives rise to but cannot contain. The acceptance of the authority of the technique class suppresses the local histories that the dancer bears. Exercising this same authority suppresses its own dependence on what it commands. Because these two dependencies are of different orders, one that identifies activity with command and the other that misrecognizes a command for activity, the social contract is destabilized as it is made. Modern dance also produces a primitive body whose colonization proceeds through the application of technique. If the forces in colonization and modern dance aspired to make the world one, to be a secular universal, the progress they prescribe does not recognize the diversity of creativity unleashed in their wake. Dance technique claims to command every conceivable movement, to devise abstract conceptions of time and space freed from their location in history and society. As with other officiating techniques, it seeks to pass off to its adherents the hold it has on the body as a kind of enhanced participation in a project to free the self to become fully aesthetic—that is, to appear as an autonomous originality. Yet in the particular city of women studied here, the male gaze that observes, instructs, and accompanies their movement becomes, in the course of the class and throughout their training, marginal to their activity. The authority that was supposedly indifferent to gender here gives rise to it as that social category that can act against what denies it. The universalizing claims of modernity, in dance and other spheres where activity is governed, organize nations of peoples whose allegiances lie elsewhere. For despite and because of all the formative subjugations that dancers endure, their trained bodies generate a commitment to the activity of dance that will allow for their most free association. In the end, technique is more than a system of administration that states the self in terms of authority. Technique also marks a spot where diverse capacities and practical differences that compose a self are assembled. What remains unstated is an activity, at once self-critical and self-forgiving, torqued and released, that dance makes legible wherever bodies move.

For Dance Studies
Fire in the streets. Fire on the screens. Deficits char universities. Tuitions go up like smoke. Broken borders. Saturated identities. Defensive knowledges. Departments freeze. Strange times, these, to be speaking of new disciplinary formations. In the name of urgency, it is tempting to return to basics, if only their bases were transparent. Under the sign of sacrifice, a call can be heard to pare down to essentials, if only those essences would stay put. And what of discipline itself? Could anyone survive asking for more? Certainly not more of the same. Conversely, if something has recently been set loose, can calls for discipline be far behind? The discipline wittingly or unwittingly records the oddity of the newly unfamiliar. So don’t new formations necessarily draw on what is strange in their times? Any arguments for new disciplinary formations, therefore, would want to take account of the social and epistemological movement afoot in the broadest possible terms. A comprehensive understanding of a whole way of thinking, or episteme, would promote the most radical appreciation of the relation between the context for the production of a specific form of knowledge and the form and content that knowledge assumes. The prospect for a critical dance studies to emerge out of the variegated intellectual attentions that have already been given to dance depends on developments in both disciplined knowledges and cultural practices. Dance studies, properly reconstituted, promises to help materialize in thought a whole series of problems that have run homeless through the academy as well as through the world.

In what follows, I would like to treat dance studies not simply as the empirical collection of all that has been written about dance but also more speculatively as a project that relates to various modes of thought and from which it is possible to imagine a whole range of applications, both to dance and to other practices. Whatever turns that project eventually takes, its theorization as something that could be not only allows the various potentialities of critical dance studies to be marshaled but also helps establish the discursive terrain in which it would take its place. Hence, I will not claim here that the present moment originates dance studies as such. Rather, like the creation of all dance, which starts in the midst of those capacities for movement that dancers already embody, so too dance studies must begin in the middle of what has been produced under its sign. To start in the middle entails the recognition of the debt to other initiatives and findings so that the project of dance studies, as I imagine it might best be positioned to reflect on the domains of practical knowledge into which it intervenes. When compared with what most bodies do most of the time, dance would typically be considered a minor movement. In relation to the quotidian practices of the body, dance is a marginal endeavor, both in terms of its degree of incorporation into total daily activity and in terms of how it is inscribed with meaning and value in the pantheon of those activities. Because dance is but a minority of the movement most people engage in, the claims that can be made for its formal political impact or direct social significance are limited. Yet, from the perspective of the minority, what often conventionally appears as informal and indirect takes on its strongest explanatory resonance. The seemingly minor mobilizations in life may reveal more about the weak linkages or mediations that allow our sensibilities to relate to one another within the body politic than may the ways in which we are accustomed to perceiving and evaluating politics. If we are used to seeing politics as a stable inscription on the social terrain, as something written into the social contract, then what actually moves the political may be missed altogether.

I have argued that what in dance evades representation can extend our grasp of mobilization, which is itself so crucial to an understanding of politics. But in certain respects, the study of dance has paid a theoretical price for its difference. The very resourceful and suggestive ways in which dance eludes the grasp of inscription can isolate dance from everything else that has engaged the critical attention of writers and therefore threatens dance studies with a kind of conceptual ghettoization. What I attempt to show here is the way that dance studies could mobilize in writing the conceptual challenges that dance offers to conventional ways of understanding politics and the world, in turn arguing that dance can be specified as that cultural practice which most forcefully displays how the body gets mobilized. The emphasis on dance as bodily mobilization, rather than as any determinant movement form, may ultimately help to efface the distinction between incorporation and inscription that has divided dance and writing and allow us to imagine that middle ground, which is otherwise ceded in the binary relation between the linguistic and the bodily. It is this middle ground, this terrain of mediations, that I would like to see dance studies occupy and articulate.

An argument for dance studies, not as the topic it has always been but as an emergent field of knowledge that is its most radical promise, must understand the underlying relation between the terms "dance" and "studies." The question is a projective one. Rather than a review of all that has been accomplished by dance scholars, the obligation of the present writing is to understand how a disciplinary field is constructed. Different meanings of "dance" and "studies" could be combined to create very divergent conceptions of the field, but it is important first to imagine how the two terms could be problematized such that the epistemological and political significance of their union would be made explicit. The space of this union constitutes a certain epistemological present, a realm of imagination from which we wonder how we come to know what we claim to know. From the epistemological present, we can ask the following questions: What is discipline now? And, what is dance now? The concern with what is to become of their being suggests that something else can be announced as having just passed. In other words, to claim that dance studies could emerge under certain conditions is to assert that it comes into being after becoming something other than what it has just been. It could be said that, until recently, the specifying point of reference for dance had been body movement. Now, however, the departure from this definitional base must be conceptualized. The status of dance as a focus of inquiry, then, has to be reevaluated in light of two changes in theory and practice. The first is the loss, in recent dance practice, of pure movement for its own sake as a fundamental defining feature. The second shift has been the ubiquity of the body as an object of study by disciplines across the humanities. These disturbances to the epistemological status of dance raise the question of what its privileged object of analysis is and therefore address the issue of its specificity.

For studies, the second term in the formulation, it is equally important to ask what the status of disciplinary formations is, particularly after such movements of interdisciplinarity as cultural studies and the politics of multiculturalism have introduced the grounds for an extensive critique of knowledge in a globally constituted capitalist society. This critique opens up the problem of context. By summoning cultural studies to challenge the prevailing epistemological field, I am clearly granting it more ideological coherence and institutional effect than it has, up to now, been able to muster. Similarly, as I suggested in Chapter 3, many disparate and, at times, antagonistic politics have been marshaled under the banner of multiculturalism. My aim in granting, at least for the moment, dance studies, cultural studies, and multiculturalism more stability and apparent conceptual unity as I imagine them here than they may have achieved in their practical formations is to envision the significance of each of them as a project that is never exhausted or fully realized in any of its myriad concrete instances. Surely the work of envisioning what we want these projects to be is crucial if we are to establish the criteria to evaluate what we take to be the limitations of existing forms of multiculturalism, dance, and cultural studies.

Let me examine the definitional questions of the founding terms of my inquiry—namely, the conceptual status of dance and the epistemological standing of disciplinary studies—to see how they delimit a field for dance studies. Such philosophers as Suzanne Langer have striven to make of dance itself a subject, or what she terms “dynamic image,” an “expressive form” that objectifies the “nature of human feeling” (in opposition to the materiality of body and space out of which it is composed). What specifies dance with respect to other arts is that it “creates a world of powers, made visible by the unbroken fabric of gesture.” For Langer, these powers are virtual, not actual, a distinction that might allow dance and politics to appear in separate domains. The autonomy of dance from actual or quotidian uses of the body is fundamental to the conception of dance as pure movement, or movement for movement’s sake. The foundation for a conception of dance as pure movement can be located in John Martin’s definitional statement in 1939 that “all dance is essentially one in so far as it is the externalization of the inner, emotional force of some kind in terms of bodily movement. "Movement is granted its autonomy from other social relations as an object of aesthetic reflection (this is what is intended here by modernism) because of what it displays as a feature of its own internality, namely, emotion. While Martin’s conception of dance is modernist, it is not confined to a particular dance idiom but rather is presumed to apply to the “essential unity” of dance as a human universal that he terms “basic dance,” “the common impulse to resort to movement to externalize states which we cannot externalize by rational means.” The universality of dance as a human expression grounds the autonomy of the irrationally constituted aesthetic from the rationality of the social and the political, which in turn generalizes the split between mind and body transhistorically and cross-culturally.

The cultural and historical specificity of these conceptual divides, which dance negotiates in practice and criticism accomplishes through theorization, leaves the critic’s own positionality unspecifiable. These modernist foundations for criticism—the unreflexive self-assign-ment of a universalizing authority that separates dance and politics —continue to exert their influence on contemporary discussions of the philosophical status of dance.

Graham McFee’s recent study of dance aesthetics, Understanding Dance, departs from Langer’s and Martin's cultural and historical generalizations to confine the appellation of dance to Western practices of ballet and modern dance, Ballet and modern dance can be joined through modernist evaluative criteria (as opposed to stylistic uniformities) to the degree that they conform to standards of aesthetic judgment. At first glance, McFee deviates significantly from conceptions of dance as pure movement; rather, he focuses on the evaluative criteria that would identify a context within which human activity could be considered dance. In the interests of specificity, which he scarcely specifies, institutional criteria are advanced that grant the “tradition” of dance an authority to arbitrate what may join this tradition which he refers to as the “Republic of Dance”: “In the specific case of dance, the ‘Republic’ will be composed of choreographers, producers, dance theatre owners and so on, and, in particular (other) dance critics and theorists. Any movement sequence put forward as dance (self-election) and accepted by others (other-acclamation by the Republic) is indeed a dance.”

Interestingly, McFee insists that this institutional definition of dance is separable from sociologies of dance, “which offer insight into society, but not into dance.” McFee appears to employ an extreme form of nominalism to avoid movement sequences from other societies or from popular culture which could be “mistaken” for dance but which are not art. He asserts “that whether or not movement sequence X is indeed dance depends, roughly, on whether or not it is called dance by the society which gives rise to it.” The translation problem, namely, that English is established as a linguistic standard that other languages must be converted into and compared on the basis of, applies to the very logic of argumentation, not simply to the word itself. For the Republic of Dance rests on a self-constituted authority that is being denied responsibility for or access to the context that makes of it a context. McFee’s book, then, is ultimately an argument for the autonomy of artistic judgment from the “general condition of society." "Hence, with his culturally exclusionary definition of dance, he appears to proceed from the opposite point of departure from that of Langer and Martin, with their universalist aspirations for dance-as-human-essence. Yet he winds up reaffirming what is essential to their common conception of dance studies, namely, the separation of the dance object from the rest of what transpires within society, or the autonomy of the aesthetic from the political, which I take to be the underlying assumption of modernist criticism.

The complication of these modernist assumptions for the study of dance, the very project that concerns me, is itself no simple matter. For example, to suggest that dance has lost its definitional foundation as pure movement seems doubly dubious. Such a claim first assumes that we know what dance is and have already consolidated all the practices that could be called “dance” under the definition. Second, it assumes that these practices had not only sustained this loss of definition but survived it.

Another possibility, however, is that, while dance retains its diversity, the epistemological foundations for the claim to be able to isolate pure movement from other forms of art and of life have been shaken by a shift in how we think about the relation between theory and practice. For the corollary of movement purity in dance practice is a presumed autonomy for the aesthetic in the realm of theory, which is, in the above examples, what grounds, without needing to name or situate, the authority of the theorist or critic.

When the ideal of aesthetic autonomy within ballet and modern dance is problematized, so too the whole modernist theory of criticism is challenged as well (as I suggested in Chapter 2 regarding the critical reception of Bill T. Jones in its efforts to contain the choreography’s political effects). Even when the concert forms of ballet and modern dance retain their institutional modes of production —from the administratively driven economies of fund-raising, subscription, and touring to the fixed investments of scenographic shops and proscenium stages— their aesthetic materials and syntax incorporate cultural sources in a way that undermines the conceptual stability of the autonomy of pure movement.

This is not to suggest that Balanchine’s work is at risk of suddenly disappearing from the repertory at the New York City Ballet or that Merce Cunningham now sees himself as telling stories through his work. Consider the constant slippage between ironical references to dance made through dancing and parodies of the holiness of consumption drawn through a non-movable feast on stage in Mark Morris’s Hard Nut (1992), or the connective function of dance to suture the enactment of social vignettes in David Rousseve’s evening-length Urban Scenes/Creole Dreams (1992), or the use of frenzied passages of the corps de ballet to offset the rise and fall of Michael Milken in Karole Armitage’s Predator’s Ball (1996). These deployments of dance and narrative figure a relation of mutual disruption and integration between movement as an absolute horizon of the body and a panoply of contexts in which the kines thesia of daily life becomes discernible, from the suburban living room to the street corner to the stock exchange. The point is not that these urban and suburban vistas are novel settings for concert dances to depict but that the movement content of these contexts is now put into circulation through the development of technical vocabularies so as to reassign the production of aesthetic value from the stage back into culture at large." With the conceptual reassignment of where value is produced, the criteria for what dance makes cultural reference to become more inclusive and ambitious than the forms of cultural example that were allowable within the older framework. More inclusive because a site of dancing (club, house, school, square, television) can no longer be assumed to specify the dancerly. More ambitious because the fundaments of dance would have to be located in the field of cultural production (and hence society) as a whole rather than resting securely in the tautologically contained definition of art (art is what artists do). Pure movement, then, however it is defined, is not lost to dancing in its myriad sites and forms but to evaluative criteria. On the contrary, because of the very proliferation of movement materials both within dancing and without, the condition by which these materials mix must now be theorized in a way that situates, as the modernist critic does not, the very politics of theory and criticism.

But while the multiplicity of movement provides new resources for dance studies by substantially widening its scope, the preponderance — across the humanities — of the body as an object of study could just as readily eclipse as it could fortify the emerging field. The burgeoning interest in the body as an object of study needs to be taken as the context within which critical studies in dance could emerge, rather than a jealous competitor in a zero-sum academic marketplace, where there is only so much intellectual resource to go around. To the extent that critical dance studies frames its problematic as one that focuses beyond an understanding of dance per se, it also addresses a larger audience that can be drawn into the specificities of dance practices.

The visibility of the body in recent academic studies could be attributed to the general textualization of cultural practices that widened the field of what could be read or taken as an intellectually legitimate object of study. But the gain of a textualized body could not always provide an adequate perspective from which to theorize what bodily practices reference beyond their textual representation. This referential, non-textual dimension of the bodily slides back into the text in discussions of literature, medical manuals, fashion, or penal codes so as readily to overlook the utility of studying practices that foreground bodily mobilization as opposed to representation, as dance can. When this happens and to the extent that they do not notice what they are missing, then the openness of the various disciplines to dance studies is cast into doubt.

To put the matter this way indicates that the future of dance studies is not wholly self-determined on the quality or merits of the work produced but rests on the larger epistemological context that generates the conditions of reception for any given field of study. For there is no appellate court to which a case could be made that would allow disciplines to rise or fall on their own merits. It becomes necessary to grasp the transformation of the means of knowledge production in its entirety, what could be called the epistemic domain, to assess the potential for new spaces of knowledge. The strongest claims for dance studies would lie in this new situation for knowing and not in some absolute status for what can be known. Institutionally speaking, it is clear that the rhetoric of zero-sum economies of cultural capital often subverts the substantiveness of intellectual discourse. With doubt, problems of allocating funds, of assessing needs, and of identifying demands are inescapable. At the same time, when these issues are couched in narrowly institutional terms, they can do more to conceal their political stakes than to make those stakes available for discussion and decision. This is why it makes more sense to begin with the broad sociointellectual transformations that have affected the disciplines and then begin the war of position over what institutional ramifications may ensue. Thus, while interdisciplinarity, which I am taking as the underlying condition of possibility for the emergence of dance studies, always has concrete institutional effects, these effects are so fully mediated that their politics can be determined only locally (whether, for example, to form departments or interdepartmental affiliations). But the epistemic shifts signaled by interdisciplinarity can be addressed in a more general fashion.

To avoid the feigned innocence of claiming grounds for dance studies as an absolute or original discovery, it would be worth pursuing the hypothesis asserted by Michael E. Brown that disciplines always have interdisciplinary foundations. The way we think about disciplined knowledge today in the United States owes a great deal to the professionalization of what could most broadly be termed intellectual labor that occurred toward the end of the nineteenth century. Professions may, for a time, have succeeded in creating the impression of self-generated grounds for their expertise, but this did not free them from other contradictions.

The development of such occupations as medicine and architecture reveals the tensions between the specialist's disciplinary claims to the monopolization of knowledge on the basis of a more generalized process of rationalization within capitalist society, on the one hand, and the ethical questions of how this newly constituted particular interest might serve the universal good, on the other. According to the logic of rationalization, the universal good is best served when the development of knowledge proceeds according to the functional requisites of its object. Hence doctors have both the commitments and the resources required to further medical practice, the gains of which are then disbursed to the population at large. Yet the resources that must be expended to assure that other practices do not occupy the privileged space of the medical profession potentially limit innovation and dissemination of knowledge. This last conflict between the particular and the general displays the traces of interdisciplinarity within the disciplinary rhetoric of the 190 CRITICAL MOVES professions, for they are always constituted against what they resemble but must exclude if their practice is to remain the privileged site for the object of knowledge over which it claims to have authority. That these contradictions play themselves out in very different ways is evident in comparing the medical profession, which succeeded in placing itself at the center of the whole constellation of sickness and health (its privileged object), with architecture, which historically has been marginal to its object (only a fraction of construction is actually driven by architectural practice). The creation of specific institutional sites for academic practices (university departments) around the same time as professionalization partially masks and partially resolves some of these questions of privilege but submerges the presence of interdisciplinary foundations in a rather similar manner. It is precisely this submergence that generates the ideology of foundations as something intrinsic to a discipline that is then incapable of specifying what the conjuncture for that discipline was. The object of knowledge is thereby presented as something both eternal, in the sense of being without origin or end, and absolute, insofar as it is seen as being constitutionally stable within the discipline.

The formation of academic literary studies rested on a dual movement. On the one hand, classical languages were displaced by modern language as the privileged repositories of culture. On the other hand, a universalizing humanism, which literary culture was seen as transmitting, after Matthew Arnold, was amalgamated with a particularizing scientificity associated with historical and philological studies. While the tensions between these sources continued to produce different ideologies of literary study, they were nevertheless the elements that had granted the new field its autonomy.

Even more specific, if American sociology were to have a foundational text (one written nearly a half century after the departmental formation of the field in the United States), it would have to be Talcott Parsons, The Structure of Social Action, a reading of the logic of social theory out of disciplines adjacent to sociology. In both these examples, what subsequently appears as an indifference to origins, in the sense of their unspeakable ontological status, marks the point at which the authority to occupy a certain space of knowledge production is transferred from the disciplinary practice (with its attendant history and politics) to the more abstract object of knowledge itself within disciplined discourse.

For dance studies, once knowledge appears as a property of a certain specialized speech without history or politics, debates can be confined to disagreements over what should properly be represented within the literary canon, as opposed to addressing the institutional and epistemological supports of the canonical apparatus. When the basis of authority for who claims truth never itself comes up for review, it is possible to argue over the nature of society without reference to what the stakes of those arguments are for the intellectuals who make them.

It follows, then, that the disciplinary suppression of intérdisciplinarity renders inaccessible to discussion an account of the means and ends of the work that disciplines perform and concedes the situatedness and interests of the intellectuals who perform those tasks within society. Hence, not only are disciplined objects of knowledge absolute, but disciplined intellectuals are also, in Karl Mannheim's terms, "free-floating," that is, unencumbered by their actual relations to societal institutions for the production of knowledge.

Because the suppression of what is taken to be interdisciplinary within disciplines (the context, not the origin of their foundation) amounts to an aporia over the ties of knowledge and power, the stakes of the emergent interdisciplinarity of the last decades that places dance studies on the agenda can now be appreciated. The new interdisciplines, most broadly grouped under the rubric of cultural studies, constitute a critique of the absolute object of knowledge and the self-positioning of the intellectual. This critique can also be applied to the whole formation of specialization and professionalization that underpins the modernist ideology of a rational society. While each of these formations (from women’s, queer, black, Latino, and Asian American studies to cultural studies itself) has an expression within the academy, each is also explicitly linked to something that extends beyond the academy. This linkage was certainly one consequence of the sixties movements that joined the insistent recognition of difference with the institutional materialization of this recognition, as evidenced in a range of phenomena from civil rights legislation to budgetary allocations for new academic departments. The critique of disinterested knowledge, associated with Jürgen Habermas and indebted to the student movements of the late sixties, was one way of grounding intellectuals in terms of their own context for knowledge production. But the assertion that the object of knowledge became fundamentally destabilized when its own sources were constituted across a complex societal field where gender, race, and class cultures lie, introduced an indeterminacy about where knowledge was constituted in relation to its object.

All this is to say that the double of interdisciplinarity of the last decades was not the specializing demands of universal reason, as had been asserted a century before, but the reflexivity of difference in the process of identification, the terrain of this process being what I want to refer to as the social base for multiculturalism. The previous disciplines had insisted on a climate of certainty, a positivism with respect to the relation between the professional knower and the disciplined known, Interdisciplinarity after the likes of cultural studies now rests on problematizing the status of hitherto existing conditions of knowledge production and therefore raises the level of uncertainty about what objectivities and which subjectivities get produced.

We can, for example, revisit the debate that emerged over the epistemological status of the subject during the past decade, in which a tension was expressed between the critique of the transcendental ego and the assertion of the authenticity of the hitherto unrepresented to speak for themselves. If these divergent perspectives are taken in their totality as a sociological phenomenon, then the antagonism itself can be seen as a critical resource for the elaboration of the cultural politics of difference, not simply a point of division for that politics. The return of the repressed in cultural studies is what here joins interdisciplinary content with multicultural context in a way, as Bruce Robbins notes, that foregrounds the institutionality of knowledge work and hence extends the politicality of the new formations.

That so many attacks on cultural studies emanate from beyond the university's hallowed halls indicates how grounded in the ways of the world discussions over the possibility and commitment of knowledge have become, rather than being seen as governed by the sui generis demands of disciplinary objects. It is for this reason as well that the sixties remain the obsession of the Right into the nineties (as discussed in Chapter 2), as if by obliterating both the memory and the efficacy of those earlier times we could return to a still prior originary moment of truth claims, indifferent to their politics of production. In this light, it seems less surprising that the unreconstructed antagonism toward any variant of multiculturalism could be powered by a non-theological religiosity perhaps misleadingly labeled as fundamentalist. The religious fundamentalisms can be understood as non-theological, disinterested in critically investigating the ontological questions that typically occupy religious institutions. A key trope in this religiosity is a form of corporal exchange, substituting the body of the born (the woman who bears) for the unborn (an entity that bears no traces of this necessary labor). The demographics of the adherence to this trope as a phenomenon of belief are not as significant as its ability to circulate and structure the discourse of discourses.

The putative seamless exchange of bodies (present for absent, different for same) underpins the negative response to the gains made in the field of multiculturalist mobilizations, from which the reflexive interdisciplinarity of cultural studies springs. The substitution of the (rights of the) unborn for the (rights and capacities of the) living has the effect of naturalizing the process of exchanging living labor for its abstract product, making the former disappear in the service of the latter.

The relation between two figures of control that are more extensive forces in the reproduction of capitalist hegemony is legible through this particular trope of bodily exchange. The first figure is exposed when the implicit demand for consent to a ubiquitous surveillance of every space of social life, assumed by the outing of women's reproduction choices, is made plain. The call to end those choices assumes an agreement to police not simply labor but also desire, wherever it may emerge, as that which is fundamental to the general social contract.

Women double as metaphors for unrestricted production through their fertility and as metonyms for producers through their concrete possession of actual means of production, whose juridical virtuality as ownership is being denied them. Submission to the generalized surveillance over what can be produced replaces the uncertainty of (knowledge) production associated with the most self-critical forms of multiculturalism with a certifiable allegiance to the (here patriarchal) demands of production without concern for use.

The consent to generalized surveillance signaled in the trope of bodily exchange under the New Right that was asserted in the eighties is closely bound to a second figure of this economy of social control that is part of a more general reaction to the sixties. Surveillance over bodies and bodily production assumes an agreement with respect both to being watched and to watching for practical transgressions. A regime of surveillance operates not merely as an attitudinal adjustment but also as an entire structure of participation. It therefore assumes that every occasion for surveillance presents itself as a transgression in need of punitive containment. In the most strident and revealing formulations of antiabortionists, it is not enough for women to be told they are without reproductive choices; they must be stopped and punished should they make the wrong choice. To uphold the law of life's production in the abstract, the concrete producers must be sacrificed. In turn, their sacrifice requires an apparatus of coercion—to force their absentable product from its presentable absence—the crux of choice in the production of reproduction that is women's special collective capacity.

Surely, the language of production itself risks reducing what women are or could be to specific effects of their labor. Further, the double meanings of labor as it is used here overstates the Right's ability to treat reproduction as subject to a fully commodified economy. But the point in showing where women's actual historical self-articulation joins a generalized climate aimed at repressing multicultural articulations is to indicate the specifications that are necessary if any more comprehensive conception of a historical moment (here, one where the body becomes a privileged object) is to be possible.

The forces that bear on emergent formations and tensions within the university setting do not emanate from within that particular site. At the same time, part of the challenge of radical variants of multicultural politics is to see what travels and what doesn't as other manifestations of difference are included in the account.

The trope of presence and absence is a figure for the more general denial of the conditions for the social reproduction of labor on which any appropriation of surplus rests. As such, the rhetoric of visibility needs to be combined with an analysis of what is considered public and private and how the institutional arenas of paid economic activity and domesticity are treated by the state as it seeks to manage the population by means of the divisions from which the likes of racism, sexism, and homophobia flow.

FOR DANCE STUDIES 195 Patricia Williams masterfully weaves these issues together, as she plucks examples from the daily fare of media representation and legal casework. She notes that when the interconnection between woman and fetus is lost to the substitution of the former for the latter, "the fetus becomes an incorporation of the woman, a business fiction, an uncomfortable tapestry woven from rights-assertion-given personhood. It is an odd, semiprivate, semipublic undertaking, in which an adversarial relationship is assumed between the public and the private."

When the business of reproductive technology meets the economics of race, damage is likely to be reported. Williams cites the example of a white couple in which the husband made a deposit at a sperm bank; the wife returned for artificial insemination, gave birth to a child "she describes as black," and, after enduring the "racial taunting" of her child, filed a wrongful birth suit." Williams herself ponders the implications of systematized reparations for blackness, including the "intellectual castration" from the black community as a price of her own professionalism and, concomitant to this, her status as a childless and single woman, when "black babies have become worthless currency to adoption agents — 'surplus' in the salvage heaps of Harlem hospitals."

As race becomes articulated with socioeconomic status, gender, and sexuality, the body remains in focus as a contested site, but the opposition to this realm of difference can no longer be summarized so neatly as rightist or fundamentalist. What returns to minimize the now raced and gendered body's labors are the more abstract and impersonal forces of the market assigning its hierarchies of devaluation and dispossession. 

If the labor of the woman is disavowed and made absent, the “surplus” of black bodies seems to be represented excessively, as unadoptable children, as unemployable teenagers, as incorrigible and incarceratable youth, but also as bodies with star quality that brings in the gold. The current traffic in black bodies is, of course, the legacy of slavery, on which, as Cheryl Harris has argued, race and property become fused, so that whiteness is attributed with the legal rights and ontological status of an inalienable self, with protections to use and enjoy its privileges through exclusion and appropriation of what belongs to it. Black bodies, in contrast, are alienable, not in possession of themselves, yet their value derives from their very presence, which, once purchased, signifies unpaid labor for others. While the juridical framework to exercise white privilege has eroded 196 CRITICAL MOVES with emancipation, civil rights, and affirmative action, the expectation to dominate has continued. Harris notes: “In protecting the property interest in whiteness, property is assumed to be no more than the right to prohibit infringement on settled expectations, ignoring countervailing equitable claims predicated on a right to inclusion.” ® It is important to reaffirm that the entitlements associated with those expectations have also diminished. Here, I refer not only to government-provided benefits but also to lowered wages and restricted access to consumer credit, mortgages, higher education, and health care—in short, the whole material infrastructure of social reproduction. So too have the very terms of exclusion and inclusion changed from the days of slavery, as I suggested in my overreading of Bill T. Jones’s choreography in Chapter 2. For while under slavery the exclusion of blacks from the use and enjoyment of the bodies of others as property was what included them within a productive economy, the present exclusions figure blackness as the source of a surplus population—as those displaced from the labor market when means of production are reorganized—rather than as producing surplus labor. However exploited, the accumulation of black bodies was intrinsic to an economy that now seeks, in certain sectors and instances, to live without them. Increasingly in public representations of crime, welfare, single motherhood, and workfare, black bodies come to stand for the more general figure of expendability and exclusion against an earlier promise of emancipation to a universalizing development of modern society. Perhaps another dimension of the demonizing attacks on black cultural output is to destroy the idea that exclusion from the coercive forces of labor markets themselves might be a source of freedom. Again, it is important to emphasize that this figuration elides the vast majority of African Americans who are actively part of the workforce—for them, actual relations of exploitation do not make the news or have their day in court. Yet, in the current wisdom of investment, the display of newly expendable domestic bodies is linked to images of equally superfluous bodies in certain zones of the former second and third worlds, in the nightly rites of this nation’s news, where it appears that homicide, genocide, and ethnic cleansing are the moral attributes of surplus populations, rather than factors in their production. For the present formulation of white supremacy, it is the combination of retaining privilege against others who could share in claims to equity with Between surplus labor and surplus population, lies the divide between culture and nature, abundance and scarcity, civilized and savaged. The binaries that re-cur to sever the no longer necessary from those who can still board the train to progress. Even for those on the train, many will be diverted from the promised land of imagined inclusion. So many of the newly minted jobs pay less than the ones they have replaced, and the standard measures of economic expansion and political stability deliver less confidence in the future than had similar reports of prosperity in decades past.

Where progress based on forced inclusion in a capitalist world order once promised universal inclusion, new wealth seems less contingent on holding all populations within its mastery. Surplus population depends on labor cycling in and out of productive activity as requirements of accumulation change. The refurbished racism, sexism, and homophobia of the present are oriented toward this ability suddenly to exclude what was once (and may once again) be economically necessary. The emphasis placed on the body in this macabre vision of humanity against itself allows the selection process to appear as a feature of the immanent characteristics of individual bodies before the judgment of the market.

While anyone can make it, collectivities can be addressed only in the negative, as figures of failure. Animated by this renewed logic of scarcity and exclusion, life chances are determined by free will without the organization or intervention by the state. This should remind us of the double meaning of privatization —a denial of the role of the state as it acts to secure the conditions for the accumulation of wealth, and a disavowal of the claims of those who historically were excluded from the public arenas that recognize needs and demands as political, that is, that the needs of such persons are merely private matters.

But privatization as a state-mediated project entails the administration of bodies in the domestic sphere, with respect to the legislation of sexuality, domestic violence, and the civic conduct on which decolonized settings become desirable and penetrable, as M. Jacqui Alexander has observed in her study of the Bahamas. The connection between decolonization and deprivatization should not be lost for a critical multiculturalism's bodily politic. The refusal to be contained by the boundaries of the colonial or the private and the ability to self-recognize the unruliness of the various differences I have been discussing fits with the two dimensions of multiculturalism that I identified in Chapter 3.

The body that is at once mediated and performative is also an instance of the principle of composition, which points to a surplus of the social beyond the instrumentalities of appropriation. For what is a surplus population from the perspective of the market may nonetheless be constitu-tive of a whole dimension of human association that generates an excess or surplus of social activity and cultural production beyond what the market can absorb. The economies of consumption oriented around differentiated market niches depend on but cannot exhaust the appeal of expansive sexuality, of exotic personality, of excessive fecundity, and of extravagant bodily achievement. The task of expanded accumulation for global capitalism is to sunder the labors of these various productivities (that now include attributes of culture and identity) from the populations that generate them. The problem for administering an amplified field of use values is that the social accomplishment that created the value in the first place constitutes a collectivity that enters, as it deepens and diversifies, the world of the political. As I suggested in Chapter 1, the mobilization that gives momentary form to these collectivities (there, that unstable presence called “audience”) does not leave a trace of itself. Rather, the mark of mobilization is left in the policies, commodities, and configurations of space that are assimilated to the body by means of various techniques (Chapter 4).

Much in the policies and rhetoric of governments inspired by rightist ideas during the eighties and nineties did represent a highly repressive re-alignment of consent and coercion in its domestic and foreign extensions of surveillance and sacrifice. It would not be difficult to trace through some of these manifestations with respect to, for example, a highly destabilizing credit economy that joined first world consumers and third world nations in a computerized frenzy of increasingly supervised subsistence expenditure. Nor would it be hard to see parallels in the militarization and penalization of society at home and abroad incumbent in a war on drugs that took as prisoners small (marijuana) farmers and a (Panamanian) president.

The rightist inspiration for the government appears to at times be voted in and out of office. Yet the more general oscillations between coercion (applied to and constitutive of surplus bodies) and consent (individualized participation in the market that appropriates and addresses bodily surplus) remain perhaps the most vivid idea in U.S. politics. Communications superhighways are hardly at odds with escalating surveillance. Riot control without riot and new taxes without social programs are still taken as political common sense.

It is in this broader context that the prospects for interdisciplinarity promised by a multiculturalism from the base must be considered, not only in terms of institutional resources but with respect to its general appeal. In the light of these constraints, multiculturalism needs to be seen above all as a social process that, as long as the imperium is intact, remains incomplet-able.

By reasserting interdisciplinarity here, after discussing how a rhetoric of bodily exchange has been marshaled in the service of the repression of a critical multiculturalism, I very much want to suggest where dance studies could align itself within an epistemological conjuncture. The Right sees the body as everywhere, and everywhere the Right sees it, the body is presently ungovernable and in need of further repression. This surplus can be grasped only in relation to some other economy of bodily exchange whose effects the surplus seeks to mask and oppose. Dance studies could take the opposition of this opposition as its outer horizon where epistemology and politics meet.

Even if in its particular instances it left this context implicit, dance studies could serve to articulate the condition of the bodily in a manner that would dramatically enlarge the stakes and interest in what is frequently associated with dance. Again, it is toward the articulation of that aspiration for dance studies, rather than the delimitation of its practical possibilities, that I direct the present comments. I have just sketched something of the field within which dance studies might intervene. It remains to outline what some of the claims of that intervention might be. Mobilizing Dance

Dance studies could be poised for an intervention into a larger cultural and political field, already assuming that it has broken free from a certain condition of its (pre)production for a way of knowing that could only have been internal to it. It is now placed in a position to act projectively, to imagine itself critically, and to influence other fields. The point at which a project can articulate itself out of its own internal history, the moment at which it raises its intellectual stakes as a field in its own right, is referred to as an "epistemological break."

This concept, derived from Althusser's use of Gaston Bachelard, does not mean that a specific schism exists in Marx's personality or that a set of texts can render the history of reading Marx suddenly unrecognizable. Instead, the break represents a departure for reading in which what is different in Marx as a foundation for theorizing can now be mobilized.

The mid-1980s signaled a moment for dance studies, as indicated by the distance between the collection of essays edited by Roger Copeland and Marshall Cohen titled "What Is Dance?" and Susan L. Foster's monograph "Reading Dancing." Under a single question of content, Copeland and Cohen assemble several centuries of critical writing on Western concert dance by various authors. The collection can be distinguished from other volumes by its conceptual comprehensiveness in the editorial organization of the field of dance studies.

The essays in the collection are grouped under the following headings: "What Is Dance?"; "The Dance Medium"; "Dance and Other Arts"; "Genre and Style"; "Language, Notation, and Identity"; "Dance Criticism"; and "Dance and Society." This classificatory scheme permits a logical movement from specifying the dance object as such to seeing how dances "reflect and illuminate the cultural mores of the societies in which they are created." The underlying idea that is sustained is that of the modernist separation between dance and society, as implied by the metaphor of reflection as a process between two mutually external and fixed entities.

The editors begin their introduction to the book by asking, "Can we formulate a definition comprehensive enough to cover the wide variety of activities routinely referred to as dance? Unfortunately, the theoretical literature of dance provides only limited help in answering this question. ... If we are to arrive at a satisfactory conception of dance we have much to gain by appealing to the most influential traditional theories of art and the dance literature that is informed by them." The appeal to tradition is meant to overcome the "resistance" to theorize dance rather than to mobilize that resistance. Consequently, dance theory has an object, but it lacks the means to think its own practice until, like a vessel, it is filled from the outside. Paradoxically, then, their comprehensive treatment of the problem of definition of dance results in an idea of dance that remains pretheoretical. By organizing distinct studies under the same investigative authority, the editors of "What Is Dance?" aim to stabilize the object of dance. They achieve this not only by organizing contrasting definitions but also by exploring the inherent limits of the dance medium, asking when it exceeds its competence and encroaches on other arts. The volume's appropriation of interdisciplinarity reflects the founding moment of academic disciplines a century before. However, it is insufficient to articulate a disciplinary project in the present multicultural context. The assembled disciplines, such as philosophy, history, anthropology, sociology, and literary criticism, offer a point of return, but studying dance did not disrupt the intellectual foundations of these disciplines. While the studies appear well-poised to articulate interdisciplinarity, they haven't identified their own founding interdisciplinarity, making it easier to fall back into their particular sites. In contrast to Copeland and Cohen's definitional project, Susan Foster's theory of dance representation produces different modes of reading autonomous dance practices. She uses four tropes or figures of speech: metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche, and irony, derived from literary theory. Foster aims to present "outlines of paradigmatic approaches to making and viewing dances," emphasizing the apparatuses by which dance is appropriated in writing rather than in reading. This allows her to feature the self-constitution of the production and reception of dance in dance commentary, distinguishing between different dance practices. "At the same time, Foster retains a sensitivity to the historical. Her embrace of Foucauldian taxonomy for the representation of historically constituted forms of discursive practice suggests a solution to essentialist historiography that is not without its own complications.

'Instead of advocating a single aesthetic project by showing its resilience over time or its development through various stages, the arrangement of historical dance forms side by side supports and encourages a diversity of choreographic pursuits.' Yet while she appears to have avoided a periodization that relies on finality, teleology, she presents the autonomous periods of 'distinct cultures or strata' where these distinctions depend on an absolute chronology ('1400 to 1650, 1650 to 1800, and 1800 to some time in the early twentieth century').

What she is able to avoid in denying finality, she yields to in subjecting periods to an abstract and historicizing standard. Her effort to project an isomorphism between the tropes of choreography and those of historiography relies on Hayden White's discussion of tropes in Metahistory.

'Following White, I assume that the mode of representation—the tropological equation that allows art to represent life— offers the primary entry point into each period's epistemological organization.'

'White's study of major historiographers of the nineteenth century, however, was intended to identify the relationship of their selection of tropes to their politics. Foster avoids political assessments in all but the reflexive episteme of the sixties and seventies to discriminate between the 'conservative' choreography of Tharp and the 'critical' work of Monk and Grand Union.

Within each discursive episteme of metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche, and irony, the primary mode of representation identifies both the signifying chain of a dance form (from conception through performance to interpretation) and its relation to history.

'The nature of that relationship may be more precisely expressed as follows: [Deborah] Hay maintains a metaphorical relation with the Renaissance dances by resembling them. [George] Balanchine's relation to the eighteenth century is metonymic, or imitative. [Martha] Graham, as emblematic of expressionist dance [1890-1950], stands in synecdochic relationship to it. And [Merce] Cunningham retains an ironic distance from his objectivist descendants.'

The isomorphism that Foster attributes to literary trope, choreographic mode of representation, and contemporary and historical choreographic examples begs the question of politics in favor of an idealization of epistemes. In the environment of difference that makes up the aesthetic Foster wants to champion, the principle of communal practices she sees as responsible for a resistive form of dance making and viewing cannot be accounted for historically. The tension between the aesthetic autonomy among the different tropes and the engagement of difference necessary to produce community is lost in Foster's framework. There is no sense of historical contexts or problems that choreographers, dancers, and publics might respond to and emerge within as a condition for their work. Rather, the structural characteristic of a period marks the structure of a given dance work. The very analytic procedure that frees her to theorize the construction of meaning in a particular work occludes access to the interference between conflicting choreographic or social principles that could give dance its historical quality."

Such a procedure does distance itself from the judgmentalist attitude toward works that Foster justifiably seeks to avoid and allows her to refrain from the essentialism of asserting boundaries among works. But it does so at the expense of historical context and the social principles with which works are animated. In effect, by beginning with the autonomy of a given artist's discursive practice, the emergent character of the work — and thus its historical character — is left unaccounted for. She evades the relationship of the work to the broader interdiscursive field within which all choreographic projects collide.

As Foster acknowledges in her discussion of Tharp, on the one hand, and Monk and Grand Union, on the other, not all the play of difference yields collectivity. Foster wisely avoids any reference to the reflection by dance of "its" time. Instead, she imputes a structural identity to dance and history that does not specify conditions of production. The autonomy of epistemes achieved through a radical refamiliarization of a given aesthetic project appears to segregate accounts of the arts from accounts of society, agency, and history.

Foster's work, "Reading Dancing," could be considered a text of the break, as Althusser calls it, because it makes it necessary to think of dance not as a particular site but as a condition for the production of a certain knowledge. It is with her work that the project of thinking through dance—rather than identifying dance—receives its seminal articulation. That knowledge is more, but not less than, what the various hyphenations of dance (history, anthropology, aesthetics, notation, kinesiology) provide, namely, a foregrounding of how a given form of knowledge gets produced.

In the supplementation of the question of what dance is with how dancing can be read, a double movement is implied. The first takes us from the stable object of knowing to the contingencies of its production through a reading. This allows a shift from site to condition of knowledge. The gaze that could fix dance within a given disciplined space now becomes a certain way of grazing across an entire terrain.

The conventional way of defining dance and the focus on definition as dance studies' principal charge provoke anxiety over whether a given site that contains a specifiable content is adequate to the appellation "dance" and can therefore sustain the demands of an autonomous aesthetic. Critical studies, however, emphasizes a more ambitious indeterminacy over what to make of the proliferous activity of dancing that is not confined to privileged sites of performance.

Once dancing is established as a condition and not merely a location (or, in the case of dance, a given content), the issue of its production and its product is thereby raised. While dance lends itself to infinite readings, it presents itself as a discrete thing in need of interpretation; it remains an object of knowledge. Instead, the emphasis on dancing demands attention to an activity that must be produced through an incessant process where the product of that process is itself a cultural practice. This shift from object to practice, manifest in the conceptual priority of dancing over dance, is precisely what cultural studies has offered interdisciplinarity that makes those foundations explicit and available for epistemological reflection and political commitment. What precisely are the gains of such a maneuver? For cultural studies, "practice" is a key term that joins epistemology and politics. Practice is what emerges at the juncture between what is given or structured in a particular historical moment and what is generated through forms of agency. Structure concerns the organizational principles for social relations, while agency refers to the means for acting on the world it inhabits in a way that generates social materiality. However, practice is not simply an effect of agency, because agency itself emerges already conditioned by structural effects. Practice emerges as the already amalgamated process of structure and agency.

From the perspective of practice, it is no longer possible to insert human activity into a fixed landscape of social structure; both moments are formed in perpetual motion. The importance of this insight lies in the series of practices articulated through race, class, gender, and sexuality. These words point to a systemic structuration that appropriates different forms of surplus through racism, exploitation, sexism, and homophobia.

By extending a productionist model to domains not generally associated with an economy oriented toward exchange, the author wants to take seriously Marx's understanding of capitalism. He treats it as forcibly constituting, by the very organizing boundaries it erects and then transgresses, in pursuit of increasing magnitudes of surplus, the global collectivity, the "combination, due to association," that he understood as the socialization of labor.

The extension of Marx's concept of socialization to a widening range of practices deepens rather than detracts from the power and aims of his analysis. To take the production of surplus seriously in these other domains should not reduce practices to mere instruments of the ends of domination where race, gender, or sexuality are in turn nothing more than products in a profit-taking market.

The emphasis on surplus identifies what is productive in race, gender, and sexuality, such that the proprietary claims of the dominant position in each system are exposed as emerging only through what dominance subordinates through appropriation. The unacknowledged dependence of the dominant on what it subordinates through appropriation is one reason that whiteness is both the hatred of and the desire for blackness, that misogyny aspires to the rape and reverence of the feminine, and that homophobia is the rejection of sameness and the need for it.

In short, the appropriation not only produces the divide between dominance and subalternity but also the demand for further appropriation as a very condition of social reproduction. Race, class, gender, and sexuality, as the very materiality of social identity, are also produced in the process, indicating the practical generativity—the ongoing social capacity to render life as history—necessary for any cultural product.

A productionist approach is intended to imagine the context for critical analysis that would grant these four articulating structures historicity, politics, and practice in relation to one another, that is, in a manner that is mutually recognizable. To speak of practices, rather than objects of knowledge, as what disciplines serve privileges the capacity for production over the already given product-object as a founding epistemological premise. The focus on practices also allows production to be named historically, so as to situate it with respect to existing political mobilizations. If the older set of disciplinary formations constantly had to ask, "Knowledge for what?" it was because the autonomy of knowledge from other social relations was assumed. The practices of cultural studies imply commitments that are constitutional to knowledge as such and can therefore be used to ask how one set of practices could be articulated with another.

The problem that these critical insights pose for the existing institutionality of disciplines is that the language of practices must find a way of circulating in a disciplinary world that (still) finds its conditions of existence through objects, in this case, objects of knowledge. Although English and sociology can be practiced, they take their epistemological occasion to be a specifiable object: language and society, respectively.

What is signaled in the movement between dance and dancing (a movement that flows in both directions) is how an object becomes practical. If dance studies can be instituted on these terms, then it marks the conditions under which the disciplining of knowledge production can emerge as practice. Dance studies would be helpful in the articulation of cultural studies for dance studies more broadly, which has not been free of the object insofar as the joining of the popular to what was once reserved for the canonized elite is taken as the addition of so many cultural texts or artifacts, each one now equivalent to the other.

If a comic book is just as valid and intrinsically complex an object as a prized literary work, then the gain of access to existing institutionalized formations can be attained without much guarantee of transforming the disciplinary structure of institutions. On the other hand, the question arises of what is practical about the comic book. This would entail its readerliness, the way it circulates, its relation to social fantasy, its relation of interruption with other media (intertextuality), and so on.

If these issues are now taken to structure how literature must be taught and not simply what objects are included on lists of required assignments, then the result is altogether more radical. What can be claimed for dance in this regard is that its proper analysis demands that it be viewed as a practice. When the practical is absent from representations of dance, dancing becomes almost impossible to specify. This claim rests on an argument that the relation of dance to its own means of textuality is very different from that for other arts, including other performing arts.

In art history and criticism, the language of the photographic slide seems well established as a means to talk about what is represented in a given artistic object and of what is absent from that representation in terms of authenticity. Reading certain musical texts can be taken as logically prior to musical practice when that practice results from an already written score. Similar relations hold between a dramatic performance and a play script. While the lexicon of dance is no more originary than other aesthetic expressions—movement, like literature, has always already happened before it is temporalized in performance or reading—the fullness of its absence in the traces left by dancing, whether as notation, video, or kinesthetic memory, enacts the very shifting from object to practice where the latter asserts its necessity over the former. This is not to say that no modes of representation exist that expose dance, that no writing can address it, that no textuality binds it. Dance, like any other practice, is suffused with all these possibilities. Rather, representations of dancing map the performance of detextualization, the moment at which any practice, including logophilic ones, displays that it is more than language and thereby opens the door to the "prison house." "Detextualization," 208 CRITICAL MOVES it must be emphasized, is not atextuality. Dance is not without text, it is not free of objectification as if it were some pure instance of spirit, nor is the bodily lost in the absolute divide of some binary that makes it inaccessible to intellection or mind. Detextualization is precisely the movement from object to practice (recalling that practice is not pure subjectivity but the labor process that amalgamates subject and object, agency and structure). That movement is what occasions dance studies. But because the shift from object to practice that occasions dance studies is in turn transformed by the internal production of the new interdiscipline, movement is rendered into something else by its identification as a practice. That something else I have termed "mobilization," the means through which bodies gather and are assembled and the materialization of identity that is accomplished in the process. It is as a consequence of mobilization that the grid is generated in which sociohistorical space and time are plotted. If different dance practices embody different principles of mobilization, then what dance studies as a whole produces is a theory of the contingency of chronotopic, or space-time, environments.

Space and time are no longer the abstract raw materials out of which practice is made; rather, the mutual transfusion of spatiality and temporality is what practice produces. Dance studies tracks how units of temporality circulate within a given performance to the point at which they occupy space (the way in which a slow traversal across a stage marks its dimensionality and metaphorizes its scale) and how in turn spatializations of bodily form give temporal units their apparent boundary (as when a repeated step generates the perception of tempo). Hence, dance studies adopts mobilization as the tracking of traces in an accumulation of materialized identity effects (those social productivities of race, class, gender, and sexuality).

The foundational epistemological transformation from object to practice that dance studies effects in its internal dialectic of movement and mobilization is far from innocent with respect to its interdisciplinary context of cultural studies and its political context of multiculturalism. Just as cultural studies could benefit from the way in which dancing refuses to be just another cultural object, text, or artifact, a critically reconstructed multiculturalism and, as I argued in the introduction, politics more generally inform and can be informed by the shift in inflection from movement to mobilization. For example, even in the rhetoric of the New Left, oppositional politics were characterized as "the movement." As is now well rehearsed in the multicultural critique of the Left in the United States, this well-bounded entity credited with articulating the distinct and non-reducible effectivities (that is, the capacity for influence) of race, class, gender, and sexuality could also produce an elision of any of the remaining three terms in the assertion of the one. The boys of anti-war were accused of having others do their "legwork," and the women, of looking a certain way. Labor, of loathing the politics of others. Gays, of being free of labor. African Americans, of having a single sexuality. Yet what all these caricatures betray, beyond the homophobia, racism, sexism, and classism of their formulations, is something of why the critique of these appropriative practices can be generated only within a properly multicultural terrain. As with the more abstract terms of time and space, the issues generated over the meaning of multiculturalism have provided (like dance studies may provide) the means through which the critique of each of the appropriations could circulate through a given mobilizing process.

As such, it is not "the movement" that has produced these critical insights and the practical language through which they circulate. Rather, the very proliferation and mobilization of the terms of societal differentiation around which relations of domination and appropriation crystallize generate materialized identity effects through a whole conditioning of sites where politics is today staged. Although it is not the case, for example, that sexuality becomes race, it is evident that sexual practices are racialized, not in the sense of having a given (or essential) racial content but insofar as practical effectivities of sexuality are always mobilized in a racial formation.

The insistence on mobilization is what makes the particular accumulated effect of a given practical moment both contingent on the mobilizing principle at play and specifiable not as absolutely original but as immanently contextual. If mobilization allows the body to be detextualized in the way that multiculturalism articulates the internal circulation of practical politicalities, what then does dance studies do to this mobilized body? Here it becomes possible to suggest how dance studies could offer a methodology for an economy of the body different from that of the exchange of absent for present (unborn for the labor of those already born), the divide of surplus labor and surplus population (in the reconstitutions of racism that 210 CRITICAL MOVES dispossess the body as a spectacle of expendability from its own laboring capacities), or the initiatives of a doubled privatization (to recolonize newly constituted socialities for the market and to depoliticize the needs they generate).

This entails treating the body, like historical agency more generally, as a complex circulation of identity effects and a concrete site for the composition of multiple and mutual association, where one practice articulates rather than cancels another. The body is viewed, then, not as a unity but as an economy with its own internal and nonreducible effectivities. Time and space condition and are produced by bodies, but they do not account for a circulating body's composition. Terms that can more fully articulate the body's materiality may prove more helpful in identifying this economy. The language of the senses provides a vocabulary different from that of space and time for imagining bodily interiority.

Clearly, any adoption of the senses for critical analysis is not philosophically innocent. Since Aristotle, senses have been seen to carry the burden of an essentialized, putatively universal human body. Adopted uncritically, such a view of senses and bodies risks treating political questions in purely formal terms and subsequently aestheticizing knowledge as the search for the truth of those forms. Dance studies could offer a shift toward a view of the senses as subject to persistent negotiations over their significance and the place they occupy within the bodily economy. In this economy, the senses are not properties or faculties of the body but a strategy that is constitutive of the body. If the association of movement with the body as a tightly bounded entity could not permit the internal circulation attributed to mobilization, then perhaps the body itself should not be assumed as an outline or, worse still, a self-policing fortress.

Even solo dancing implicates other bodies and assumes that the expressivity of what circulates as interiority is not confined or contained to that edge or boundary we attribute to the skin. That such a belief could move within a culture attests not to the truth of physiology (which tells us of hair follicles and permeable membranes, of electric fields, and of incessant exchanges, not of some vacuum-packed slab of meat) but to the truth of vision, whose failure has been typically understood as a bout of false consciousness. Dancing constantly enters into a space that is not yet visible out of which it will subsequently disappear as it makes that space disappear. Yet it is worth entertaining the possibility that these entrances and exits are not simply from the visible but into other registers of sensation as well.

One would want to inquire, for example, into an acoustic approach to dance studies to see how different spatial and temporal figures distributed among a group of dancing bodies could generate kinesthetic effects. Or, one could study how spatiotemporal affiliations generate an absence in the collective interiority of those bodies present. Certainly in multicultural mobilizations one would want to attend to effects generated in the negative spaces and polyphonic temporalities of the range of practices set in motion. This is a more productive approach to the appreciation of political effects that elude the visible than is captured by the term “unintended consequences.”

It should also be plain that the importation of acoustic models to dance or other practices does not mean that sound can be essentialized as a stable sense-presence. If the senses are treated as socioperceptual systems, then we must inquire into how they operate as activities, and not what processes of seeing or listening possess as a given content. To listen to dance, to hear dancing, must be more than the percussive encounter of bodily surfaces against their own built environment; these sensitivities must inform the whole way we attend to a practice.

While the visual and the acoustic interact with dance in potentially productive ways, dance is most frequently associated with the art of the kinesthetic, which would render its most familiar sense system that of touch. Yet, as with the other senses, this touching or feeling is not necessarily that of physical contact but that of a sensed contact organized through some circulation of the physical. In certain respects, then, the dance-generated notion goes beyond the use of structure of feeling in the work of Raymond Williams, in which it designates a historical sensibility that is itself nascent in a range of practices. The ability to be implicated in a mobilized physical presence makes a body attend to the prospect of mobilization. That this ability could be applied to dancers and their audience suggests a way beyond the chasm sometimes found in cultural theory between production- and reception-centered accounts. By locating dancing among bodies that are differentiated into performers and audience, we can sustain and distribute what is productive and the necessary receptivity implicit in communication across those seemingly binary positionalities of producer and receiver. Between and Beyond: Choreography and Dance Technique

Dancing takes surfaces as depth, fleshy contacts as the confusion of means and ends, and is yet another form of bodily circulation, now of interi- 212. CRITICAL MOVES ority with its own exteriority. To say this, however, is already to imply a term other than dancing that is constitutive of it, one that has animated but has also been long absent in this chapter, namely, choreography. What is specific to dance are its own constituting practices, dancing and choreography. I want to conclude with a discussion of the resonance of these terms for cultural studies and a political economy for multicultural bodies. By multicultural bodies, I mean to gather the conceptual momentum built up in these pages and speak of the mobilization of difference materialized momentarily in various social kinesthetic practices or techniques. Multicultural bodies are composite, instanced by immediate and mediated associations, and not amalgamations of fixed identities within stable group memberships. Although what these bodies produce is subject to appropriation and commodification, bodies' specific forms of mutual interdependence generate a social surplus that leaves its mark in the configurations of space and time in which we live. It is toward the elaboration of society itself and against the subordination of social life to domination and exploitation that these differences make a difference or create a politics.

No doubt, this articulation of multicultural bodies is complicated by the acts of state and economy that seek to deny difference its context and convert, by means of what is recognized in rights or what circulates as commodity, an irre- ducible multiplicity into so many units of discrete, monocultural identities. I would not want to suggest that such reductive and subsumptive recognitions are without utility to the critical multiculturalism being invoked here. Although meant for control and profit, relations of state and economy (not, in the last instance, readily separable) are also themselves transformed by what they seek to co-opt and assimilate. Official multiculturalism would have difference be a property of individual bodies. The efforts at this line of administration constantly run into resistance, however, because difference is what relates and composes bodies as collectivities.

One of the predicaments of a radical multicultural politics is how to evaluate the efficacy of its own capacities for mobilization, when it is invited to recognize itself in the arrested motion of resources targeted for a fixed position. This problem alludes to the crisis of theory and politics with which I opened the book and is one that I hope dance can address with its own special resources. At first glance, choreography and dancing would appear to be the local variants for dance of the now familiar opposition between structure and agency that the shift from object to practice was intended to complicate. FOR DANCE STUDIES 213 In actuality, the two constitutive features of dance offer their own ultimately helpful complications to the conjoined mobilization of subject and object attempted by cultural studies and required to realize the politics of multiculturalism. One reason dance can contribute to the larger political discussion is that both choreography and dancing remain practices that present their own amalgamation of structure and agency. The choreographer is situated between the dead body of her existing work and the living bodies who make the continuation of that work possible. The work of those living bodies presents itself as a problem that is at once organizational and aesthetic. Organizationally, the choreographer must institute a process that ultimately rid itself of her if it is to come to fruition. It must trespass on her founding linguistic authority if it is to come into being as the embodied ac- tivity she desires for what a dance, at its creative inception, not yet is. These organizational resources of the choreographer are joined with the aesthetic ones by means of a ligation of the usually implicit rules generative of re- hearsal processes, which are aimed at mobilizing bodies, together with the syntax for those rules designed to organize movement. Clearly, the chore- ographer draws from more than her own history of choreography. Instead, she appeals to the broadest historical horizon in a stream of kinesthetic me- diations—that is, the place at which choreography is drawn out of a given physical culture. Hence, especially and most commonly when the choreo- graphic function is not personified, as in the case of myriad popular dance forms, the enunciation of dance from a more generalized cultural disposi- tion toward movement is crucial. But it is exactly here, at its founding sources, that choreography reveals its own internal relation to its apparent opposite, for the process through which movement is articulated as dance depends on something generally attributed to dancing itself, namely, technique. This means (techne) for generating movement, for practical mobilization of the body, assumes some capacity for the internalization of syntactic structures that might be as- sociated with choreography. In the dialectic of technique and virtuosity, it is the moment of detextualization, in which mobilization momentarily eclipses what has mobilized it, on which the West has pinned its desire for dance through the figure of the star. No doubt, we would not have to reach for such heights to notice detextualized bodies, which, as already suggested, are constitutive of all mobilizations. Dancers, whatever the cultural status of their dancing, exist in relation to 214 CRITICAL MOVES some technical foundation for movement whether it is explicit or implicit, whether its pedagogy is self-referential or unnamed as such. While chore- ographer and dancer (even if these are the same person) depend on each other for their particular agency, that agency is already made possible by the structural interpenetration of choreography and technique. In this re- gard, choreography is a metatechnique. It is a method for generating means of movement and offers a basis for differentiating movement values out of a given cultural context that provides the orienting principles for a body of techniques. It follows that technique is itself metachoreographic. For a choreographer cannot initiate a particular dance by originating, in any absolute sense, the movement of which it is composed. As I said at the opening of this chapter, the creation of all dances must begin in the middle—that is, in the midst of those capacities for movement which the dancers embody. Dance technique, as is apparent as soon as one changes teachers, classrooms, or cultural loca- tions, is highly situational. 

What each site for dance technique displays is a certain aspiration for an entire condition of the body, a body that technique valorizes. Thus, techniques are not neutral with respect to a given culture. They are also choreographically inflected or, to be more precise, they are the materialized possibility of a given choreographic trajectory.

The premise that wherever there is dance, choreography and technique are mobilized through dancing, is an open and ongoing hypothesis that dance studies must continually pose. For to answer or prove this hypothesis definitively would conclude the final dance study. But what is an immediate undecidability for dance studies can turn out to be an enormous resource for multiculturalism.

The epistemological break for dance came when it was realized that dancing could be treated as a language like other forms, removing the shackles of a prelinguistic autonomy from the world of cultural discourse. That dance can now enter discourse means that it must be able to show its own differentiation from the discourse and how it can, in turn, further epistemic transformation as a whole.

This is important because cultural studies assumes that real political gains can be had in the struggle over the conditions of knowledge production not simply as a means of official validation but as a means of valuation for the myriad mobilizations in which people are already engaged. It is from language, from dance studies’ newly found comfort with dance as text, that a break within language itself is now possible.

For if dance were to assume the mantle of what language has accomplished for cultural studies — the circulating mobilization of structure and agency in practice— it would have to show the gains of inserting the dialectic of choreography (with its metarelations to technique) and dancing (with its bodies of circulating senses) into the epistemological spaces that have now been opened.

By this I am referring to the basic distinction found in Saussure between langue, or the structural capacity for language, and parole, or the specifiable speech act or utterance. Cultural studies, at least as imagined here as a critical project that encompasses emergent dance studies, represents the most powerful use and critique of this linguistic model. It promotes an extensive democratization of identity at the same time as it has examined where the cultural theorization of language has failed that democratic project.

Without rehearsing either of these aspects of cultural democracy, I want to turn to the problem that langue and parole have posed for radical multicultural politics: a theory of structure and agency that polarizes the two terms to the point where the prospect of their mutual historical transformation becomes difficult to conceptualize.

The polarization of structure and agency is especially problematic for multicultural politics given that it represents precisely the field where such transformations occur. Indeed, much of the politics of representation, to say nothing of representational politics, has stumbled on this point, for it is difficult to have one’s voice heard when an utterance is lost to its structural occasion because the universalizing langue cannot be recognized in the particular parole. Similarly for representational democracy, the call to “throw the bums out” does little to assure that the very distance between formal structures and needs could be ameliorated only by different principles of representation. By introducing choreography and dancing at the crossroads of the crisis of representation that has shaken the epistemological foundations of the West, I do not want to succumb to the temptation of posing interpersonal proximity as a solution to the woes of a globally constituted society. On this last construction of a multicultural world system, there seems to be no conceivable (or, I would argue in a different context, desirable) alternative. Any notion of a return to the past is unavailable both logically and politically as a model or ideal. Invoking a nostalgic return as a figure for the future has invariably meant excluding the bulk of those in the present. The beauty of the small assumes the universalization of both the small and the beautiful, a rather large idea and one that confuses size of social units and societal scale (after all, what could be smaller, historically speaking, than imagining a society composed of five billion nuclear families of one?).

All this is to say that what dance offers cultural studies and politics is not a new theory of small groups that provides a template for social engineering. Instead, critical dance studies can develop an account of the interpenetration of structure and agency that makes palpable the radical contingency (the possibility of mutual influence and therefore difference) of these two analytic terms, without losing sight of the appropriation of surplus that necessitates a critique of domination.

Radical contingency assumes that appropriation is neither unidirectional nor unidimensional, not that all outcomes are equally likely or desirable. It is thus possible to recognize the histories of cultural appropriation that have undermined the basis for human association while acknowledging that the multiple borrowings of practices from diverse sources is constitutive of multicultural bodies. This capacity to incorporate difference establishes affiliations that can be drawn on to undermine the imaginaries of partition and division. It is not simply the ability to identify with the other but to depend for one’s own movement on what one has learned as productive in an other that can serve to enlist participation in various multicultural mobilizations.

These steps taken may enhance the very avenues of exchange, even if they operate in the shadows of those who traffic in stolen goods, for ownership tends to steal the limelight, but not the stage, from those who dance to further their own devices. The circulation of the body through the various fields of the senses (a sort of simulacra for multiculturalism itself) sustains a heterogeneous range of cultural and historical difference in its incessant exchange of absence for presence, public for private, and a social surplus for surplus labor and population. And with each circuit of this exchange, the socialized labor so vivid in the close encounter of choreography and dancing multiplies the capacities, the effectivities, and the desire of this new political economy of the body. Its novelty resides in no small measure with what gets valued, namely, the very capacity for mobilizing difference, which choreography treats as its most fundamental resource and leaves intact as the social surplus that makes further dancing possible. It is not that choreography can exist without a momentary objectification of dancing labor or commodification of choreographic time in performance. Rather, this labor becomes the means of choreographic agency in its encounter with the public reception that realizes the value of this productive process as the association of bodies mobilized in performance. In this dance performance, the principle of society is made legible through labor itself, which is the end of human association, not merely its means. The radically close encounter of choreography and dancing is not necessarily apparent at the interpersonal level but emerges when the interpersonal reflects what makes it possible politically and epistemologically. Therefore, an analysis cannot begin with proximity but must view what is close in time and space as the consequence of the way in which those terms get constituted globally.

Because struggle issues both out of and through oppositional terms, dance is not simply a product but a labor process of what struggle could be. This last possibility is a socialized economy of the body radically different from that proposed by the rightist call for sacrifice and surveillance under the sign of exchange of the unborn for those who bear, the spectacle of racialized surplus bodies, or the privatization of need on behalf of an ever-expanding circulation of commodified want.

If interdisciplinarity is to be more than just another better idea waiting for its successor, it will be a production of ideas in the service of realizing what this socialized economy demands if it is to come to prominence but cannot yet know. The desire for this knowledge animates the project of dance studies I have imagined here.

Beyond the concrete works that emanate from it, this project has three inflections. The first is the challenge to the conventional ways of understanding politics. The place of the theoretical gaze with respect to what it looks at has too often taken this separation for granted. The result is not simply a divide between who can speak and what is spoken for but also a sense that the latter is fixed and immobile, an interest awaiting activation.

The mutually constitutive relations of agency and critical presence concretely yet unstably mobilized in performance allow the basis for politics to be recognized as already in motion and not suffering the crisis of arrested development.

Second, critical dance studies holds the promise of developing this language of mobilization beyond its present state of affairs that too often renders political movements as insufficient to the demands of their times and, in effect, minimizes recognition of the efficacy of future mobilizations. For these theoretical resources to be developed, dance must be taken as a kinesthetic practice that puts on display the very conditions through which the body itself is mobilized, rather than as simply a privileged aesthetic object.

Finally, dance studies can take up the critique of representation developed in cultural studies to find an analytic ground between incorporation and inscription, the bodily and the linguistic, historical subject and agency. The body of the text can be used as a metaphor for the materiality of language and its practical enactment. But this specification of text can come at the expense of rendering the body, the attributes of materiality, and the conditions of enactment as generic. So too, overidentifying body and word as a kind of architectural skeleton can entomb a process that is not yet dead. Yet this critique, even when it acknowledges the differences between subject and agency, cannot be confined to speech about speech. So much of human practice cannot be spoken for, and even a portrait needs to be composed through applications of bodily techniques. What is left out of language, what animates speech, can also be subjected to a historical and materialist analysis that can allow us to sense what continues to develop even when ideas, invariably tied to the mast of events, appear to fail. The political undertaking of supporting an expansive body of the social (against its appropriative reduction), just when the idea of community seems so much at risk, can renew the significance of socialism. It is toward this project that dance studies may lend a certain vocabulary.

The performance took place on Monday, November 11, 1991. Peggy Peloquin was the choreographer. While various systems of dance notation exist, they do not enjoy the generalized application of a standardized reference that characterizes the status of the musical score or dramatic script. Writing is decentered with respect to the institutions of dance production. The subfield of dance restoration or reconstruction already indicates a break between what can be taken as evidence that a dance once was and what is required of representation if the dance is to come again into being. The "graphy," or writing, in "choreography" is an inscription of moving bodies in space and not on paper or video screen, where movement activity is a precondition for inscription. It is not that signals for movement patterns can never be transmitted to dancers except through movement (which is therefore, somehow, not mediatable). The more important point is that the choreographic idea is dependent on its ultimate expressive activity (dancing) for its inscription in a manner qualitatively different from any other performance idiom. This fundamental difference in the materiality of the object and its representation displayed in dance may also reveal the limits on the metaphor of writing as it is applied to other media. Classical ballet, hip hop, and Balinese or Ghanaian dance routinely treat movement or steps as items of a vocabulary that was established prior to a given work. Unlike video or dance notation that would claim to document the dance object, such vocabularies are systems for naming movement that bear all the ambiguities of the relation between a sign and the referent that lies outside it. Especially for the latter three forms, the question of how to situate the choreographic function is particularly complex in terms of the way dance making is instantiated in other cultural processes. For in these cases, dance is already a mediation of a social kinesthetic that may first be viewed in terms of gender, technology, politics, or community, In contrast, the lexicon for modern and experimental dance is more diffuse, whereas the choreographic role tends to be attributed indexically—that is, as a function of generating the particular dance rather than as a precondition for choreography. Consequently, the specificity of the rehearsal process to create a work of dance is privileged (as was the case for the piece performed at Judson Church). While, analytically speaking, such forms of contemporary Western concert dance are just as replete with the broader social kinesthetic as their so-called popular counterparts, the localized vocabulary of modern dance movement supports an ideology of the autonomy of the aesthetic for its social context, which suffuses the choreographic process. In this ideology of the creative process, modern dance forms treat their own choreographic practice as an originary expression whose value lies in sheer difference from any other instance of dance. This autonomy joins together the representations of dance production (the language of the rehearsal process) and reception (the conventional dance review). Consequently, the rehearsal process and the review serve not only as sites for dance creation but also as a means to imagine the bracketing of the creative process from both the history of dance and the larger physical culture, these two being subordinate during rehearsals to the immediate authority of the choreographer.

I would suggest that ethnography is most appropriate for exploring the relation of agency and history simulated in performance. Ethnography is an appropriate method for appreciating the disruptive presence that divides representation and its object. It conveys through language that the ethnographic procedure is radically different from what it looks at. An activity of textual appropriation of difference, ethnography rests on a prior cultural appropriation through colonial contact. Hence, while ethnography results in representation, with sufficient methodological reflection, it points to what is lost to representation, just as does the performer-audience relation in dance.

In terms of the preceding discussion of people's history, this turn from history to ethnography was one of the methodological foundations for the development of cultural studies in Britain at the Birmingham Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies. The search for the people's voice had led to oral history and, from there, to the traces of the popular in contemporary culture, an investigation well suited to ethnography, whose 226 NOTES TO CHAPTER ONE 27 28 seminal bridge text in this regard is Paul Willis's Learning to Labor: How Working Class Kids Get Working Class Jobs (New York: Columbia University Press, 1981). Willis effectively showed that the very efforts to colonize the minds of working-class youth generated an autodidactic culture of resistance in the classroom that was supportive of decolonization. In this manner, ethnography transferred the object of people's history into the present, but again, not without introducing certain problems of its own. These problems must be addressed with the understanding that although ethnography and historiography refer to different disciplines, they can share a commitment to a given conception of history defined by the mobilization of critical publics.

My account of the performance at Judson Church was ethnographic in that it wrote the observation of my own lost traces of participation. In pursuing traces of the critical public manifest as audience, my dance ethnography turned its agency toward history. While oriented toward history, this form of representing the difference generated by an encounter is also critically disposed toward other ethnographic practices.

For a programmatic statement on oral history, see Paul Thompson, The Voice of the Past: Oral History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978). For a critical but sympathetic reflection, see Ronald J. Grele, "Movement without Aim: Methodological and Theoretical Problems in Oral History," in Grele, ed., Envelopes of Sound: The Art of Oral History, 2d ed. (Chicago: Precedent Publishing, 1985). My own reflections on ethnography can be found in Randy Martin, "Dance Ethnography and the Limits of Representation," Social Text 33 (Winter 1992): 103-23; Randy Martin, Socialist Ensembles: Theater and State in Cuba and Nicaragua (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1994), 1-24; and Randy Martin, "Agency and History: The Demands of Dance Ethnography," in Susan Foster, ed., 

In "Choreography and the Imagined Community: A View from the Stage," the author discusses the integration of theaters into their social context and the history of experimental work. The text focuses on the Judson Dance Theater and its impact on dance and art.

The author has discussed the insertion of these theaters into their social context in "Performance as Political Act: The Embodied Self" (New York: Bergin and Garvey, 1990). It is no small irony that experimental work, once conceived as autonomous from the instrumentalities of the social, would be drawn into the sanctuary of a church to escape the wrath of an assault cloaked in the mantle of religion.

Some of the documentation of that dance history bears repeating, and Sally Banes' "Democracy's Body: Judson Dance Theater, 1962-1964" (Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press, 1983) serves as a key reference. Judson was founded on a goal of community service and a principle of not "proselytizing in a community that was primarily Italian Catholic" (36). Its mandate for theater under Minister Al Carmines was "one, not to do religious drama. Two, no censorship after acceptance" (37). Its refusal to stamp its religious "content" on the poetry, visual art, theater, and dance presented there permitted a range of artistic possibilities.

The Judson dancers took their name from an activity of writing or inscription in a virtual space. That space was actualized, although only briefly, by bringing dance to a place already defined as oppositional by other, nonartistic activities. The possibility for democracy came by situating a generative principle for dance activity within the particular framing provided by the church that had as its project the constitution of a public aesthetic sphere presumably freed from certain instrumentalities of the market.

While not theorized as such, Banes's study of Judson indicates some of the more familiar aspects of postmodern art, though in unfamiliar manifestations (for discussion, see Sally Banes, "Terpsichore in Sneakers," 2nd ed. [Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1987], and Susan Manning, "Modernist Dogma and Post-Modern-Rhetoric: A Response to Sally Banes' Terpsichore in Sneakers," Drama Review 32, 4 [1988]). Pastiche is evident in the parody of styles and genres of dance presented in the course of an evening's concert. The leveling of high and popular culture is apparent in the framing of pedestrian movement as dance; it is complicated, however, by Judson's maintenance of an avant-gardism and its dancers' links with the canons of modern dance and ballet through their technical training and professional work.

Finally, the fragmenting of authorial integrity, identified with the 1960s attack on bourgeois individualism and the myth of the self, is displayed in Judson's collaborative process, only to reveal something of the fragility of that critique. The premise of the 1962-64 dance initiatives at Judson was to couple a non-hierarchical and participatory principle, a body politic, with a non-authoritative compositional process. Judson's breakup represents a contradiction of participatory process and participation. If the democracy produced by Judson yielded to "an influx of younger participants," or the presence of Robert Rauschenberg in some of the later concerts introduced hierarchy, or accessibility of Judson's work to those outside the New York community produced conflicts over where and when to perform, it was at the very least a highly exclusive and troubled democracy.

In her closing words, Banes seems to accept this account of the movement of innovation in art, which she terms "cyclical," with a kind of confidence______ Proliferation, expansion, growth, but of something that no longer showed even the traces of the democracy that had been, according to Banes, its original project. This too is resonant of other experiences, but neither the contextualization of the split in democracy's body nor the internal contradiction between expansion and participation is registered in Banes's account. It would be unwise not to exercise caution in drawing conclusions about historical movements such as Judson, so as to avoid confusing an analytic frame that may make democratic impulses and processes available with an expected autonomy of art from its social context, Otherwise, democracy appears altogether unsustainable, in life as in art.

I have never seen an actual performance of Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land, but have relied on multiple viewings of a video of the November 9 performance screened at Lincoln Center's Dance Library. The video was viewed several times before I wrote my own narrative of it and several times after I produced an initial account. Hence, my representation of the dance video in what follows is a reading of a reading that treats an effect of dance performance that is already inscribed in the context of reception—in this case, a center of research.

A step removed from the dance, I will not attempt to locate the authenticity of performance, but of context. Curt Sachs, World History of the Dance (1937) (New York: Norton, 1965), 18. John Martin, Introduction to the Dance (1939) (Brooklyn: Dance Horizons 1965), 13-14. This critique is developed most programmatically by Lévi-Strauss in The Savage Mind. See Catherine Clement, Opera, or the Undoing of Women (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1988).






===================\n\n\n




Scene One

It is New Year's Eve 2001-2002 in the Mission District of San Francisco, a dicey neighbourhood populated by street people picking through the detritus of discarded items left for garbage collection on the grungy sidewalks. In the midst of this gritty gray urban tableau, in front of the Episcopal Church of St. John the Evangelist, small groups of brightly dressed people congregate at the entrance, their colorful attire and vibrant energy standing out in stark contrast to the bleakness of the external environment. I am one of these people, and when I pass through the gate, friendly greeters welcome me with hugs as I enter into a completely different reality, the world of an all-night underground rave. This rave is called Alchemy and, according to what is written on my invitation, is conceived of as "a divine vessel for personal and global transformation through ceremony, dance, music, light, food, and personal interaction." It is one of four seasonal raves put on each year by the Rhythm Society, a group of dedicated organizers who "come together in dance and celebration for primary religious experience, spiritual growth, and community."

I make my way through the courtyard to the church building itself, and the first thing I see upon entering the foyer is a large altar filled with an assortment of sacred objects. I step into the main room, which is normally used as a sanctuary for church services, and the full impact of the rave environment overwhelms my senses. Incredibly loud, pounding, beat-driven electronic dance music is blasting from an enormous sound system at a volume that produces shock waves I can feel in my solar plexus and throughout the rest of my body. Innovative lighting fills every nook and cranny of the room in a variety of creative configurations, and one wall is completely taken up by huge projected video images morphing with state-of-the-art programming artistry. All of the pews have been cleared to the sides, and the central area of the floor is already crowded with people dancing to the music. There are four distinct sizable altars in each of the cardinal directions, an area with massage tables and masseurs/masseuses, and an area of tables with food and beverages. At the perimeter, people have laid out cushions and blankets and personal items, and are sitting and lying together in various groupings, engaged in intimate interactions.

As I search for a place to put down my own things, I run into a number of close friends, many of whom I have not seen since the last Rhythm Society event, and we greet each other warmly, sharing our excitement in anticipation of the night ahead of us. At a certain point close to midnight, a person with a microphone calls the several hundred people to gather together and be seated for the opening ceremony. Welcomes and introductions are given, as well as an orientation to the church, the Rhythm Society, the space, and the scheduled sequence of events. Another person talks about the theme of alchemy, and the intention to create a sacred container for alchemical transformation from base elements to higher spiritual refinement. Another person calls in the four elements and the four directions, and yet another leads everyone in a guided meditation in which we draw energy up from the earth and down from the heavens into our bodies. Finally, we are given two small strips of paper—a white one, on which we are supposed to write down difficult issues we have been struggling with over the last period of time, to be burned in the fire in the courtyard, and a gold one, on which we are supposed to write down dreams we wish to call in over the next period of time, to be placed in an urn in the center of the main altar. We meditate on these two strips of paper and their meanings for us for a few minutes of silence, and this is brought to an end by the powerful reintroduction of uptempo electronic dance music. A palpable surge of energy fills the room as everyone jumps up and starts to dance enthusiastically, and the rave begins in earnest.

From this moment of midnight until the break of day after 7:00 a.m., participants dance to the continuously mixed, beat-heavy music, losing themselves in deep trance states as they merge into a unified field of sound, light, and motion. This intense experiential matrix of the dance floor is the central focus of the rave, the crucible in which powerful energies are activated, shaped, and transformed by both the dancers and the DJ, who leads them on a musical and spiritual journey. For long stretches of time, I dance in my own universe, experiencing transcendent peaks of joy and terrifying valleys of fear, working through personal issues of light and darkness. At other times, I am actively engaged with those dancing around me, interacting with gesture and movement; we acknowledge each other with eye contact, and let out shrieks of delight when the music carries us to a shared ecstatic high.

This ongoing dance-floor experience is punctuated by occasional breaks to go to the bathroom, cool off, drink some water, eat some food, sit or lie down, and visit with friends. Over the course of the night, each person develops his or her own unique rhythm of oscillating between the high energy intensity of the dance floor and the more relaxed intimate atmosphere of the specially designed “chill” spaces. Although dancing is the primary activity of any rave, many people may also have their most profound experiences in quieter contexts off of the dance floor.

As the long hours of night give way to daybreak, light begins to illuminate the stained-glass windows and the music is brought to an end with one last uplifting anthem that leaves everyone smiling and happy. Acknowledgments and hugs are exchanged as music issues forth from the enormous church organ and people lie down on the floor to listen to the baroque intricacies of the Bach fugues. When the organ music finishes, we are brought together for a brief concluding ceremony that provides closure to the rave.

Some people, like myself, begin to gather our belongings and get ready to go, saying goodbyes to old and new friends alike, while others busy themselves with the tasks of breaking down the equipment, cleaning the space, and putting the church back to its normal configuration. For those hard-core ravers who still haven’t gotten enough, there will be an “after-party” in a different location when the breakdown is complete.

I myself walk out into the morning air with a sense of satisfaction and fuzzy exhaustion, taking in the beauty of the new day. I find my car, drive home, and sleep until the afternoon. Although I am tired for days afterward, the rave has provided me with just the type of transformative experience I was looking for, and I enter the new year with a feeling of spiritual renewal that allows me to approach the next phase of time with fresh energy and vision. Scene Two:
It is Labor Day weekend 2002 in Nevada's Black Rock Desert, an ancient seabed that is one of the most desolate locations on the planet, a perfectly flat expanse where temperatures regularly exceed one hundred degrees and virtually no living thing grows. Nearly thirty thousand people are attending Burning Man, a weeklong festival of communion, revelry, and creative expression that culminates in the spectacular nocturnal burning of a forty-foot-tall wooden sculpture in the shape of a man. The gathering is laid out as a temporary city in a circle of "streets," with the Man himself as the central focal point, towering above everything. People live in elaborate theme camps they have created, which have a ramshackle, almost Third World quality that is counterbalanced by an astonishing display of creativity and high-tech wizardry.

Because of the barren, two-dimensional nature of the desert landscape, anything that is constructed stands out in high relief against an empty backdrop, a blank canvas that is then filled with the vibrancy of the visionary mind. Indeed, any survey of the incredible proliferation of camps and installations reveals a mind-boggling array of artistic, conceptual, and technical expressions, forming a surrealistic tableau that feels like a waking dream. One is bound only by the limits of one's imagination, and these limits seem to be temporarily suspended out on "the playa" (the name is loosely based on the Spanish word for beach), as though the imagination has been exteriorized into a three-dimensional physical landscape where it is given form.

Yet these external forms, amazing as they are, are not even the main show; they are often mere backdrops for the humans that inhabit them. At Burning Man, the human body itself becomes another blank canvas on which to express creativity. In addition to widespread nudity, body painting, and outrageous clothing, there are amazing costumes on display, from eight-foot-tall satyrs to glowing machine men to aliens. And these costumes are usually not mere decorations, but are employed in all manner of performance that is constantly happening—dance, theater, ritual, music, and so on.

These performances are also highly creative endeavors, ranging anywhere from original techno-operas to reconstructions of ancient Sumerian ceremonies. Some performances function within the traditional performer/audience division, but more often than not, they break down the barriers between performer and audience and encourage audience participation. Such interactive engagement is one of the primary values espoused at Burning Man, expressed in the official aphorism "no observers, only participants."

These intensive interactions can occur anytime and anyplace, not only at planned performances, but just as frequently in unplanned spontaneous circumstances. This spontaneous unfolding of intense experiences and interactions characterizes each individual's time at Burning Man. Although days are usually spent cowering in the shade, waiting for the heat to pass, evenings are spent wandering from camp to camp, never knowing what type of environment, performance, or interaction one might encounter.

Music is as much a part of Burning Man as visual art, and one can also wander from camp to camp with huge sound systems blasting electronic dance music of every variety, incredible decorations and lighting, and dance floors filled with dancers deep in trance. Although Burning Man is a multifaceted phenomenon that cannot be reduced to any one component or conceptual framework, the rave scene is clearly a very strong presence, not only in terms of the countless "mini-raves" going on and the large numbers of people involved, but also because the powerful experiencial states, spirituality, sense of community, alternative/utopian values, and high-tech psychedelic aesthetic of raves are a perfect fit for the ethos of Burning Man. In fact, a few years ago, the rave contingent became so dominant that organizers felt that it threatened to take over the whole gathering, and so they discontinued the central rave after the burn and efforts were made to concentrate rave camps in one area. Nevertheless, rave culture continues to be an integral part of Burning Man, and there is a symbiotic relationship between the two phenomena. This relationship is best illustrated by the activities the night of the burning of the Man, which is the culminating peak of the whole gathering. After days of intense adventures, wandering dispersed throughout the playa, the entire population assembles as a whole for the first time and the sense of anticipation and excitement is palpable and contagious. There is a long procession of a seemingly endless profusion of costumed performers and brilliantly decorated vehicles that moves slowly down the central boulevard to the cheers of the crowd toward the waiting Man, which glows with multicolored neon lights attached to its skeletal structure. The crowd 6 TRANCE FORMATION gathers in an enormous circle around the Man, kept at a safe distance from danger, and begins to chant “Burn him, burn him!” The method by which the Man is set on fire differs from year to year, but it is always accompanied by a spectacular pyrotechnic display and a huge explosion that results in the Man going up in flames. Spontaneously, and as one, the crowd screams at the top of their lungs. It is impossible to convey the intensity of the moment and this intensity continues until the Man has burned long enough to lose its structural integrity and fall to the ground, which takes several minutes. The falling of the Man is another peak experience accompanied by a crescendo of screaming and then, as the crowd spills out onto the playa in all directions, what can best be described as total chaos breaks out as far as the eye can see. It is as though the final bonds of restraint have been broken and wild revelry ensues in thousands of manifestations, including dozens of raves going off in every direction. For many people, it is the best rave of the year, with the best DJs, sound systems, and visuals; the wildest, most dedicated crowd of dancers; and the most powerful experience on the dance floor. For myself, I went to the Illuminaughty camp and danced with friends to a series of incredible DJ sets and a live performance by the techno group Medicine Drum. The party continued all night into the next day, culminating with the pastel colors of the dawn and the spectacular desert sunrise, which provided an inspiring and memorable conclusion to the Burning Man experience.

Scene Three

It is the first Saturday afternoon of July 2000; in the central Tiergarten Park in Berlin, Germany, I am one of over a million people who have come to attend the Love Parade, the largest rave gathering of any in the world. As I exit the subway and begin to walk up the stairs to street level, I can already feel the ground shaking with the continuous pounding beat of incredibly loud electronic dance music. I emerge from the underground station into daylight and am immediately overwhelmed by the densely packed mass of people crowding the city streets. The vast majority of them are brightly dressed in all manner of rave clothing and paraphernalia, smiling and dancing to the music, which is blasting from countless sources at a volume of deafening proportions. I am still close to a mile away from the park and the actual parade itself, so after steeling myself, I begin slowly moving in that direction, pulled along in the flow of people. THE WORLD OF RAVES

Finally, after what seems like an eternity, I enter the park, its wide boulevards and wooded paths filled beyond capacity with ravers in full party mode. Several dozen large "floats," brightly decorated semi-trucks with powerful sound systems, crawl up and down the boulevards through the crowds, each with DJs spinning electronic dance music and packed with gyrating dancers. All of the boulevards converge at a central circle, at the center of which stands the famous Victory Column—adorned with a triumphant angel at the top—that serves as ground zero for high-volume music, wild revelry, and a maximum density of people. Somehow I manage to reach this epicenter without getting crushed and take in the tableau. It is an ocean of humanity stretching endlessly outward in every direction as far as the eye can see, everyone smiling and moving to the insistent rhythms of the all-encompassing techno soundscape. The sheer scale is impossible to grasp, and yet the fact that so few people are injured every year is a testament to the palpable and pervasive feeling of goodwill, unity, and cooperation shared by everyone.

The partying continues unabated for hours into the evening. At a certain point, the floats come to a stop and all of the sound systems are linked by radio signal to a central stage, so that over a million people are now all dancing to the same music. It is undoubtedly the biggest party anywhere on the planet, and dancers are rewarded with a lineup of some of the world's best DJs spinning the best music and with hours of ecstatic trancedancing. Strangely, everything comes to an end at 10:00 P.M., a very early time by ravers' standards, a time at which most raves usually haven't even gotten started. There is, however, method in this madness. While many people have heard of the Love Parade, what most of them don't know is that the parade itself is just the tip of the iceberg, a pretext for dozens of raves occurring throughout the city in the days before and after. In effect, it is a raver's paradise for the hundreds of thousands of dedicated aficionados who have come from all over the planet, and they are the proverbial kids in the candy store, with an overwhelming variety of top-quality events to choose from.

So, when the music shuts down at 10:00 P.M., most people go home to rest, perhaps take a nap, recharge, and get ready for a full night of raving. For myself, after dinner and a nap, I went to a club called the Tempodrom and danced all night under a big-top tent in a warehouse courtyard to the psy-chedelic trance music of DJ Goa Gil. (As his name implies, this particular style and scene of electronic dance music, known as Goa trance, got its start in Goa, India, and is strongly influenced by Hindu spirituality and iconography.) When I left at 6:00 A.M., happy and exhausted, the music was still going strong and the dance floor was packed. Although these descriptions of events may seem strange and unusual to someone who has never attended a rave, in fact, thousands of people regularly engage in such activities every weekend in numerous locations across the planet. Since the mid-to-late 1980s, raves and the culture surrounding them have become a huge global phenomenon that has made an enormous impact not only on the lives of the people directly involved, but also on many aspects of larger mainstream popular culture. While most media accounts of raves sensationalize their negative features, emphasizing excesses of drug use and bacchanalian revelry, what goes unnoticed is perhaps their most important positive feature—their tremendous spiritual and religious power. For thousands of ravers worldwide, raves are one of their primary sources of spirituality and the closest thing they have to a religion. This is a theme that has emerged repeatedly in my research, and one that ravers have articulated again and again in my interviews with them: "It's definitely a spiritual experience. And I never had any spirituality before, so this was my first time that I had ever experienced that. I consider it to be a very spiritual experience. In fact, I can say that prior to doing that, my sense of spirituality was pretty weak, pretty undeveloped, pretty dormant in me. ... I definitely felt a very strong sense of spirituality... At that point in my life, things really transformed in me. I really started feeling like I had a more noble purpose in life. ... I've had what I might term, and not facetiously, religious experiences when I've been dancing. You just get incredibly happy. You get filled with a real sense of joy... The music is a religion. ... If you've got a keyhole somewhere, that's the thing that puts the key in and turns the lock and opens you up. For a lot of people, it was equal to a religious experience, but they didn't have to follow a religion. ... On a ritualistic level, going into something and coming out feeling different, or feeling that you had become enlightened in some way. ... You felt very connected to yourself and connected to other people. There was an incredible amount of energy, [a] feeling that you were energized when you left and this feeling of being very happy for a few weeks."

The world of raves is a powerful spiritual and religious experience. It provides a form of ritual activity and communal ceremony that regularly and reliably produces such experiences through concrete practices. Raves also provide a philosophy and worldview that makes sense of these experiences and translates them into a code for living, a map for integrating the transformative experience into the concrete details of day-to-day life. And, last but not least, raves provide a sense of community, a cultural identity, and an alternative social structure that exists in the "real world" outside of the rave.

When one considers these powerful spiritual and religious dimensions of raves, combined with the fact that so many people regularly participate in them, it becomes clear that global rave culture constitutes a significant religious phenomenon, one worthy of closer investigation and serious study. Moreover, in examining raves as a significant religious phenomenon, what makes them even more interesting is the fact that they do not really resemble religion as we traditionally think of it, but rather are an innovative and unexpected development that has arisen in "secular" arenas of music, dance, entertainment, and popular culture. As such, raves also provide a template for new forms of spirituality and religion emerging in the rapidly changing social and cultural landscape of the twenty-first century. Therefore, a close study of raves will not only tell us a great deal about the spiritual and religious dimensions of this particular phenomenon, but will also provide general keys to understanding the dynamics of a wide variety of other innovative new spiritual and religious phenomena. What are some of these keys?

1. A combination of the sacred and the secular. While many raves have a general spiritual orientation, a sense of the sacred in the peak dance-floor experience, and even explicitly religious components like altars or ceremonies, they also have many clearly secular aspects, such as paradigms of partying, “making the scene” (whether motivated by beauty, sex, status, or power), recreation, entertainment, artistic and aesthetic expression, and even good-old-fashioned commercial profit. The sacred and secular aspects are interwoven to such a degree that they often cannot be separated from each other, or they may even be the same aspect, but given a different conceptual gloss by different people. For example, one person’s peak dance-floor experience might simply be construed as having a good time at a party, while another’s might be a spiritual connection to the divine.
2. Expression within the arts. Raves combine several art forms—particularly music, dance, and the visual arts—in a unique manner to produce their characteristic experiences. Each of these art forms is a highly valued means of creative expression that in and of itself can lead to spiritual and religious experience and meaning. For example, the act of composing and producing a piece of electronic dance music can be a spiritual process. So can the act of DJ mixing, in which songs are strung together seamlessly in a creative fashion. Dancing to the mixed music on the dance floor is also a highly creative form of expression with spiritual implications. And the visual components—whether original art to decorate walls; flyers and websites to promote a rave; altars, lighting, or projected video/computer graphics—are taken seriously as forms of creative expression and spirituality and also contribute to people’s dance-floor experiences of these art forms. Music is the most important, and in the rave context, music is more than just a means of creative expression. It is also a sophisticated and powerful tool for the induction of altered states of consciousness, particularly the trance state, and for opening access to the sacred.
3. Expression within popular culture. Raves are popular phenomena in several senses of the word. First, raves are not elite phenomena reserved only for the privileged few, such as a symphony orchestra concert or a religious ceremony closed to outsiders might be. Generally, anyone can come to a rave and, as I will show in greater detail later, the demographics often cut across traditional boundaries of race, class, gender, and ethnicity. Second, raves are popular in the sense that a significant number of people attend them, a number totaling in the millions. One need look no further than the Love Parade to verify this point. Finally, raves are an expression firmly grounded in the forms and sensibilities of popular culture; they are youth oriented, mass-mediated, global, trendy, rapidly changing, disposable, have a high level of sensory stimulus, and so on. Raves: Powerful, Ephemeral, and Highly Amplified Experiences

Emphasis of experience over content in rave culture has shifted the focus from the content itself to the experience. Charles Long, a historian of religions, noted this shift in emphasis from content to experience. He stated that the intensity of transmission leads to the ephemeral nature of the content, shifting the notion of religion from content and substance to modes of experience. The powerful experiential states attained by ravers on the dance floor are key to understanding raves as spiritual and religious phenomena.

The central importance of the body in rave culture is in stark contrast to the mind/body split found in Western culture and Christianity. The significance of the body in rave culture is a significant development in the religious history of Western culture.

Raves utilize cutting-edge, state-of-art digital music production and amplification technology, lighting, and computer graphic technology, as well as global networks for communication such as the Internet, cell phones, and satellite linkups. Rave culture embraces technology as a set of tremendous resources and tools that can be creatively utilized to enhance and intensify the dance-floor experience.

Raves draw from a variety of different religious influences, creating a postmodern, hybrid, cut-and-paste nature. This development is made possible by the advent of modern globalization, which renders all cultures and religions accessible to everyone on an unprecedented scale. The World of Raves: Spirituality and Religion in the Global Rave Culture

Raves clearly illustrate the hybrid, cut-and-paste nature of contemporary spirituality and religion. I use the word "postmodern" here in the sense that ravers have selectively appropriated elements from various traditions, placed them in an entirely different cultural context, and combined them in ways that suit their own purposes, which are not necessarily the originally intended purposes. In addition, many of these elements may not even come from spiritual or religious sources, but from arenas such as race, nationality, ethnicity, class, gender, and sexual orientation, as well as technology, communications, economics, and ecology. The face of contemporary spirituality and religion is clearly changing, and global rave culture is an excellent example illustrating the nature of these changes.

But what do these words, "spirituality" and "religion," really mean? While there are no definitive or universally accepted answers, I think it is important to explain the approach I will take in this book. Here I will use a broader framework for the word "religion," a framework that goes beyond the narrow reified institutions that the word is normally used to describe. This broader framework was developed decades ago by some of the pioneering scholars in the "history of religions" school of religious studies. In this approach, the emphasis is on the numinous as the central ordering structure for human beings. The human encounter with the numinous, the religious experience, forms the basis for subsequent developments that lead to the organized external forms that we call religion. Implicit in this perspective is the notion that religion, in a broader and more fundamental sense, is the underlying substratum for all cultural activity and serves as the foundation for culture in general. As Charles Long writes, "Religion is thus understood to be pervasive not only in religious institutions, but in all the dimensions of cultural life."

For many people in today's society, however, our mainstream culture's traditional religious institutions are no longer a context in which they have a religious experience or an encounter with the numinous. So where do these people have such experiences? In other sectors of cultural activity. Historian of American religions Catherine Albanese has called this phenomenon "cultural religion." Global rave culture is an outstanding example of how a significant number of people are having meaningful religious experiences in other cultural sectors outside of traditional religious institutions. Albanese has also provided an excellent approach to the word "spirituality" and, not surprisingly, this approach also emphasizes the primary importance of religious experience. In this approach, "spirituality [is] read and understood as the personal, experiential element in religion. . . . The task [is] to address aspects of experience that, for those involved, signal transcendence, sacrality, ultimacy, and/or a higher and purposive wisdom that empowers." Raves are an outstanding example, clearly providing experiences of transcendence, sacrality, ultimacy, and a higher and purposive wisdom that is empowering for thousands—perhaps millions—of people.

In this book, I will examine all of these aspects of the spiritual and religious dimensions of global rave culture in detail. The first section provides an introduction to and overview of the rave scene. Chapter 1 traces the history of electronic dance music and its culture, from its roots in disco in the 1970s, to the emergence of house in Chicago and techno in Detroit in the 1980s, to the explosion of acid house and raves in the Summer of Love in England in 1988, to its growth as a global phenomenon in the 1990s and its current state in the twenty-first century. Chapter 2 surveys the many forms of electronic dance music events, including underground warehouse parties, large commercial "massives," mainstream clubs, outdoor raves, festivals, retreats, and unique phenomena like Burning Man and the Love Parade. These first two chapters provide the contextual backdrop for the second section, which is the real heart of the book, a close examination of the spiritual and religious dimensions of global rave culture. This section is based on research and fieldwork I conducted over a period of several years, primarily in the United States, but also in England and Germany, and includes my own firsthand observations and descriptions, extensive material from interviews with ravers, and scholarly analysis using a variety of methodological tools.10 Chapter 3 examines the powerful experiential states attained at raves in detail and analyzes them as religious experiences, identifying key characteristics and themes. Particular attention is paid to the central importance of trance induction, feelings of ecstasy and love, connection and unity, transcending the ego, being in the body, the energetic field, spiritual worlds, and the presence of spirits. Chapter 4 examines the rave as a form of ritual and explores different ways of understanding its ceremonial dimensions, including ritualized time and space, opening and closing ceremonies, altars, ideas of "intention" and the "container," the role of the DJ as ceremonial leader, the incorporation of specific spiritual and religious traditions, and the use of themes and archetypes. Chapter 5 examines how ravers take the rave experience beyond the dance floor and integrate it into their daily lives and their spiritual paths. It also explores how they see themselves as part of a larger global rave culture and how this "alternative" culture articulates its vision for positive change in the world. Chapter 6 examines a number of West Coast rave communities and how they provide an important context in which this personal and planetary transformation can be concretely manifested. It also explores the emergence and growth of networks that connect these communities as a larger whole. Finally, in the conclusion, I place all of this material in a larger perspective by identifying key aspects of global rave culture as a spiritual and religious phenomenon, charting the current developmental stage of its growth, and exploring the broad implications for spirituality and religion in the twenty-first century.

Ravers themselves are very articulate on this subject, and so I would like to end this introduction with the words of a raver, who notes, "There's a little saying that 'We are one in the dance,' so if you get out on the dance floor, and you're all in that vibe, we suddenly become one regardless of cosmology. And that's what seems to be so transformative is that people aren't hung up on any particular dogma, like religion. It's more about sharing this spiritual nature that we all have with each other, and an understanding that we all do have it. . . . People are literally listening to it [electronic dance music] in every corner of the planet and it's wonderful because it unites a planet in a language that is beyond language. It really isn't about lyric music, it's about a beat, and everybody can dance, so that's what's really great about it. I think that's what gives it hope to unify people in a way that maybe hasn't happened before." 15 Shambhala, Salmo, B.C., 2004. Photograph courtesy of Quana Parker (Quana.net).

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE RAVE SCENE

It was 1977, the height of the age of disco. The film Saturday Night Fever had swept across America, transforming the cultural and musical landscape into a series of fractal reflections of disco dance floors with mirror balls and blinking lights, John Travolta imitators in cheesy leisure suits, and the Bee Gees’s enormous hit song Stayin’ Alive endlessly repeating everywhere. I remember it well because, at the time, I was living in Chicago and working at a record store, and every few minutes a new customer would come in to buy the Saturday Night Fever soundtrack, which was in the midst of becoming the best-selling album in history to date. Unfortunately for me, I was no fan of disco. In fact, Chicago was home to one of the most virulent antidisco backlashes in the entire country, culminating with the public dynamiting of a huge pile of disco records on the baseball field in Comiskey Park, an event attended by a rabid crowd of thousands. Although I was not as extreme in my hatred, I definitely looked down at disco as an inferior form of music based on canned drum machine beats, simplistic song structures, and mindless lyrics. So, like most people, when the disco fad faded and died, I did not mourn its passing, and moved on to other things.

But, in point of fact, disco did not die; it merely retreated back to the underground gay, black, and Latino subculture from which it originally emerged. And there, far away from the harsh glare of the mainstream, it continued to live and thrive and evolve and mutate.

Fast forward twenty years to 1997. I am excited to be attending my first authentic underground warehouse rave in San Francisco. I have heard about the rave scene for the last six years and have only just now finally put myself in a position to have access to the real thing. I immediately love the space; the lighting and decorations; the people, fashions and the “vibe”; and I feel very much at home, but when I get out on the dance floor, all my old judgments about disco come rushing back to the surface. I can’t seem to let go of my issues and enjoy the electronic dance music. These issues with the music would continue the rest of the night and on into several subsequent raves. However, a couple of events later, I finally have my epiphany on the dance floor and suddenly “get” the music, and go on to dance ecstatically for hours with a huge smile on my face. From that moment on, the music and rhythms somehow got deep into my body, and not only have I become a huge fan of electronic dance music, but I have developed an almost physiological need to dance to electronic beats regularly.

My journey from 1977 to 1997 is tinged with enormous irony, as I have come full circle from being a fervent disco hater to a dedicated raver and electronic dance music enthusiast. My personal journey mirrors the trajectory of popular culture as well, and that journey is equally ironic, as house music (disco’s direct descendant) exploded into the global phenomenon that is rave culture, a phenomenon that has made an enormous impact not only on the lives of the people directly involved, but also on many aspects of mainstream culture. It is an interesting journey, one with many such unexpected twists and turns, and one I will now briefly recount.

Disco
Disco is a shortened form of the word discotheque, referring to the dance clubs at which this music was first played. New York City was the primary center for disco, and the original audience was primarily gay African Americans and Latinos. As disco grew more popular, however, it became chic and trendy with the rich and famous at clubs like the infamous Studio 54 and then, spurred by the enormous popularity of Saturday Night Fever, spread throughout the United States into more mainstream demographic groups. As a musical genre, disco drew on the influences of African American soul and funk, but because it was first and foremost a dance music, its chief defining characteristic was its insistent, machine-like beat, which was foregrounded in the mix. The beat was in fact quite often produced by a machine; the first crude electronic drum machines were just being invented at this time, and disco record producers took advantage of the newly developing technology. Technology played a strong part in disco music in another respect, the prominence of the DJ (disc jockey) as the master of ceremonies at clubs. Unlike the rock concert, which featured live music played by musicians, discos featured recorded music, usually on special twelve-inch long-playing single records played by DJs over large, loud sound systems. The DJ was responsible for the selection of music, and used a mixer to segue seamlessly from song to song, thereby providing a continuous soundtrack for the dancers with no breaks in the energy. A kind of symbiotic relationship between the DJ and the dancers developed in which the DJ monitored the energy of the crowd and, depending on the context, either raised it to a fevered pitch, or brought it back down, creating several peaks in the course of an evening.

House

After disco retreated from the mainstream back into its core subculture, these musical and technological features continued to grow and evolve in the underground dance clubs of the 1980s. Catering to their core gay African American clientele, clubs like the Warehouse in Chicago and the Paradise Garage in New York pioneered the highly amplified, beat-driven music that came to be known as "house" (named after the Warehouse). One of the key figures in developing the distinctive sound of house music was the Warehouse's DJ from 1977 to 1983, Frankie Knuckles, who was so popular and influential that he became known as the "Godfather of House." Knuckles's approach was creative and experimental, and he invented new musical and technological techniques that other DJs were to follow, "such as playing a Roland 909 drum machine under old Philly records—thus emphasizing the beats. He would also blend in rhythm tracks that he'd created on reel-to-reel tape recorders to link and boost the music."[1] Over time, certain recognizable components of the music began to coalesce: "simple basslines, driving four-on-the-floor percussion, and textured keyboard lines."[2] As with disco, the importance of the beat was central to house music; as house music ethnomusicologist Kai Fikentscher explains, "House music is most easily recognized by the character and presence of its pulse, which is pronounced by an electronically realized kick drum. This concept is known as four-on-the-floor and is borrowed from disco music, house's precursor. That pulse, seemingly ever-present and ever-constant, actually fluctuates, often in minute increments within a range from 115-130 BPM [beats per minute]. It represents the stable order, the structure against which individual freedom can be asserted. The driving beat of house music reflects its primary function as a dance music, providing a groove that serves as a rhythmic anchor for the dancers to lock into. The dancers then express their own rhythmic articulation of the groove through their individual body movements. There are strong continuities here with several principles of African music: the centrality of rhythm as an organizing principle, the groove generated from interlocking polyrhythms, the interconnection between music and dance, and the essentially participatory nature of the musical experience. There are also strong continuities with some of the features of West African possession religion.

Because of the high amplification and pounding insistence of house music beats, which are felt in the body as much as heard by the ears, the groove is often compelling to the point of trance induction for the dancers, carrying them beyond their normal consciousness into a powerful ecstatic state. When a large group of dancers enter this state together, it often results in what DJs and dancers refer to as "peaks" — palpable energy surges on the dance floor. Such peaks are one of the main goals of the house music dance club experience, and are sought after by DJs and dancers alike. There can be several peaks in the course of an evening of music and dance, each with its own distinct characteristic energy.

The religious overtones of these powerful group experiences are not lost on the participants. Fikentscher writes, "Awash in the sounds of house, the dance venue becomes a small version of . . . a social 'utopia' where music and dance become vehicles of individual and collective affirmation and celebration. The social model of the church . . . in African American culture is adapted to a secular setting, which for many participants is comparable in style and dynamics to actual worship."

DJ Frankie Knuckles, drawing from his many years of experience as a top house music DJ, has spoken explicitly of this analogy: "From my particular end of it, it's like church. Because, when you've got three thousand people in front of you, that’s three thousand different personalities. And when those three thousand personalities become one personality, it’s the most amazing thing."

House music continued as a thriving subculture in Chicago throughout the 1980s, with superstar DJs like Knuckles, Ron Hardy, and Marshall Jefferson, clubs like the Warehouse and the Powerplant, and record labels like Trax and DJ International. At the same time, other local "scenes" also emerged, each with its own distinctive sound. In Detroit, for example, Juan Atkins, Derrick May, and Kevin Saunderson developed a style that came to be known as "techno," featuring strongly rhythmic drum machine programs and harder-edged synthesizer sounds influenced by European electronic music pioneers like Germany’s Kraftwerk. New York became known for its "deep house" or "garage house" sound, the latter named for the legendary Paradise Garage club and its DJ Larry Levan. And in Chicago, classic house music gave birth to subgenres like "acid house," which was built around the characteristic squelchy sound of the Roland TBR303 machine that was used to compose the bass lines.

Despite the growth and spread of these "dance music" genres, however, house and techno music remained primarily an underground phenomenon in the United States, with only rare breakthroughs to mainstream chart success.

Ecstasy

While house music was laying the foundation for the rave scene in the mid-1980s, at the same time, the emergence of Ecstasy as a popular recreational drug was also setting the stage for rave culture as well. Ecstasy, also known as MDMA, or 3-, 4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, had been synthesized and patented in 1912. It began to be more widely used in the late 1970s when Alexander Shulgin synthesized it. MDMA is classified by some as an empathogen, a drug that has the effect of increasing feelings of empathy, connectedness, and love. Psychologists and psychiatrists began to use MDMA as an effective tool in psychotherapy and other forms of counseling. Spiritual seekers also began to use it as a means of facilitating powerful ecstatic experiences, leading some to classify MDMA as an entheogen (from the Greek “bringing the God within”).

During this early phase, use of MDMA was primarily an elite phenomenon available only to a select few, remaining largely underground and hidden from public view. By the mid-1980s, this changed as Dallas entrepreneur Michael Clegg, a former divinity student, gave MDMA the name Ecstasy and began to manufacture and distribute MDMA on an unprecedented scale through his Texas Group. Ecstasy became an incredibly popular party drug that quickly penetrated into mainstream society, with Dallas as the epicenter.

Ecstasy also began to be widely used in dance clubs as a means of enhancing the dance-floor experience, spreading beyond Dallas to house music capitals like Chicago and New York. The Starck Club in Dallas was the most popular of these clubs, catering to an eclectic mix of “rock and sports stars, musicians, artists, and gay people,” providing a preview of the inclusivity that was to become the hallmark of the rave scene. Ecstasy was sold at the door or at the bar, as well as at convenience stores and from toll-free phone lines taking credit cards.

In 1985, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration placed Ecstasy on Schedule 1 of the Controlled Substances Act, making it illegal and effectively ending the Ecstasy explosion of the mid-1980s. However, Ecstasy use did not die, but merely retreated back into its underground origins, remaining an illegal drug of choice for those drawn to its ecstatic properties.

In 1987, both Ecstasy and variations of house music, particularly acid house and techno, made their way across the Atlantic Ocean and became established in underground scenes in Europe. One of the first places where this potent combination of Ecstasy and house music took hold was the small Balearic island of Ibiza, off the Mediterranean coast of Spain. With its beautiful beaches and laid-back lifestyle, Ibiza has a long countercultural heritage dating back to the 1960s, featuring an eclectic mix of hippies, spiritual seekers, and wealthy jet-setters. It was also a popular vacation destination for Britons, particularly young clubbers seeking a relatively inexpensive place for a holiday getaway. In 1987, the heady mix of Ecstasy, house music, and countercultural freedom in the open-air clubs and underground parties on Ibiza made for some extraordinary life-changing experiences. As one clubgoer notes, "It was almost like a religious experience; a combination of taking Ecstasy and going to a warm, open-air club full of beautiful people—you’re on holiday, you feel great, and you're suddenly exposed to entirely different music to what you were used to in London. This strange mixture was completely fresh and new to us, and very inspiring." As another clubgoer put it, "We all had the same mentality, which was to have a really good time and try as hard as possible not to think about anything else. When we all came back to England, it really struck me that we'd got some kind of . . . it felt like a religion."

Among the Britons on holiday whose lives were changed were Nicky Holloway, Paul Oakenfold, and Danny Rampling, and these three were instrumental in bringing this new religion back to England and establishing it there. They each organized influential club nights in London (the Trip, Spectrum, and Shoom, respectively) at which they attempted to replicate their Ibiza experiences, spinning acid house music to enthusiastic crowds on Ecstasy.

Because the club plays a much more important role in the lives of young people in England than in the United States, when acid house and techno music hit England, young people flocked to the newly developing scene in unprecedented numbers and percentages that would not have been possible in the States. The acid house clubs quickly developed their own unique subcultural identity, which was strongly influenced by Ecstasy, a huge factor that contributed to the utopian "peace and love vibe" of the early acid house scene, a vibe that continues to be central in the rave experience today.

Another effect that Ecstasy has, because of its amphetamine base, is to help keep people awake and energetic, an important feature that can make it possible for dancers to dance without a break for long hours into the morning. For young people seeking freedom and novelty, adding this drug to the already potent combination of highly amplified beat-driven house music, trance dancing, and pyrotechnic light shows made for intense and wild experiences.

Take, for example, one person's account of an acid house club experience in 1988: "T would suggest that Acieed [sic] House and the fundamental change in club culture it spawned was THE most significant cultural explosion to occur in this country (whose shockwaves have been felt worldwide) for over a decade. Talk about cultural revolution. It altered the course of my life and that of thousands of others. . . . Nothing could have prepared me for what lay beyond those portals. ... The scene literally took my breath away. The club was rammed, the atmosphere was rich with whooping, enthusiastic, sweating party people. I'd never known anything like it... . But it was the music they were dancing to that really blew me away. . . . Unbelievable. It was like being a blind virgin on his first visit to a brothel. Overpowering and completely overwhelming. . . . It was really Heaven on Earth. To the day I die I will never forget dancing on the main floor for the first time. . . . 2000 people dancing passionately, 2000 people’s hands held aloft facing the DJ booth, their hands cutting through the green cascading laser-beams that bounce off their bodies as they chant . . . with an almost religious fervor. These wild all-night gatherings in London attracted thousands of enthusiastic adherents, who developed their own distinctive forms and fashions. In the hands of British musicians and DJs, the music itself began to shift away from its American origins toward a more characteristic British sound, exemplified by electronic groups like 808 State, Orbital, and Future Sound of London, and DJs like Oakenfold, Rampling, and Sasha. Advancing digital musical technology like samplers and sequencers enhanced this process. The same was true of visual technology, progressing from basic dry-ice fog and strobe lights to programmable lasers, fractal animation, and video effects units. Special spaces called "chill rooms" were set up for people to temporarily escape the sensory overload of the main dance floor. Clubgoers began to dress in an identifiable acid house look: baggy, fluorescent, brightly colored clothing with psychedelic patterns, sometimes accompanied by visual paraphernalia and gadgetry. The so-called "smiley face" became the totemic symbol of this new psychedelic subculture, adorning T-shirts and posters alike. Numerous pirate radio stations sprung up, playing acid house and techno music and serving as information clearinghouses, along with a proliferation of acid house fanzines.

Acid house became so popular in 1988 that it crossed over to the mainstream, as songs like D-Mob's "We Call It Acid" hit the top of the record charts. Tabloids like the Sun began to run sensationalist headlines and stories on the new subculture, emphasizing its drug use and bacchanalian nature. As acid house exploded into mainstream awareness, its psychedelic associations began to trigger a backlash from authority figures that some scholars have called "moral panic." "We Call It Acid" was banned by the British Broadcasting Company, along with all other songs with any reference to the word acid. The police began raiding clubs, shutting them down and arresting people for possession of drugs. Such tactics forced the acid house subculture to develop more elaborate strategies to continue. One such strategy was to move out of the established legal clubs into abandoned warehouses or other large structures, where the acid house gatherings continued illegally, becoming known as "warehouse parties." This strategy worked for a time, until the police became aware of it and figured out the locations, closing down the gatherings.

The Emergence of Raves and the Summer of Love

The cat-and-mouse games between underground organizers and the police gave birth to the next major development in the British dance music subculture, the rave. This appellation was originally given to the wild acid house gatherings described above, referring to the crazed activities and states of consciousness the participants engaged in, and used as both a verb and a noun. However, as the trajectory of these gatherings moved them out of legal dance venues into abandoned warehouses, aircraft hangars, municipal pools, and, ultimately, into open fields and other outdoor locations that could accommodate even more people, the term rave began to be applied more specifically to all-night events in these new contexts. The sheer logistics involved in organizing these raves gives an indication of the degree of fanatical dedication ravers had to their subculture and its ritual form. As Harvey Tyler notes, "During the day, organisers would prepare the secret venue, setting up the required sound systems, lighting, lasers, refreshments, merchandise, etc." In the evening, via a mobile phone, they'd dial a computer that would record their spoken directions to a special meeting point. Prior to this, tickets or flyers would have been sold for the event, with the special phone number printed on them. Party goers would ring this number to get directions to the meeting point, and within minutes of the pre-recorded message being made available, thousands of people would be driving in their cars to the rendezvous. A member of the rave organizers would be at the meeting point with instructions on how to get to another one. After getting to the last meeting point, you had the option of being herded onto buses to be taken to the venue, or just joining the convoy of cars, the atmosphere like that of a Carnival procession. The sheer amount of party goers descending on the site would prevent the police from stopping the rave.

Unlike the clubs, the largest of which could accommodate two or three thousand people at most, these raves at secret illegal locations—particularly the outdoor events—could and did attract even larger numbers of people, often from five to ten thousand and sometimes as many as twenty-five thousand. There were two motivations for this on the part of the organizers. One was simply good old-fashioned profit. The money generated by ten thousand people at twenty pounds per person was enormous, making the logistics and legal risks well worth the effort. The second motivation was a strategy to thwart police intervention by sheer numbers. If thousands of people were already present at a rave, it was impossible for the police to shut it down.

From the point of view of the participants, the cat-and-mouse tactics, the novelty of new locations, and the illegality of the raves made them even more attractive. In the summer of 1988, the illegal outdoor rave became wildly popular, with dozens of events attracting tens of thousands of young people every weekend. Unencumbered by any external constraints, these raves took the wild energies of the acid house club gatherings even further, going all night into the daylight hours, creating intensely powerful group experiences along the way.

For many of the participants, the raves were nothing short of revelatory, a life-transforming religious experience: "For a lot of people, it was equal to a religious experience, but they didn't have to follow a religion. ... For me, it was on the level of being in this situation of healing, very safe with a community of people. On a ritualistic level, going into something and coming out feeling different, or feeling that you had become enlightened in some way. ... You felt very connected to yourself and connected to other people. There was an incredible amount of energy, feeling that you were energized when you left and this feeling of being very happy for a few weeks."

The utopian feelings glimpsed in the heat of the peak rave experience were eventually articulated into the beginnings of a coherent ideology symbolized by the acronym PLUR, which stands for peace, love, unity, and respect. Such ideals, shared by the tens of thousands of young people who were attending the raves, are what led some to call that time period the Summer of Love. Like the Summer of Love of the psychedelic hippie counterculture twenty-one years earlier, it was probably the high-water mark of the rave subculture, attaining a critical mass in terms of sheer numbers and purity of shared experience. The mainstream authority figures did not share the sense of love and community, however, and responded with more forceful tactics to try to shut down the rave phenomenon. As Tyler explains, “A special police unit was set up to deal with the parties. ... A combined intelligence unit drawn from 12 police forces, the Home Office’s most powerful computer system, sophisticated radio scanners, monitoring of underground magazines, light aircraft, road blocks, and arbitrary arrests. ... Phone companies were pressured into halting the use of their systems by organizers, and pirate radio stations promoting raves were shut down. . . . A new law was passed enabling a promoter to be jailed for six months with the confiscation of all profits.”

These tactics did eventually begin to have the desired effect of slowing down the momentum of the illegal raves. By 1990, faced with a virtual police state siege, most promoters chose to work legally and negotiated agreements with local authorities to hold licensed raves. Although the rave phenomenon continued to be huge in the 1990s, spreading to continental Europe and the United States and developing new articulations in these new locations, its character in England changed considerably. It became more commercial and more superficial, losing some of the sense of love and extended community that had characterized the Summer of Love.

Within a few years, the British raves had degraded and, although still quite popular in sheer numbers, were no longer the same vibrant utopian centers of the culture. As the rave phenomenon spread to the United States for the first time, attracting a whole new audience, it seemed to carry some of its original authentic flavor with it. New York, San Francisco, and Los Angeles became particularly important centers for raves in the early 1990s. The “Stormraves” organized by DJ Frankie Bones were key in establishing the rave scene in New York. Likewise, Toontown, organized by Mark Heley, Dianna Jacobs, and Preston Lytton was seminal in San Francisco. In some cases, British ravers like Heley were instrumental in helping to reproduce the music and the feeling of the early British raves. This was also the situation in Los Angeles, where brothers Jon and Steve Levy organized a number of influential early events. Raves quickly spread and developed in most major cities across the country, with Ecstasy-fueled gatherings taking place in clubs and warehouses, and at outdoor locations. Young Americans were able to have the same type of revelatory experiences as their British counterparts, and they developed their own indigenous versions of the subculture, complete with clothing and accessory fashions, fanzines, pirate radio, Internet websites and bulletin boards, and so forth. The rave subculture even followed a similar trajectory in the United States as in England, beginning as an underground phenomenon with a wild utopian sensibility and strong feeling of community and, as it gained in popularity and spread to the mainstream, gradually becoming more commercial and superficial, as evidenced by the proliferation of huge “massives” at arenas and stadiums attended by tens of thousands of people. The same kinds of developments were taking place in other locations as the rave scene spread throughout most Western countries. This process was fueled by the attempts of the major record companies in the mid-1990s to capitalize on the popularity of the burgeoning rave scene by marketing electronic dance music to the masses under the awkward appel- lation electronica with “bands” like the Chemical Brothers and the Prod- igy. While the Prodigy did in fact become extremely popular and climbed to the top of the charts in England and the United States, this strategy eventually failed for a variety of reasons, but contributed nevertheless to spreading awareness of rave culture. This trend of commercialization in the mid-1990s also saw the rise of “superclubs” in England—huge, expen- sive, state-of-the-art venues booked with superstar DJs—pioneered by the Ministry of Sound and followed by the likes of Cream, Gatecrasher, God’s Kitchen, and Renaissance. In the midst of this commercialization, however, the underground rave scene was continuing apace, outside of the glare of mainstream attention. Dedicated crews sprung up in cities throughout Australia, Europe, Israel, Japan, North America, and beyond, each throwing small local events with their own distinctive style and flavor. For example, in Goa, India, a bas- tion of Western countercultural types since the 1960s, a unique kind of music called Goa trance, or psychedelic trance, developed in underground raves on its tropical beaches, strongly influenced by Hindu spirituality and LSD, and spread to establish strong local scenes in England, Germany, Israel, and the United States. In the San Francisco Bay Area, the Wicked crew began putting on its influential full moon raves in various outdoor locations outside the city. Following their lead in 1993, the Moontribe crew in southern California began to throw outdoor events on the night of every full moon in remote desert locations, building a close-knit community. These raves continue today, and the Moontribe recently celebrated its twelve-year anniversary. Yet the underground scene was not confined to small-scale events by any stretch of the imagination. Burning Man, which started as a small summer solstice ritual at Baker Beach in San Francisco in 1986 attended by several dozen people, moved to the Black Rock Desert in Nevada in 1990, where it began to take on its current flavor of a countercultural arts festival with a strong rave contingent, and grew throughout the 1990s from an attendance of several hundred to over thirty thousand while preserving a large measure of its underground character. A similar process was occurring with the Love Parade in Berlin, which began in 1988 as a celebration of the fall of the Berlin Wall and grew yearly from a small local street festival attended by hundreds to a huge international phenomenon attended by over a million, all the while maintaining its status as a free party open to everyone. For the last several years, the Movement Festival (originally called the Detroit Electronic Music Festival) has attracted a comparable number of ravers to Hart Plaza in downtown Detroit for three days of nonstop techno music and dancing. Interestingly, this kind of growth has not slowed even after the end of the economic boom of the late 1990s, a downturn that led to the scaling back of the commercial developments of the rave scene, best exemplified by the recent closure of superclubs like Cream and the Ministry of Sound. While this may be bad news for those people whose primary motivation is profit, it demonstrates the long-term viability of underground rave culture, and it is good news for those people who want to preserve the original “vibe” of the early rave scene.

I myself was first exposed to the rave scene in 1996 when I moved to the San Francisco Bay Area to do research for my Ph.D. dissertation. I was transformed by my experiences and I quickly became an enthusiastic participant. My involvement has continued and deepened in the years since and has led me to a variety of events in a variety of locations, many of which I will describe in the coming pages. It was not until 2003, however, in preparation for writing this book, that I returned to formal, focused research on the scene, based primarily on the West Coast and in the Bay Area. In the course of this research, one of the more interesting developments that struck me was the emergence of a new wave of underground rave crews with an "intentional" spiritual orientation who are working to create sustainable communities that integrate the rave experience into the fabric of their ongoing daily lives. I will discuss some of these crews that I was fortunate enough to come in contact with—the Rhythm Society in the Bay Area, Moontribe in Los Angeles, the Oracle in Seattle, and Tribal Harmonix in Vancouver—in greater detail over the course of this book; but for now let me simply note that I believe they represent the next step in the evolution of underground rave culture, a step that has been made possible by the fact that the culture has been around long enough to move from childhood to adolescence to the first signs of adulthood. It has now been more than seventeen years since raves exploded into the public consciousness in the Summer of Love in England and, despite the occasional pronouncements of its death, rave culture is still going strong. It has evolved into so many different styles of music and events that it is nearly impossible to make any generalizations about its overall trajectory except to say that it is still vibrant and vital and meaningful to thousands, perhaps millions, of people around the world. And for a significant number of these people, this vibrancy, vitality, and meaning has important spiritual and religious dimensions.

THE FULL SPECTRUM OF EVENTS: FROM WAREHOUSE PARTIES AND CLUBS TO BURNING MAN AND THE LOVE PARADE

There are so many different kinds of events the word rave might describe that it is almost misleading to discuss them as if they were all somehow the same thing. But the one key feature that they all have in common is the centrality of continuously mixed electronic dance music that people dance to for hours. This dancing can take place in warehouses or studios, in arenas or stadiums, in forests or open fields, on beaches, in city streets and plazas, at camps and retreat facilities, or in clubs and bars. It can be for free, for a small charge, or for a steep admission price. It usually takes place at night, but it can also happen in the day or for several days and nights continuously. It can be an intimate affair attended by several dozen people with only one room, or it can be a massive event attended by hundreds of thousands of people with many sound systems going simultaneously, or anywhere in between. It can be put on by an idealistic underground collective in its own space for the pure joy of it or by professional promoters primarily interested in making money. The music can be spun by local DJs or by internationally famous superstar DJs on records or CDs, or it can be performed live over a PA. 

It can focus on one or several of an enormous variety of electronic genres: house, techno, trance, progressive, breaks, jungle, garage, downtempo, ambient, and an even larger variety of subgenres. In this chapter, I will survey the wide diversity of rave events, describing their basic structure and adding anecdotes drawn from firsthand experiences.

The Underground Warehouse Rave

I will start with the classic warehouse party, since that is perhaps the most archetypal form of a rave. While illegal abandoned warehouses were used quite commonly in the early days of the rave scene, typically these kinds of spaces are now legally rented, sometimes as a residence, sometimes as a business, and frequently under a combined live/work designation. In the San Francisco Bay Area, warehouse spaces are often residences for rave crews and/or collectives who wish to immerse themselves completely in rave culture and live “the rave lifestyle.” Such residences make it easy not only to host a rave and its preparatory planning meetings, but other events as well. The Cloud Factory Collective and the Oakland warehouse space where they live, the Otherworld, are a good case in point. While a variety of underground raves regularly take place at the Otherworld—some put on by Cloud Factory and some by other crews—it also hosts a range of different kinds of events such as the Storm Sessions, a daylong gathering of networking, brainstorming, and workshops attended by different Bay Area and West Coast rave crews.

I will describe a rave that I attended at the Otherworld in December 2003, an event called 2012, which was put on by the Koinonea crew. The year 2012 is widely known in rave and New Age circles as both the endpoint of the ancient Mayan calendar and the beginning point of planetary transformation in the late psychedelic philosopher Terence McKenna’s time wave theory.1 Initial word of the event came out weeks in advance, through posting on the Internet; through 4 x 6 sized flyers distributed at other raves, at electronic dance music record stores, and from person to person; and by word of mouth. As is usually the case, these postings and flyers featured beautiful original digital art, made a brief statement of the theme, gave the names of the DJs, their style of music and/or affiliation (crew, record label, etc.), a date and time, and a contact phone number. As is also usually the case, they did not give the location, and the phone number was a temporary line set up for event information only. This is a protocol passed down from the early days of illegal raves in England, when this kind of precaution was necessary to guard against possible police action to shut it down. (In the current climate of antirave hysteria, this still remains a possibility today.) The location of the rave was then given out on the recorded message on the phone line on the evening of the event, mere hours before the doors opened.

There are a tremendous number of logistical details involved in a successful rave—organizing DJs and musicians, sound, lighting, visuals, decorations, altars, furniture, security, insurance, the door, publicity, food and water, and the like—requiring a series of meetings to make sure the necessary arrangements are in place. The day of the event is spent setting up the space, which is a very labor-intensive process that takes many hours. For the 2012 event, this entailed setting up both the large main dance room and a smaller chill room. There was also a long entrance hallway with lighting and a series of quotations on the walls about the significance of each year leading up to 2012. A typical warehouse rave usually does not open its doors to the public until 10:00 p.m. and the main dance floor usually does not really get going until at least 11:00 P.M. or often later, and 2012 was no exception. I arrived around 11:00, presented my ten-dollar ticket to the people at the door, and proceeded slowly down the entrance hallway, taking my time to read the quotations on the walls about the nature of transformation to expect in the years to come. This provided a nice transition from the outside world of gritty urban Oakland, so that by the time I entered the main dance room I was ready to take in and appreciate the colorful multisensory environment.

A DJ was spinning progressive house music over a powerful sound system, and the dance floor was about one third filled with brightly dressed ravers, some dancing and some socializing. The lighting, decorations, and altars were beautiful, and thematically tied together by several distinctive archways that had a vaguely Tibetan feel to them. I spotted a couple of friends of mine, and we talked for a while before going to check out the chill room, which was also very beautiful, but had no music playing as yet and very few people in it. We then went to the designated smoking area so my friends could smoke cigarettes and, about twenty minutes later, we made our way back to the main room—which was now tightly packed with a couple hundred dancers—for the opening ceremony.

The music stopped and a woman began speaking into a microphone, welcoming us and saying a little bit about the event. She then led us in a 36 TRANCE FORMATION meditation/ceremony in which we closed our eyes, breathed together, did a guided visualization, and chanted the Hindu seed syllable mantra OM several times while she vocalized on top of the group chant. For myself, I had mixed feelings about this experience. On the one hand, I appreciated the creation of sacred space and the setting of a sincere spiritual intention. On the other hand, I felt the ceremony was a series of well-meaning but superficial clichés that were not particularly effective and seemed to actually dissipate the energy in the room rather than increase it. I would estimate that about half the people were participating fully and the other half were uncomfortable to one degree or another. However, once the ceremony ended and the electronic dance music came back on, the room exploded in a wave of high energy dancing and good feelings that continued for the rest of the night, so from that standpoint, the ceremony was a success.

In the interest of providing an accurate overview of typical warehouse raves, I should note that while these kinds of opening ceremonies are quite common at warehouse raves I attend in the Bay Area, they probably only occur at a small percentage of the total number of warehouse raves. After the ceremony, 2012 really entered the peak time of the night, which is often the case with most raves. The music was great, the floor was packed with enthusiastic dancers, the energy was high, and everyone seemed to be smiling. To use rave terminology, “it went off.” There was a real “vibe” that could be easily felt and that many people were acknowledging. Although this shared ecstatic state is the goal of a rave, not every event succeeds in attaining it, so my approach is to enjoy this kind of fleeting experience when it happens. Accordingly, I stayed out on the floor, trance dancing for a long time, carried along by the synergistic momentum of sound, rhythm, movement, light, energy, and a strong sense of connection with my fellow dancers and the larger field we were a part of. During this time, my friends had to leave in order to get home and get to bed in time for work the next day. We said goodbye, and I continued dancing. Finally, at a certain point, I decided to take a break in order to rest, give my body a chance to cool down, and rehydrate, so I went into the chill room and lay down on some soft cushions with my eyes closed, letting myself drift on the soothing sounds of the ambient music there.

When I was rested, rehydrated, and cooled off, I returned to the main dance floor, which was still packed and now peaking, and resumed trance dancing for another long stretch of time. Some time after 3:00 A.M., I was happy and tired, I had had my fill and decided to leave and drive home. Of course, 2012 continued for many more hours into the morning light and ended with a closing ceremony. There are plenty of folks like myself who do not stay all night. The dance floor often begins to thin out to some degree somewhere between 3:00 and 5:00 A.M., and the number of people left dancing at the end is usually less than half of the number at peak time. However, for those who remain, the rite of passage of staying all night forges strong bonds, creating a sense of closeness and connection that is very sweet. Many people stick around to help the crew break down the space and pack things up. Often there is an "after-party" for these people and the organizing crew at some smaller, more intimate location, which features food and chill-out music.

Finally, people go home and sleep until the afternoon. The Larger Commercial Rave

Larger, more commercial raves are frequently held at concert halls, arenas, stadiums, and convention center facilities that can accommodate thousands of people. The really large events, called "massives," sometimes draw tens of thousands of people. Such events usually feature big-name DJs and have several large dance rooms with high-production sound and lighting systems, each showcasing a different style of music. These events are typically put on by more ambitious, profit-oriented promoters, sometimes with corporate sponsorship, rather than by idealistic underground collectives, although there are exceptions. These events also tend to be advertised in wide-circulation weekly listing newspapers like, for example, the Bay Guardian and the Weekly in the Bay Area, as well as with large glossy flyers and on the Internet, and unlike warehouse raves, the location is given out. Permits with the local authorities need to be approved and paid for, along with insurance and security. All of these factors are expensive, and this is reflected in a significantly higher ticket price, typically twenty-five dollars and often quite a bit more. Because these events are so big and public, they tend to lack the intimacy and underground feeling of smaller warehouse raves, focusing instead on providing a state-of-the-art multimedia spectacle that emphasizes the current "hot" superstar DJs and performers. The audience is typically on the youngish side—those in their teens and early twenties—and is more likely to be newcomers than veteran ravers. The best example of a successful massive in the Bay Area is the 38 TRANCE FORMATION annual Cyberfest put on by Coolworld, which has been going since 1991. The 2003 event, held at the Cow Palace arena, featured five stages/rooms, a lineup of over sixty DJs and musicians, and was attended by 20,000 people. For those willing to pay the money and brave the crowds of a massive, a good time can be had dancing to high-quality music with top-notch visuals, perhaps even to the point of having the kind of peak, religious, or life-changing experience that happens at smaller raves, and sometimes there can be a real vibe as well.

One of the first electronic dance music events I ever went to was in 1997 at the Warfield in San Francisco, a small concert hall with a capacity of around 2,000 people. It featured a DJ set by Fat Boy Slim and live performances by BT and the Crystal Method. I went with a friend, was amazed by the music, and had a fantastic time dancing, but it felt more like a concert than a rave.

These kinds of commercial events usually do not emphasize a specifically spiritual orientation, and this is reflected in the absence of opening and closing ceremonies, altars, and chill spaces. Also, because the size of the crowd is so large, it is more difficult to make personal connections, especially with strangers, and one can sometimes experience a sense of aloneness and alienation. Finally, these events may not have the necessary permits to go all night long, which makes it more difficult to have a full-on transformational experience.

Large commercial raves often serve as an introduction to the rave scene for the uninitiated, and if a beginner has a good time, she will go to more events and may develop connections that lead her to attend more intimate, underground raves.

Clubs and bars are also an important context for electronic dance music, even though club and bar events are not usually raves in the strict sense of the word. Although some clubs and bars do their own booking, they often do not put on the events themselves, but instead make arrangements with crews or promoters to use their space on a regular basis, usually weekly or monthly, and also for one-time events as well.

The crew or promoter is primarily responsible for the lineup of DJs, the overall theme and flavor, and the target audience. However, depending on the arrangement, they can also be in charge of or collaborate on the creation and distribution of flyers and other advertising and, in some cases, the decor, lighting, and the sound system. The profits are split, typically with the door proceeds going to the crew or promoters and proceeds from the sale of drinks going to the bar or club.

If successful, these weeklies and monthlies can develop their own devoted crowd and a sense of community, as is the case in San Francisco, for example, with the Loog crew’s weekly and monthly events, Qool Happy Hour and Qool Saturdays, which feature a top-notch lineup of DJs and maintain an authentic underground feeling.

However, while these kinds of events comprise a significant percentage of any given city’s ongoing electronic dance music offerings and good experiences can be had on the dance floor, in general, most aficionados do not consider them to be raves per se for a variety of reasons. First among these is that they do not usually go all night due to city ordinances stipulating closing time, in many cases as early as 2:00 A.M. Second, the sale of alcohol and the prohibition of illegal drugs like MDMA and marijuana at a legal venue makes the vibe of a bar or club event considerably different than that of an underground rave—generally less ecstatic, utopian, and open, and more like a typical bar or club. 
This is not to say that people don't do illegal drugs at a club or bar, but recent antidrug pressures have made it much more difficult and have curtailed such use significantly. For example, in San Francisco, the leading electronic dance music club, 1015 Folsom, has been forced by the police to search people strictly at the door and to install video surveillance cameras throughout the venue, which has had the effect of not only cutting down on illegal drug use, but also on the number of people who choose to submit themselves to this kind of invasive scrutiny. Yet, beyond these particularities, perhaps the most important factor distinguishing club and bar events from real raves is simply the fact that they are "above ground"; in other words, they are open to anyone who happens to come to the club with enough money to get in. So while the crews who put them on and many of the people who attend may be underground ravers (but they also very well may not be), there is no consensual framework that the purpose of the event is to generate the peak dance-floor experience and the sense of connection of a rave. For every raver who is there for that purpose, there may be someone else who is there simply to get a drink or looking to pick up a sexual partner or any of the many other reasons people go to a bar or club. A great example of this is 1015 Folsom. The club's Friday and Saturday night events, Sonic (produced by Spundae) and Release (produced by Martel and Nabiel), consistently book 40 top DJs to play high-quality music on their state-of-the-art sound system, and I have enjoyed many nights at 1015 dancing to amazing sets spun by the likes of Sandra Collins, Paul van Dyk, and Dave Seaman. But the crowd is often mostly above-ground types, and it has become increasingly rare for me to have a transcendent dance-floor experience with an underground vibe and a deep sense of connection at 1015. Nevertheless, because the logistics of putting on events at bars and clubs is considerably easier than at other locations, they will always be a major context for electronic dance music, and many people have a great time at them. In fact, the clubs and bars often serve as an introduction to the rave scene for the uninitiated, and once they've had a positive experience with electronic dance music in a club setting, many newcomers will then seek out more authentic underground raves. And sometimes underground crews will put on "one-off" raves at a club that will "go off" and have a real vibe. It is also worth remembering that the early acid house scene in London was essentially a club phenomenon, which demonstrates that despite their drawbacks, clubs were and continue to be an important context for authentic rave experience and culture, especially in England.

The Outdoor Rave
Raves that take place outdoors in natural settings have been part of the scene since the Summer of Love in England in 1988, where a significant percentage of events were held in open fields out in the countryside. Some of the seminal early raves in the United States were also held outdoors in natural settings. For example, the influential full-moon raves put on by the Wicked crew in the Bay Area in the early 1990s were held in natural locations such as Bonny Dune Beach, south of San Francisco. In the words of one attendee, "The Wicked full moons were really special. It was clear that the whole thing of it being free and outdoor really brought out the depth of the experience, or the real potential of it to go deeper and to be more authentic and intimate and noncommercial and all that." The Moontribe crew in Los Angeles quickly followed suit and put on their own full moon gatherings at different remote locations on national forest land out in the Mojave Desert, an outdoor tradition that continues today. Here is a description of one of the first Moontribe full moon gatherings:

It was on a flat lakebed. The cars just kept coming. We just kept seeing headlights driving over the playa, the lakebed. And it was just like out of some movie, like Mad Max or something like that. And next thing you know we had, like, five, seven hundred people just dancing their butts off. For me, that was a very defining moment. That was also the first time in the morning, you know, the sun came up and people just sort of spontaneously made a circle holding hands and started dancing around, and it was just lots of smiling happy people.

And one of the reasons I think it was so successful, as much as I'd like to think everyone came to see the DJs, I think it was much more about the location and what I would call now the spiritual aspect of that, which was releasing all that tension. It was all about the sun coming up. That was the focal point of the event. People would find a little hill somewhere and watch it come up and the sun cascade in the whole valley without any cars or smog or anything. Watching the sunrise in the desert with your friends after you’ve been dancing all night; that’s a good thing.

Outdoor campout raves are particularly popular in the Pacific Northwest, where the natural beauty of the land provides a spectacular backdrop. As one Portland raver says, "It’s why Oregon has such a unique scene is because of these outdoor parties that are just beyond anything I can even describe. They’re usually free events and it’s just this magic thing that happens." Another adds, "It’s not just an evening that you share with each other. You’re out camping... It’s beautiful, very interactive."

In Washington, for many years, the Starseed crew from Seattle put on full moon "events, mostly free outdoor stuff, up in the mountains, which became quite epic." And the Tribal Harmonix crew from Vancouver has an annual summer campout rave out in the forests and mountains of British Columbia. Many Bay Area crews who regularly put on warehouse raves—such as Friends n Family, the Rhythm Society, or Sweet!—also make a point of having at least one outdoor campout rave each year in the summer at a beautiful natural setting.

I should also add that outdoor events of varying sizes continue to happen in England and other parts of Europe as well. For example, in 2000, when I was in England to do research, I attended a small campout rave called Breathing Space put on by a psychedelic trance crew in a forest north of London.

There are a number of factors involved in an outdoor campout event that create conditions more conducive to having powerful experiences and making deeper connections. The first of these is simply the extra effort involved in attending, which necessitates making more of a commitment. It takes a lot longer to drive to outdoor events, often several hours. It is more than just one evening and sometimes as long as two or three days. One needs to pack all the necessary gear, including appropriate clothing, camping equipment, and, in some cases, food and cooking gear as well. Once at the location, it is difficult to just pick up and leave at any time. As one Moontribe veteran puts it, "It requires a serious investment of time and energy and risk to get out to these things. It filters out a lot of people that don't have a certain kind of sensibility, and then people that have a similar sensibility naturally find themselves connecting and bonding easily. And often you're out there for a day or two, and it's pretty powerful energy." Bonding is also enhanced because everyone is actually living together in a temporary community during the event, so interactions can go beyond the peak dance-floor experience to other activities that are more mundane, such as eating or camping. There are also more opportunities just to hang out and do nothing. These mundane activities are made more special by virtue of the fact that they take place in a liminal environment that is set apart from one's daily life.

The beauty and power of the natural setting, and one's connection to it, are also key factors in the outdoor rave experience. One raver notes, "There's that connection I always feel going down into the earth. It's just a very core connection to warm, deep earth. And I feel an upward connection to the divine. It's just like right through my body, out with my dancers, into the mountains, out to the sunshine. It's all about nature for me, and I'm just in it." Another raver mentions, "I've noticed in my own movement that I'll consciously flicker in and out of drawing influence from the environment around me. If I'm in nature, I've noticed that I like tuning into the shapes of form around me and allowing my movement to resemble the dance I see of plants and trees that are growing [there]."

Festivals are an important variant of the outdoor rave, typically lasting two to three days (sometimes longer) and are larger, higher-production affairs with numerous stages and/or tents. England has a particularly strong summer festival tradition, one of the best-known and longest-running being the Glastonbury Performing Arts Festival, which began during the heyday of rock music and has been going strong for over thirty years. While Glastonbury is not exclusively devoted to electronic dance music, there is a strong electronic dance music presence, with a huge dance tent accommodating tens of thousands of people and featuring a first-rate lineup of DJs and performers, a second smaller dance music stage, and electronic dance music headliners like the Chemical Brothers or Moby on the main stage. The author attended the Glastonbury Festival in 2000, along with 100,000 other people, and despite the enormity of the crowds, he was still able to make some nice person-to-person connections. Interactions took place in non-musical contexts like the extensive vendors' rows and the "greenfields zone," which included alternative technology displays, a healing area, and a sacred space for quiet reflection and meditation. In general, I was very favorably impressed by the level of friendliness displayed by most people and the overall good vibe of the festival. England is certainly not the only place where rave festivals are held; they regularly take place throughout Europe, the United States, and many other locations around the world. One of the best and most popular festivals in the United States is the Movement Festival (formerly the Detroit Electronic Music Festival, or DEMF), which happens every Memorial Day weekend in Hart Plaza in the center of downtown Detroit. The Movement Festival began in 2000 as a celebration of Detroit’s historic role as the birthplace of techno music and a showcase for the city’s many local DJs and performers. From the very beginning, organizers were able to secure the support of the city government, including funding, sponsorship, and the use of Hart Plaza. This joining of forces between ravers and city government is extremely rare; in fact, government authorities are usually hostile to electronic dance music events and marshal their efforts and resources toward shutting them down. The festival offered free admission and by the second year had attracted a total of over a million people for the weekend. I attended the second DEMF in 2001 and found it to be a fantastic event. The setting in the heart of the city gave it an urban feeling very different from most outdoor festivals that take place in more natural environments, but at the same time, the normally bleak, barren urban landscape was transformed into a colorful throng of happy, dancing people. And these people were not just typical ravers, but Detroit area locals from all walks of life, including a high percentage of African Americans, who were united in obvious pride in their electronic dance music heritage.

My experience was almost identical to that of a West Coast raver who attended the DEMF and described it as follows: "I went to the Detroit Electronic Music Festival and I think it was Juan Atkins that was playing on the main stage. And I remember looking around and there was probably close to four thousand in this amphitheater. It was just unbelievable, just completely packed with people. And I looked around and there were old women with walkers and unhoused people and policemen and ravers—just this huge conglomeration of people, obviously a lot of them from Detroit. And I looked over and Juan Atkins is playing this hard, dark techno and everyone just starts screaming 'Detroit, Detroit, Detroit!' over and over. I was just amazed at this place where you don’t have anything to be proud of—this city, cars and 45 the full spectrum of events car factories, you know—then, all of the sudden you have people screaming and giving themselves a pride for the city that they’re from. To me, that is what the revitalization aspect is. Just the fact that it makes you proud. And it seems like a way of transforming these cities into this really ancient ritual that’s performed in the most urban center of all."

On the West Coast, one of the more popular outdoor festivals is the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, which takes place every year in late April or early May at the Empire Polo Fields in Indio in the southern California desert at the foot of the Santa Rosa Mountains. Coachella is a classic commercial festival attended by tens of thousands of people that features a lineup of top DJs and electronic dance music performers, along with rock and hip hop acts as well. Yet, of all the festivals, Burning Man stands alone as one of a kind, and there are a variety of reasons for its unique and distinctive nature. The first of these is that it is not a rave festival per se. In fact, it is difficult to say exactly what Burning Man really is. Some people describe it as an arts festival, and the arts aspect is extremely important, as evidenced by the plethora of unorthodox art installations, theme camps, and performances. Some might say the ceremonial and spiritual aspect is key, particularly with the central ritual of the “burning of the Man” and the wide array of other ceremonial and spiritual practices that take place. On the other hand, some might argue that it is really just a big party that celebrates hedonism and a variety of nontraditional approaches to sexuality. Still others might wax rhapsodic about its articulation of alternative culture and community. And all of these approaches would be correct. However, there is no denying the strong connection between Burning Man and rave culture, which was confirmed by ravers in many of my interviews.

In this regard, a second unique aspect is that the raves at Burning Man, like most other activities, are put together by those participants who feel moved to do so and, not insignificantly, at their own expense. Therefore, there are many different sound systems and dance areas set up by many different crews with many different tastes, and the DJ/performer pool is primarily comprised of camp members and other fellow participants. It is thus the ultimate playground of noncommercial underground rave culture, a place where you can wander in any direction following the sound of the beats and find another dance floor with its own distinctive flavor.

Another key aspect is that Burning Man now lasts for a full week, far longer than most two- or three-day festivals, and this length of time makes it easier to go much deeper into the experience. As one raver put it, "Burning Man was a seminal experience in my life. ... At Burning Man, we got completely into that sacred space. As Burning Man can do, as the week goes on, everybody hits that space." When I asked another raver if Burning Man was connected to rave culture, he said, "Absolutely. It's really confirmational. . . And that experience has been really profound. . . I went to Burning Man and got a way big jolt of hope and sense of belonging."

Finally, no survey of rave festivals would be complete without mentioning the Love Parade. It is unique not only because of the number of people who attend (1.5 million in 2000; 1 million in 2001; and 750,000 in 2002 and 2003), and not only because of the distinctive format of the parade—the daytime procession of dozens of floats, each with its own sound system and DJs—but because for three days, the entire city of Berlin is transformed into a raver's playground with dozens of events to choose from, making it a pilgrimage destination for ravers from around the world and, for that weekend, the de facto capital of global rave culture. It is also one of the most powerful examples of how far rave culture has penetrated into the mainstream, and it demonstrates the complexities and contradictions of the dynamics of this interaction. For many years, the city government of Berlin was an active participant in helping put on the Love Parade, making the enormous central Tiergarten park available by giving the Love Parade the designation of a "demonstration" and providing massive resources for traffic and crowd control, portable toilets, garbage, and cleanup. In return, the influx of ravers pumped significant money into Berlin's economy and tourist industry. Over time, as attendance grew into the hundreds of thousands, organizers turned to corporate sponsorship to underwrite the spiraling costs of dealing with such a huge crowd, a decision that was the cause of some ambivalence among underground ravers. In addition, the massive crowds increasingly became a source of ambivalence for local Berliners, many of whom chose to leave the city during that weekend.

The full spectrum of events

In 2001, the city government decided to revoke the "demonstration" designation, which significantly increased the organizers' expenses. Coupled with a marked decrease in attendance in 2002 and 2003 (although 750,000 is still a staggering number), the Love Parade began to suffer huge financial losses that became so crippling that both the 2004 and 2005 Love Parades were canceled. (At the time of this writing, it is unclear whether the Love Parade will continue and, if so, in what form.) However, even as these developments have thrown the original Love Parade in Berlin into question, a host of Love Parades have sprung up in other locations (Austria, Israel, Mexico, South Africa, Switzerland, and, most recently, San Francisco) over the last several years and have enjoyed considerable success.

The annual Street Parade in Zurich, Switzerland, using the Love Parade as its model, has steadily grown from attendance of a few thousand at its inception in 1992 to 650,000 in 2002, 900,000 in 2003, and 1 million in 2004. Thus, it appears to have supplanted the Love Parade as the premier rave parade in the world, and its success demonstrates the continued popularity of the form, regardless of the fate of the original Love Parade in Berlin.

Retreats

On the opposite end of the spectrum from the Love Parade is a much smaller, more intimate rave phenomenon that has just started to emerge in the last few years—the retreat. Retreats are similar to campout raves, but they are held at retreat facilities with pleasant indoor sleeping accommodations, kitchen and dining facilities, a main room for music and dancing, and smaller rooms for workshops and other activities. Aside from these more comfortable physical amenities, the central distinctive feature of a rave retreat is the ongoing schedule of workshops, classes, spiritual practices and ceremonies, and a variety of other educational and interactive activities that take place throughout the days and evenings.

Although retreats usually do include a rave-type electronic dance music event, the workshops comprise a major focus for participants, and there is also ample opportunity for people to spend time together informally as well. On New Year's of 2003-2004, I attended Intention, the annual retreat put on by the Tribal Harmonix crew up on the Sunshine Coast of British Columbia, which was held at a YMCA camp in a spectacular location right on the waterfront with views of the mountains. This five-day-long retreat was attended by several dozen people, featured workshops on everything from yoga to tarot to drug education to sustainable community to dance rituals, and culminated in an all-night rave on New Year's Eve. The rave featured both an opening ceremony and a ritual theater performance at midnight, and had two rooms for dancing as well as a chill space. I found Tribal Harmonix to be a close-knit alternative community that was very open and welcoming to outsiders like myself, and I made good connections and had several meaningful and transformative experiences. A similar retreat is held every spring by the Rhythm Society at a facility north of the Bay Area in a beautiful natural setting in Mendocino County. I attended the 2004 retreat, Inspire, along with several dozen others. I arrived on Friday evening just in time to participate in a Native American-influenced sweat-lodge ceremony. After dinner, there was an opening ceremony/circle for all the retreatants in the main room.

On Saturday, I attended a workshop that drew on the work of choreographer and dancer Anna Halprin to create a movement ritual. Other workshop offerings included group drumming, a discussion on ecstatic dance, and a movement choir based on the work of Rudolf Laban. On Saturday evening there was another, more formal ceremony that featured smudging with sage (a purification ritual), chanting accompanied by Tibetan bowls, and a kind of circle dance. This was followed by a rave-type DJ dance that lasted for several hours, but did not go all night long.

On Easter Sunday, after brunch, there was a group discussion about where the Rhythm Society is headed in the future, and then a closing ceremony. For me, the highlight of the weekend was the opportunity to spend quality time with a number of people and get to know them better. I also had strong experiences with the sweat lodge, the workshops, and the ceremonies. Interestingly, the rave itself, although nice, was not particularly revelatory.

Several common threads stand out from both of these retreats. The first is the importance of the workshop format. As one participant in Intention puts it, "The thing that makes those gatherings special is they’re really not just parties. They’re really more about workshops and sharing and learning, and that goes on for many days, and then there’s a party at the end for New Year’s. And it’s almost like, 'New Year’s—whatever.' It’s all these workshops and all this learning that went on that was really memorable and powerful and empowering and awesome."

A second thread is the importance of spiritual and ceremonial practice. The retreat format seems to lend itself to more focus on the explicitly spiritual aspects of rave culture, whether they are connected to the rave experience itself or not. Finally, the retreat format also seems very conducive to community building. The retreat provides an opportunity for those in the rave community to go deeper in their shared experiences and interconnections, to reflect on where they've been and to envision where they want to go.

In this regard, it is important to mention the Gathering of the Tribes, a five-day retreat that began in 2000 for the purpose of linking up different rave communities. The June 2003 gathering, held in southern California, was organized around the theme "Evolution + Manifestation = Transformation" and included an opening ceremony, a DJ dance, and several days of workshops on assorted topics, some of which featured authors Barbara Marx Hubbard and John Perry Barlow.

Although it is still in its formative stages, overall I think the emerging phenomenon of the rave retreat represents an evolutionary step forward for the rave scene because it provides more of a context for integrating the rave experience into one’s daily life, especially in terms of spirituality and community. D. dissertation on the religious dimensions of popular music, focusing on four particular musical subcultures, one of which was the rave scene. It was during this two-year period that I was initiated into rave culture, attending numerous rave events, spending time with participants both in and outside of these events, and conducting formal interviews with a number of ravers. On an academic and scholarly level, this research was productive and resulted in the successful completion of my dissertation and my Ph.D. But my immersion in rave culture also had an unintended impact on a personal level as well: I quickly developed a strong affinity with the scene, became an enthusiastic participant, and my life was transformed through my involvement. In the years since that time, my involvement has continued and deepened, to the point where I consider myself to be an “insider.” At the same time, my scholarly interest in the rave scene has also continued and deepened, as has my sense that rave culture is an important religious phenomenon that deserves in-depth study, a conviction that has been the driving force behind this book.

In the summer of 2000, I used a research fellowship to travel to England and Germany to investigate the rave scene in Europe and was able to attend a variety of 51 52 TRANCE FORMATION events and meet people involved in European rave culture. However, to be perfectly honest, of the dozens of rave events I’ve attended since my dissertation research, most of them were undertaken for personal and not scholarly reasons. In the fast-evolving world of rave culture, seven years is an eternity, and I felt that in order to accurately depict the current state of the scene for this book, it would be necessary for me to undertake additional formal research. Accordingly, in late 2003 and early 2004, I traveled up and down the West Coast to check out rave events and meet members of various crews. During this time, I also conducted an additional dozen interviews. While much of this new material confirmed themes already identified in my earlier research, it also helped me to elaborate some of these themes in new and important ways and, more significantly, it turned up completely new themes and forms that demonstrate the evolution and maturation of rave culture. For example, the Street Parade in Zurich, the Rhythm Society in the Bay Area, the Oracle in Seattle, Tribal Harmonix in British Columbia, Earthdance, and the Gathering of the Tribes have all come into existence and had a strong impact during this time. Overall, I learned a great deal from this new research and I am excited to share this material.

In this volume I am addressing both a popular audience and a scholarly audience, each with its own sets of concerns, and I acknowledge that balancing these two audiences is a challenging task. On the one hand, ravers will want to verify my credibility as someone who has a sizable body of direct firsthand experience in rave culture, and I think my eight years of involvement and my own personal transformation meets this criterion. On the other hand, scholars will want to know I have not sacrificed my capability for objective research and analysis by being an insider, and to verify that I have a solid theoretical and methodological framework for this study. To address these concerns requires a bit more elaborate response, so if you are not interested in these issues, please skip ahead to chapter 3. I conducted two kinds of formal research for this book, the first of which was fieldwork.

Here my task was to immerse myself in rave culture and to attend a sizable body of events and activities. In conducting this fieldwork, I have primarily used the participant observation approach so that, in addition to having direct personal experiences of the subject matter, I was also able to make detailed firsthand observations as well. For the second kind of research—formal interviews—I interviewed a number of ravers so that they could speak for themselves in their own voices on the subject, and I have included extensive direct quotes from these interviews in the chapters of this section. While I do not claim that these events and individuals constitute a representative sample, it is nevertheless clear to me that this research did allow me to significantly deepen my understanding of rave culture, its religious experiences, ritual forms, spiritual and philosophical meanings, and communities.

Once this research was completed, my next task was to analyze the material to bring out the dynamics, nuances, and complexities of rave culture as a religious phenomenon. As I have noted in the introduction, rave culture does not constitute religion as we traditionally think of it and, consequently, it does not fit neatly within the standard religious analysis. Therefore, it is necessary to develop theoretical and analytical tools to make sense of some of the key features of newly emerging religious phenomena like raves, features which I also noted in the introduction: a combination of the sacred and secular; expression within the arts; expression within popular culture; the emphasis of experience over content; the central importance of the body; use of digital technology, multimedia, and global communication systems; and a postmodern, hybrid, cut-and-paste nature.

Historian of religions Charles Long has identified two important elements that I think are extremely helpful for understanding this new type of religious phenomenon, the first of which is “the mode of transmission.” Raves illustrate this point perfectly. Their mode of transmission is intimately bound up with beat-heavy music, electronic instrumentation and amplification, digital recording, record and CD manufacturing and distribution, DJ beat matching and cross-fade mixing skills, digital lighting and projections, a wide variety of crews and promoters, and a wide variety of physical environments (warehouses, clubs, arenas, outdoor locations, etc.), as well as each individual's unique way of receiving and processing the music, including dance, social interactions, and the ingestion of substances like the drug Ecstasy (MDMA, or 3-, 4-methylene-dioxymethamphetamine). Each of these aspects has its own particular set of parameters and dynamics that, taken in sum, account for many of the complexities of rave as religion.

The second element is the “cognition afforded by the modes of transmission,” which, because of the powerful technologies involved, has been greatly intensified. Long argues that “because of the intensity of transmission,” “the qualitative meaning of the nature of experience” becomes the central defining feature.” In the case of raves, then, the key to unpacking their spiritual and religious significance lies in understanding the intense experiential states that they engender. Thus, the first and most important aspect of my analysis of the spiritual and religious dimensions of raves focuses squarely on the powerful experiential states ravers attain through music and dance, states that are clearly analogous to a variety of classic religious experiences. I see this focus on the primacy of religious experience continuing and updating a long-standing tradition of religious studies scholarship that emphasizes the encounter with the numinous as the central ordering structure for human beings. This primary religious experience then becomes the basis for subsequent developments that lead to the organized external forms that we call religion. In this section, I will look closely at three of these developments in particular: (1) the ritual and ceremonial forms that bring ravers together in religious communion; (2) the spiritualities, worldviews, philosophies, and codes for living that provide them an orientation to the world and a meaning system through which to construct their ongoing reality; and (3) the communities that provide ravers a context in which to integrate these religious experiences, rituals, and worldviews into their ongoing daily lives.

Religious experience is one of the most difficult subjects for scholars of religion to analyze because it is of a uniquely subjective personal nature that cannot be objectively observed or empirically measured. What one can do, however, is to seriously examine the accounts of individuals who have had such experiences and to use techniques of comparative analysis to tease out consistent threads of similarity and difference. This is the approach that William James took in his classic study The Varieties of Religious Experience, an approach that could be characterized as a kind of radical empiricism. While clearly useful for marshaling objective evidence of a subjective phenomenon and identifying structural patterns, such an approach, however, still leaves one on the outside looking in, separated by a glass wall from the interior texture of the experience.

As a corrective, therefore, certain strategies have been developed within the discipline of religious studies that seek to overcome this separation. Joachim Wach’s strategy is found in the hermeneutic enterprise, the attempt of the scholar to interpret the data using not only the intellect, but also the total person, which includes emotion, will, and experience. He writes, “A love letter will appear meaningless and silly to anybody not in love. . . . By the same token a religious utterance will bewilder, frustrate, or repel anyone whose religious sensitivities have not been developed.”4 In a similar vein, Gerardus Van der Leeuw’s phenomenological approach balanced objective techniques of epoché (bracketing and temporary suspension of presuppositions) and analytical categorization of phenomena with the scholar’s empathetic interpolation of her own experiences; he called for “a systematic introspection; not only the description of what is visible from the outside, but above all the experience born of what can only become reality after it has been admitted into the life of the observer himself.”

In terms of the life of this observer, I can say that music, and its spiritual and religious dimensions, has exerted a tremendous influence on me since my adolescence—an influence that has continued into my adulthood, with electronic dance music and rave culture as my primary focus for the last eight years. I regularly acquire and listen to vast amounts of recorded electronic dance music and regularly go to raves and dance clubs, all purely for my own personal edification, independent of academic concerns. Therefore, I have a natural empathy for the subject I am studying, as well as a set of powerful experiences I can draw from in making my interpretations. In addition to this personal involvement, I think it is also important to address my scholarly work focusing on the spiritual and religious dimensions of music, as well as the work of other scholars in this area. The connection between music, spirituality, and religion is so widespread as to be nearly universal. Yet, strangely, there has been very little serious and systematic scholarly study on the subject, not only on the religious side of the equation by religious studies scholars, but also on the musical side of the equation by musicologists and ethnomusicologists. In my first book, Traces of the Spirit: The Religious Dimensions of Popular Music, a revised version of my dissertation, I developed a preliminary theoretical framework for understanding the tremendous spiritual and religious power of music, essentially arguing that because music integrates its multiple dimensions into a harmoniously functioning whole, it is the vehicle par excellence for conveying religious experience and meaning.º At the physiological level, it affects the body and its subsystems; at the psychological level, it affects the structure of the psyche and the state of consciousness; at the sociocultural level, it affects and reflects the social order and the cultural paradigms; at the semiological level, it provides symbolic structures which create affective meaning systems; at the virtual level, it creates compelling temporal and spatial worlds into which one is drawn; at the ritual level, it fits into a larger set of ritual activities, 56 TRANCE FORMATION with their own functions and purposes; and, finally, at the spiritual or religious level, it establishes a link to the spiritual world and the contours and dynamics of that world. Moreover, music affects people in all of these ways simultaneously, integrating all these levels into a harmonious whole that is greater than the sum of the parts. . . [and that] takes place in [a unique and powerful] experiential state.

Drawing on some of the pioneering ideas developed by ethnomusicologist Steven M. Friedson in his excellent study of the vimbuza spirit possession complex among the Tumbuka of Malawi, Dancing Prophets, I took this framework further in proposing the concept of music as a unified field, a hyperdimensional continuum in which humans and spirits, as Friedson writes, “as equally viable presences, partake of the same experiential realm of sound and motion.”* Thus, music allows human beings to enter a unified field where the spiritual dimension can be directly experienced in a powerful mode that is integrated with all the other dimensions. In the years since I wrote my dissertation, an exciting new body of work has emerged that draws on new technologies in brain imaging that have led to new research in brain science confirming the unique capacity of music to transform consciousness and induce powerful religious experiences. In fact, I only discovered this work after I had already completed the manuscript of this book, and I was amazed to find that this new material uncannily paralleled many of the most important themes in the following section on the spiritual and religious dimensions of raves. So, while this new body of work did not influence my theoretical and methodological approach in this volume, it did validate the results and the larger themes of my research from a different perspective. I include a brief survey of this work here, not only because I feel it is important material on the connection between music, spirituality, and religion in its own right, but also because it sets up and illuminates the material on the spiritual and religious dimensions of raves that follows in the next section. I begin with ethnomusicologist Judith Becker’s Deep Listeners: Music, Emotion, and Trancing, a groundbreaking book that emphasizes the nearly universal importance of musically induced trance as an effective tool for accessing spiritual dimensions, a theme that is clearly central in this volume. She writes: “The interpenetration of music with trancing is ancient and universal. I suspect that most, if not all, societies have some form of institutionalized, religious trance ceremonies that also include music.”

The Spiritual and Religious Dimensions

"Music that accompanies religious trancing is . . . music whose primary function is to address, summon, or present an unseen world of gods, of deities, and of spirits." Throughout her book, in characterizing the experiential states attained by musical trancers, Becker uses phrases that not only read like classic themes of religious and mystical experiences, but also that uncannily parallel themes that emerged in the course of my interviews with ravers: divine presence, transcendence, gnosis, out-of-body sensations, feelings of nearness to the sacred, loss of boundaries between self and other, experiences of wholeness and unity, joy, numinous luminosity, a sense of divinity, of the sacred realm, pure bodily experience, feelings of closeness to the holy, revitalization, a special blessing, a benediction, the ability to temporarily abide in an eternity, an enchanted world, and so on.

In addition, Becker identifies some of the key structural components of the musical trance induction complex, which also uncannily parallel key components of raves: musical immersion, music that is rhythmically vibrant and loud, dance or strenuous activity, and sensory overstimulation. Drawing on the new wave of brain science research, Becker gives her analysis of these structural components and spiritual/religious dimensions of musically induced trance greater depth and scientific validity by grounding it in biological and neurophysiological processes. Key among these is the arousal of the autonomic nervous system, or ANS. The ANS consists of physiological processes such as breathing, heartbeat, digestion, involuntary muscles, and so forth that operate independently of our conscious control, but are regulated by areas of the brain such as the encephalon and the brainstem. ANS arousal seems to be a central factor in precipitating trance.

Deep listeners experience strong autonomic nervous system arousal in listening to music that may result in chills or tears, changes in their heart rates, in their skin temperatures, and in the brain chemistry, resulting in a heightened sense of aliveness, an alertness, and, mostly, a joyfulness. In trancing contexts, the ANS seems in overdrive, propelling the trancer to physical feats not normally possible, and to the feeling of numinous luminosity that encapsulates special knowledge not accessible during normal consciousness.

Another important biological process is that of structural coupling, the synchronization of different bodies and nervous systems into a collectively shared brain state and consciousness, accomplished through the mechanism of musical rhythmic entrainment. Musical rhythmic entrainment can be seen as structural coupling, of a changed interior, personal consciousness in a musical domain of coordination. Bodies and brains synchronize gestures, muscle actions, breathing, and brain waves while enveloped in music. Many persons, bound together by common aims, may experience revitalization and general good feeling. The situation is both communal and individual, as music descends on all alike, while each person's joy is their own. Other scholars have developed similar ideas, such as cognitive scientist William Benzon, who has touched on the concept of structural coupling of brain states and consciousness through music in his outstanding book, Beethoven's Anvil: Music in Mind and Culture. Benzon believes that the tight coupling between the brains of individuals sharing a common musical culture allows a collective intentionality, where the music serves as a vehicle for sharing a private experience, such as trance.

In turn, both Benzon and Becker have drawn on the work of neuroscientist Walter Freeman, who considers musical entrainment as a powerful agent for social bonding. Freeman believes that music and dance originated through biological evolution of brain chemistry, which interacted with cultural evolution of behavior. This led to the development of chemical and behavioral technologies for inducing altered states of consciousness. The role of trance states was particularly important for breaking down preexisting habits and beliefs, leading to the formation of social groups by cooperative action and trust.

The theme of ritual is also relevant in this survey of new research and theory in brain science. In his influential book, Why God Won't Go Away: Brain Science and the Biology of Belief, brain scientist Andrew Newberg argues that ritual activity is another kind of rhythmic behavior that also shifts brain states and consciousness, producing religious experiences. The ability of human ritual to produce transcendent unitary states is the result of the effect of rhythmic ritualized behavior upon the hypothalamus and the autonomic nervous system, eventually affecting the rest of the brain.

I went to one of Martin's Gathering parties, which was a house break-in down on the docks. It was like, "Okay, here we go. This is it." I flew to the Bay and went directly to a Toon Town. I took my first drug ever and dropped Ecstasy one night and went to a Toon Town. I'd never smoked marijuana up until then. I had my heart chakra blown completely wide open at this event. I felt unity, but it was missing in situations that should have had it, like in a religious setting. But here I was at Toon Town with 3,500-4,000 people on the dance floor, and everyone was in a complete state of bliss. Doc Martin was playing, and the stage was set for a spiritual experience for me to happen. I moved to Seattle because I went to a dance culture event in '94 and knew that I was looking for that. A friend told me about rave culture events, and I flew out to go to one. I just knew that was what I was here to do.

I visited San Francisco and went to my first real rave. I was there for four days, and you cannot believe what I went to. I just get the shivers when I think about it now. It was the NASA tour, and Jeno was playing, Moby, Richard James/Aphex Twin, and Orbital. We did Ecstasy, and it was like, "Whoa! The heavens opened up." It was amazing. I felt like, "This is it! I have arrived. This is exactly what I've been looking for my entire life." Then, I went to one of the very first Friends n Family events. I had connections with people that were so incredible. The vibe was so good and right, and I felt like, "This is home, this is what it's all about, this is what I've been looking for." I vowed to move to San Francisco. I hit a party where Doc Martin was playing, and I just danced my ass off. I had never really danced that much, certainly not to a DJ where he's working the rhythms, flowing from song to song. I just ended up drenched in sweat and thought, "Wow, that is the most fun I've ever had." And from that point on, every week, we'd just go dancing. . . . So yeah, I heard house music and it totally changed my life. These lengthy testimonials from ravers are included to vividly convey the euphoric intensity of the experience of "getting it" the first time at a rave, an experience so powerful that it immediately changed their lives in a complete and irrevocable way. These descriptions can be classified as religious conversion experiences. But what exactly are ravers experiencing, and to what are they being converted?

Electronic Dance Music:

The music is different from other kinds of music, not only in terms of its sounds but also fundamentally in terms of its core organizational principles. Jimi Fritz, author of Rave Culture: An Insider's View, notes that "With conventional music, we listen to the form and follow the lyrics, but with rave music there is no beginning or end. The music is cyclical and continuous and acts more as a catalyst for our own personal inner journey, more a transportation system than an end in itself. Rave music is specifically designed to make you move your body."

Beats are central in electronic dance music, and they are constructed through drum-machine programming or manipulating recorded samples of drums. Then, sonic textures are layered on top of the beats in an interlocking polyrhythmic manner. Producers create new sounds and timbres using synthesizers, sound modules, and software, which are then enhanced by various effects and processors. The freshness of these sounds is an important aspect of the music.

Within the context of a rave, the music is played at an extremely high volume over a high-quality sound system, ideally with surround sound and a subwoofer that gives the bass register a physical presence. The music becomes a totalizing sonic environment in which one is immersed. Here are some testimonials from ravers to this effect, including Jimi Fritz and some of the people he interviewed for his book:

People were dancing hard and smiling from ear to ear, as if amazed at the ability of the music to affect them so completely. The heavy tribal beats continued to grow, building in intensity. Just when any increase in power seemed impossible, a plateau of swirling sounds suggested an ultimate zenith. Then, suddenly, the music exploded into another rhythm even more penetrating and profound than before. This upward spiraling cycle of pulsating sound continued to build relentlessly hour after hour throughout the night. Like a musical river, it swept everyone along with an irresistible momentum. An incredible sense of optimism and enthusiasm pervaded the room as we surrendered to this new musical form. "Absolutely nothing... has taken me to the intense levels that this music does and hold it there. There is nothing like it in the world, it is like reaching an orgasm... The music made me feel both just free and inspired and more in touch with myself... The music was so powerful to me that it just highlighted all the beautiful things...1 Electronic dance music is a new way of presenting sound. I think that part of the attraction is that some of the new sounds I'm hearing, I recognize from sounds I've generated in my own head before I ever went to a party or tried Ecstasy. It's like I'm listening to my own brain-wave patterns."

"Electronic dance music is a brand new, cool musical genre, very progressive and modern. It is a new step of human musical progression and I think it is the music of the future."

The repetition is primarily important—it is hypnotic and addictive. With a proper sound system the music is so loud you can feel it in every part of your body. The low bass notes connect you to the earth and remind us how physical and animal we all are. The melodies and higher frequencies extend us up out of ourselves into a higher state of consciousness. It is an embracing of both earth and sky. Its effect is the most liberating ecstasy possible."

"For many ravers, this state of ecstasy is one achieved through the music itself, without using the drug Ecstasy (MDMA, or 3-, 4-methylene-dioxymethamphetamine). However, the synergistic combination of electronic dance music and Ecstasy has historically been one of the key catalysts of the rave scene, and there is no denying that Ecstasy strongly enhances the already powerful effects of the music.

Popular music critic and rave aficionado Simon Reynolds, in the seminal Generation Ecstasy: Into the World of Techno and Rave Culture, has written an excellent description of how Ecstasy (also called “E”) enhances the experience of electronic dance music:

"All music sounds better on E—crisper and more distinct, but also engulfing in its immediacy. House and techno sound especially fabulous. The music’s emphasis on texture and timbre enhances the drug’s mildly synaesthetic effects so that sounds seem to caress the listener's skin. You feel like you’re dancing inside the music; sound becomes a fluid medium in which you're immersed. Ecstasy ... melts bodily and psychological rigidities, enabling the dancer to move with greater fluency and ‘lock’ into the groove. Rave music’s hypnotic beats and sequenced loops also make it perfectly suited to interact with another attribute of Ecstasy: ... the drug stimulates the brain’s 1b receptor, which encourages repetitive behavior. ... Rave music instills a pleasurable tension, a rapt suspension that fits perfectly with the sustained pre-orgasmic plateau of the MDMA high. ... Over the years, rave music has gradually evolved into a self-conscious science of intensifying MDMA’ sensations. House and techno producers have developed a drug-determined repertoire of effects, textures, and riffs that are expressly designed to trigger the tingly rushes that traverse the Ecstatic body. Processes like EQ-ing, phasing, panning, and filtering are used to tweak the frequencies, harmonics, and stereo imaging of different sounds, making them leap out of the mix with an eerie three-dimensionality or glisten with a hallucinatory vividness. Today’s house track is a forever-fluctuating, fractal mosaic of glow-pulses and flicker-riffs, a teasing tapestry whose different strands take turns to move in and out of the sonic spotlight." Experienced under the influence of MDMA, the effect is synaesthetic—like tremulous fingertips tantalizing the back of your neck, or the simultaneously aural/tactile equivalent of a shimmer. In a sense, Ecstasy turns the entire body surface into an ear, an ultra-sensitized membrane that responds to certain frequencies.

Trance and Peaks

A central aspect that is nearly universal in the dance-floor experience at raves is that of trance. The trance state is induced through the high-volume insistence of the continuous beat and the accompanying continuous dance. One veteran of the Chicago house music scene put it this way:

"You would definitely get rather hypnotized by the constant rhythm, the continual motion of the music. . . . You can get into a trance state without being high [on drugs]. . . . So much of it is repetitive dance, repetitive motion; you're getting into such a groove that you put yourself into a trance state."

A San Francisco raver described it as a "really powerful experience."

"It transports you. The volume, the sheer volume of the music, and just the repetitiveness of it is hypnotic. You're dancing, you’re moving in time to the music and, after a while, you don’t know what your body is doing. . . . You just kind of have this sense of your own motion and it goes with the music."

These connections between music, rhythm, dance, and trance induction are consciously recognized by ravers, and induction of the trance state is a specific goal of the music:

"The music definitely, definitely, definitely caters to this trance, trying to put your mind into it. When it starts getting these really regularly looping patterns, it goes into a state which is kind of hard to describe. . . . You start achieving some really unusual states of consciousness, which I think people really like. The music attempts to manipulate that sense of consciousness. It tries to take you to a place, tries to sculpt your experience in some way, by manipulating those mechanisms in your mind."

It is also important to note that this is a deep trance state induced over a long period of time, one that "completely alters your state of consciousness."17 As one veteran San Francisco raver put it,

"The periods of pure trance have been profound raving, simply because . . . raving’s about eight, nine hours non-stop."

The trance state, however, is not of a uniform texture. Another nearly universal aspect of the rave dance-floor experience, as was noted in chapter 1, is the notion of the energy building to a peak:

"A well-structured, a well-done DJ set really builds a flow and an ebb, builds it up and takes it back down again, and can bring you to the peak of something and then take you back down gently."

Reaching these peaks is a conscious goal of both the DJ and the dancers, and DJs have developed specific strategies for how to get there:

"I will move the crowd up to a high level of energy by gradually increasing the beats per minute over time and then I will take it to a peak if I can, to some ecstatic peak where I’ll just keep going as long as possible. And then, when the crowd seems to fade, or have enough of that, then I will gradually take it down again, rest them for a while, and then bring them up again. . . . As a DJ, I see myself as taking the crowd on a journey and through a number of different emotions and feeling states. And, at some point, letting all that break open into an ecstatic state." And, over the course of the night, doing this a number of times, the feeling in the room grows. Another DJ put it more succinctly: "I like to definitely build up a crescendo and let it all explode." It is important to note that the experience of peaks is often a shared experience in which many people on the dance floor acknowledge the collective entrance into this higher state. These are some of the best times of the night, when everyone can feel the palpable presence of the peak sweeping them up to an ecstatic, high-energy state:

There's something about being in a room with more than a hundred people and everybody's experiencing this new thing for the first time. It's like being witness to two thousand births all at once, you know what I mean? You could almost just look at people and they'd look at you and you'd just have this understanding about what was going on, but there was no way to communicate it. It was just this physical electricity in the air.

Joy, Happiness, Ecstasy, and Love

One of the primary feelings associated with the peak experience on the dance floor is that of joy or happiness: "I've had what I might term, and not facetiously, religious experiences when I've been dancing. You just get incredibly happy. You get filled with a real sense of joy." And this sense of joy is not just a private, personal feeling, but one that is shared by most everyone else present at the rave. One raver talked about an ongoing event he helped organize that was positively notorious for this group joy that would happen: "They would walk into the space and they would just feel it... They became truly joyful, truly ecstatic."

For many, this sense of joy is the main goal of the rave: "it's all about happiness," while another went so far as to call music "the ultimate bliss." The feeling of joy and happiness is central. It is probably more than just simple coincidence that the drug most often ingested at raves goes by the common name of Ecstasy, because the feeling states induced by this drug certainly can be described as ecstatic.

It is clear that the use of Ecstasy in rave contexts is a major contributing factor to the feeling states described above. At the same time, however, many ravers were emphatic in stating that these states were easily accessed without using MDMA, that the tremendous combined power of the music, the rhythm, the dance, and the visuals was more than sufficient to produce such states. One raver talked about experiencing profound altered states of consciousness at raves long before ever taking Ecstasy, and that Ecstasy "just confirmed the way I already felt about it, just enhanced it more." Another described the opposite sequence—after taking Ecstasy and having ecstatic experiences, that state became accessible without the drug, solely through the music:

The connection I had with the music was real because I felt it when I wasn't high.

In addition to its ability to induce ecstatic states, Ecstasy is also widely known for its ability to help people be in their heart and experience feelings of love, to feel a strong sense of connection and unity, and to enhance the internal somatic experience of the body. All three of these properties are important characteristics of the rave experience worthy of further examination. With or without Ecstasy, for many people, the rave experience shifts them out of being primarily in their head and their thoughts into being primarily in their heart and feelings of love. As one Bay Area raver expressed it, "For me, it's just the openness and the love, the heart vibration, that heart feeling... that feeling of opening and connection and love that just permeates. That's why I do it. That's why I go... For me, this feeling of the sacred that I experience in the rave context, it's definitely a lot of heart, a lot of heart connection, a lot of heart opening... The experience of [the sacred] is feeling all that heart energy in the group, feeling that love. I can feel it. You know, I walk through the door and there it is." Another raver put it more succinctly, "I'm very aware that there's a heart opening when I'm dancing, especially when I'm in a place that feels safe and I can really let it go." And yet another raver referred to experiencing electronic dance music "in my heart, in my chest, feeling my heart cracking open and loosening and opening."

Interestingly, none of these three made any reference to having used Ecstasy during these experiences, clearly demonstrating that entrance into this state of being in the heart and feeling love at raves is not dependent on taking the drug. Nor is it limited to the dance floor or the rave itself; it often carries over into the rest of one's life. One aficionado talked about "coming out of a party and just being so filled with pure love," an experience quite common for many ravers. Another talked about connecting with people who "were much more loving and caring," and how "it definitely changed me and filtered into the rest of my life."

Connection and Unity

This type of connection extends beyond simply connecting with other people into a sense of unity and being part of a larger whole. "There's that unity that you experience, there's that feeling of connection, and a very loving sense of connection, sense of being connected to something larger." This experience of "something larger" can be very powerful and profound, and ravers' descriptions of it are strikingly similar to classic experiences of mystical union: "I just remember the first time I caught the vibe; I'll never forget it. It was like—I'm getting kind of choked up thinking about it—it was this sense of this total union with everything in the universe, with everyone that was there, with everyone that was not there, with everything in the world. I was stepping outside this world of limitations and stepping into this world that was just pure energy and this bigness, this space, I don't know, something. The use of the term unity so totally does not capture it at all; it so does not even come close to what it is. But this sense that all things were good, that everything was perfect, and that I was part of everything, and that there wasn't even this identification of the I. I don't know—there's no words to describe it. There's this awareness of other beings, of other creatures, forms, something, but again, the sense that they don't exist as discrete forms. They are forms, but they don't exist as individuals. Again, there's that breaking down of separation. I'm talking unity in the largest, most far-out, divine sense of the term." There were definitely times where I felt like I was existing as everything all at once. I would blend into the cosmic mind. I felt like I was a part of that and not part of an individual consciousness, an individual experience with a sense of self.5” Though these experiences of mystical union are one-of-a-kind life-changing events of a profound spiritual nature, they are at the same time quite widespread and common for ravers, so much so that the ideas of connection and unity have become central in the discourse of rave culture: TRANCE FORMATION 73

Having that experience of connection—I mean, connection implies separation, in that experience of unity. And I find that’s something very prevalent in rave culture. I think that what rave culture is doing, that a lot of people feel it’s doing, and they're articulate to one degree or another, is raising the level of our consciousness to a point where we’re more aware of ourselves as a connected consciousness, as a connected being, and less as an individuated being.**

There appear to be two parts to this process; one must first transcend the individual ego in order to then become part of the “connected consciousness.” As one raver expressed it, “You lose a sense of where you're at and it becomes so much more.” Transcending the Ego

In the Western rationalist tradition of the Enlightenment, the Cartesian maxim “I think, therefore I am” forms the foundation for how our culture views and/or structures the psyche. The ego, or the self, is identified with rational thought, and most of our energy and attention is invested in that modality. Consequently, other human modalities such as feeling, the body, and spirituality are often relegated to the unconscious, where they continue to exist, but receive little conscious attention. However, what happens in the intensity of the dance-floor experience at raves is that the ego is temporarily relieved of its dominant position. As one raver describes it, “When you get so into the music that you’re just dancing all night and you're grooving, you sort of lose your sense of self.” And, in addition to losing a sense of self or ego, one also loses the petty, day-to-day concerns of the ego: “It was unlike anything I’d ever experienced in that I would, over time, not care how I was looking, not care about most of the things that I would carry around with me—you know, social concerns, even just root things like financial concerns, things like that would all be shed for those moments. . . . I no longer became this person with social hang-ups, this person with baggage and things like that. . . . I guess if I lost anything, it was more of an ego sense.”

In that moment, it’s really hard to describe, definitely being set free from what people call ego—that identification of what am I doing, how do I look, how does this improve me, who will I be in the morning, any thought of that—and completely releasing.” Most of the time, I’m consumed by the film of thought that’s going through my mind. So the dance helps elevate me out of that into a more open undifferentiated place of unity. . . . Your self-conscious awareness of yourself is suddenly shifted away from concerning yourself about how you're seen by other people and you're in the pure experiential mode of feeling. Fundamentally, there’s this sense of, I want to say dissociation of the self, but a loss of ego is what I had been referring to before. The sense of there’s no separation between you and everything else. Like you are not you, like you are not this individual that has this stuff that is about this thing that happened three years ago, you know, all the things that come with individuation—your ego, your fears, your hopes, your dreams, all this stuff that is identified as self. Many ravers I interviewed had thought a great deal about this process of transcending the ego on the dance floor at raves and some had even developed their own model to explain the mechanisms of how this happens:

What people were doing was they were opening this gateway . . . they were just bypassing all their luggage to that place where they could feel, enjoy. . . . I look at ourselves as really complexly organized biocomputers. And when we come into this world, we’re constantly programmed. We have all of these programs that are placed in us. And as these programs become more calcified as we grow, we start looking at life in a very rigid way. So I think in the experience of this transcendent dance, what happens is you can somehow bypass all these. Because that’s what the Ecstasy was doing, too—you have all this luggage, you bypass the luggage. But it can happen the same way.

Some ravers have developed an awareness of the transformative power of the dance-floor experience to such a degree that they consciously use dance as a practice to help solve problems and dissolve programming:

Part of what I love about how I use dancing is I use it to. . . address a problem. So, if I’m having issues at work, say, and I’m not communicating well with someone, I'll look at that and I'll use the dance to view it holographically, from all sides, instead of from my ego point of view. Because I do have some of a distanced perspective on that kind of stuff. And generally, it’s informed by the heart. Who am I in this picture? How did I betray myself or someone else in this scenario? So I often use it to problem solve, to get to a solution. . . . It helps me analyze problems and have a new perspective on things.

There’s the aspect of a sort of freeing, using the dance to free yourself from conditioned routines, subroutines, behavior.

Some ravers have taken the idea of consciously using dance as a practice even further by comparing it to meditation:

I guess I kind of liken it to meditation, where when the waters are still, the light shines through. And I was definitely moving, so it’s not a very good analogy, but I would get myself to a place where what really mattered was the fact that I was moving in a rhythmic motion to this music. And it’s almost like, in meditation, you follow your breath, eventually you just become that breath. Well, that’s the same with the dancing, it was like I became it. . . And I was able to have these moments of incredible clarity and blissfulness.

So, instead of focusing attention on the breath, as one might do in simple Buddhist meditation practices, and returning to the breath after distracting thoughts arise, ravers focus on the music and the dance in the same way. To me, dance is my absolute meditation. And I started to discover. . . a lot of times when I would just be completely sober on this dance floor. And all of the sudden, I just began to, beyond just dancing, I would begin to really communicate with the music. And a lot of times I would just pull myself up in front of the speaker and just allow my body to journey through and with what was coming out of the speaker. I started to do this—I found that if I was thinking about something, if my mind was elsewhere, then I wouldn’t be as into the music and I couldn’t get into it quite as much. So that almost helped me to focus on, I guess, the traditional Buddhist style of meditation, which is to allow your thoughts to leave and just begin to observe your thoughts, as opposed to trying to push them out. So it just gave me a focus. And I found that hours would go by where I wasn’t even aware of that happening. I was just so incredibly focused on the music that was coming out that moment that I wasn’t even focusing on homework that I had or relationships that were going on, problems I was having with my parents. None of that was really apparent because I was just so in that moment." When you get so into the music that you're just dancing all night and you're grooving, you really, I think, to some degree, if it’s a good night, you sort of lose your sense of self and you really become one with the music and everything else ceases to exist. It’s called active meditation. You're not still but you’re so in the music that you're not thinking, you’re just being there, moving with the music.

There is even a website dedicated to the idea of rave dancing as a meditation practice, called Enlightenment by Dancing, in which they draw on basic Buddhist concepts. Here is a brief summary of their perspective: In a nutshell, dance is meditation! It is possible to gain direct access to our own enlightened qualities: peace, love, openness, understanding, energy and joy. The popular notion of meditation is to withdraw from the senses and suppress our thoughts. This is hard to do and doesn’t last very long because it is an artificial state. It is also rather dull. Real meditation is being completely awake and open to what is happening right now. We recognize thoughts as just thoughts and return to openness again and again. This moment of recognition is effortless and natural and can become completely stable. Vivid dance experiences are the ideal time to practice real meditation. Real meditation is effortless and sparky. Effortless because we are simply opening up to what is already there, our natural awareness. Sparky because vividness is fun! Dance and meditation come together in the experience of absolute spontaneity! When we are completely in tune with the music, not a thought in our mind, and no idea where the next beat will take us, then we are in touch with our own spontaneous perfection. This is dance as a spiritual path to enlightenment.

Another key aspect of transcending the ego through dance in rave culture is a strong emphasis on being in the body and bodily experience. This emphasis is in sharp contrast to Western civilization’s Cartesian maxim of “I think, therefore, I am,” which has led to a primary focus on the mind as the true identity and a culture-wide sense of disembodiment. One raver expressed this contrast very succinctly: It’s all about being in your body and out of your head. Another saw the dance floor as “a place to go deeper into your body.” For ravers, being in the body means bringing as much awareness as possible to one’s internal somatic experience: "I totally feel it [the body], every bit of it. I notice that when I’m in dance the most, when I have that connection, I begin to feel every aspect of my body . . . really feeling it. And that’s when I would feel the muscles in my arms actually moving and I would feel my legs do a turn or a backstep or something. So, yes, I feel more in my body. There's a tendency in this culture for our consciousness to be mostly directed outside of the physical body. And what I've found is that there's another direction, which is to go in the physical body and to really inhabit the physical body from another space, so that you're feeling your own consciousness participating with physical matter, so that consciousness starts to rest within physical matter. What I experience is that then I feel like, just as there's no separation between myself and a tree or another person, there's also no separation with my hands or my elbows, etcetera, so that I can rest in those areas and have a direct experience of moving from inside them.°C I've also experienced . . . an increased sense of body awareness, down to the very tips of my extremities, and that, to me, is the infusion of spirit into matter to the furthest degree. And that, to me, is where a lot of the magic lies.°”

As I noted earlier, this increased sense of body awareness can be further enhanced or intensified by the use of Ecstasy: When you hear something that is emotionally evocative when you're under the influence of MDMA, your whole body feels it. . . . It’s like an almost physical reaction you have to the music. So it has a tendency to make music a very substantial experience. . . . That’s definitely something that I always felt with MDMA—you get this sense of these waves 78 TRANCE FORMATION of abstract feelings washing through your entire body. . . . It really is sort of like teetering on the edge of an orgasm for a very long time.**

What follows is a description of one raver's pivotal experience on the dance floor under the influence of Ecstasy, and I have quoted it at length because it vividly conveys the intense transformative power of the bodily experience: I remember it completely transformed my relationship to my physical body. . . . I got on this pedestal and I danced for eight hours. It was the longest time and I just did not get off that pedestal. My experience of my body was just this pure column of energy. It was just this pure connection from top to bottom of this pulsing. The beat just pulsed right through me and I could not stop. I was exhausted, but it didn’t matter because I could not get enough of what that felt like. It was so cool and it completely rewrote my relationship to my body, like, in a night. . . . I just remember breathing in and feeling this rush from way above my head to way below my feet. It was just so cool. . . . It was really fun. It was great. That rocked my universe. . . . The music suddenly got into my body. And, to this day, I'll hear music, and I'll just be sitting there at work or somewhere, and some chord progression will hit, or some combination of timbres and beats, and I'll just be, like, Whoa! I feel it in my back. I can feel it right under my left shoulder blade a lot. . .. The music will just rush along a meridian. It’s very integrated in my body right now... . Definitely [I experience it] in my body. My body opens and I am in it.*?

Clearly this was an extraordinary personal experience. But it is also an experience that many people have had on the dance floor to one degree or another. What happens, then, when this kind of powerful bodily state is shared by a group of people and experienced collectively, something that often occurs at raves? As one raver noted, When you dance with people in this way over time, one of the things that becomes totally evident is the oneness, that we’re all moving in this field, this vibrational field. What I feel occurring is a sense of global consciousness, a sense of one moving world, one enormous dancing body that is felt in a physical sense. What is being described here, then, is a kind of bodily mysticism, in which mystical union is experienced on physical, somatic, and kinesthetic levels.

At raves, dancing is the primary activity that opens the doorway to these powerful experiential states. Most ravers are dancers and they love to dance:

"I find everything inside of it. I can be anything. I can go anywhere. . . . The reason I find dancing is such a beautiful and deep experience is because it’s completely letting go of, forgetting that you walk. I think it’s a form of swimming or flying, it really is. It’s a form of releasing in me. It’s a form of entering a place that you can’t just [by] walking around and observing the normal everyday. And it’s a form of going inside the music. It’s a relationship that you have with the music. And, once you come in harmony, you're in bliss, really. There are moments when I’m dancing, but I’m dancing so effortlessly or so thoughtlessly that I'm not deciding how I’m going to dance. How my body feels is like, for a moment, my body’s just moving to the music. And the music is just going through me. I’m more enjoying the music and enjoying the movement and that ecstatic state."

Each dancer has her own set of unique characteristic dance movements that span a wide range of different forms and styles. Ravers typically do not perform these dance movements because they are aesthetically pleas- ing to watch from the outside, but because they produce powerful somatic states experienced from the inside. These states are not of a uniform nature. Different types of dance movements produce different types of experiential states. From this perspective, movement and dance can be considered a spiritual technology that ravers utilize to create and choreo- graph their own unique journey through a sequence of experiential states.

Different ravers use different dance movements to pursue different experi- ential goals. One raver described using a set of movements to activate his energy:

"I remember I used to have a few things that would activate my dance if I felt sluggish; I would go through . . . a series of movements that would just activate me slightly more and bring me into a connection, so it’s almost like a ritual I didn’t know I was performing. Just having this set, a really quick thing that would take a four-count of music or a sixteen- count, that would just bring me back, activate my energy."

Another raver uses the Taoist practice of chi kung in a similar way:

"I trained in chi kung for a few years. So, I actually do chi kung when I dance sometimes. And I'll do that just to get my energy moving around, so I can get in touch with it."

Another approach is to dance with the polyrhythms of the music:

"It has layers and layers and layers, so I think it is the rhythm that really does it for me because I'll hear another rhythm come in, and another rhythm, and another rhythm, and so I begin to emulate those rhythms in my body. And it almost is a practice for meditation, and practice for dance, because I’ll go deeper and deeper and deeper, with every new layer that comes in, I'll take myself a little bit deeper, and find myself juggling ten rhythms in my body at once.°$

One raver uses this polyrhythmic approach to dancing as a way to work with different types of energy:

"I feel the bass and then I'll move up to the treble." I love skipping between the rhythms in a single dance move. What I love is interplaying the two or three different flavors of the rhythms at the same time. It’s about energy manipulation for me. I manipulate my energy in a conscious way.

It sounds like what you're describing is a polyrhythmic approach to relating to the music.

So, you can pick out those different levels all simultaneously at the same time?

I love it! That’s how I connect to it. I hang different frequencies on different rhythms of the music at the same time. I love that! I love that so much! That’s why I like complicated high-hats and good funky basses. When there’s lots going on in the vertical spectrums of the songs, that’s my favorite.

And you can relate to those different rhythms with different parts of your body?

Yeah, it is different parts of my body. My arms will often do one thing where maybe my butt and my legs are doing something else.

One of the things that I started to realize recently is that low frequency music is down here and the center of weight is here.

Are there characteristic movements that help you modulate the energy?

TRANCE FORMATION

The low frequency stuff is in the legs and the first chakra, down. There’s sort of what I call warrior music or tribal music that’s lower frequency and the moves I like to do with that are bent knees. The emphasis is getting my butt into that groove. And that’s a root. And then above that is when it gets interesting. The arms pull that up and pull this down and there’s a real interplay.

This reference to the use of the hands and arms is echoed by many ravers, so much so that one could characterize it as a fairly universal movement form that some ravers have called "directing traffic":

One thing actually I think is pretty common is what we call directing traffic, where you have really dramatic rhythmic gestures with your arms. There must be some weird correlation with how you feel when you're on Ecstasy and doing that stuff because everybody does it... . The open arms, the extended arms, is you’re kind of opening yourself, you’re moving rhythmically to the music.°”

The house music subgenre, on the other hand, produced a different characteristic movement known as "jacking the body":

In the early Chicago house music scene, all the parties were in really tight spaces. So, people were jacking their bodies, the whole concept of jack your body. .. . Jacking your body is all about . . . imitating sexual movements, you can take off your clothes, you're jacking yourself to the beat. And it’s all in this really close environment where you are touching someone but you're not making love to them. And you're touching anybody around you. . . . And that was what a lot of the rhythm and motion was, in a really tight environment, where it was just like the sway of the ocean almost. That’s how people danced. But now everyone has a lot more room in the raves, so they’re like jumping around more, and it’s a different type of trance.®

So, one factor in these different movement forms is how much room there is to dance. Another factor is the rhythm and the number of beats per minute (BPM):

When you have a very high BPM [135-50], that tends toward the techno genre, more ravey kind of stuff. And, as you move down the BPM, you start moving into the house genre. . .. House runs in the 110 to 120 BPM range. . .. House music has a tendency to get you into this kind of pelvic trance thing, whereas techno or rave music tend to get you more into an upper body trance thing. "Trance Formation: The “Jungle” Subgenre and Dance Movements

The “jungle” subgenre, also known as “drum and bass,” has a different characteristic movement: There’s definitely more footwork in dancing to jungle . .. more of a foot thing that goes on with jungle that you don’t see in standard techno. . . . When you see people dance to jungle, there’s definitely steps.” Again, one of the factors in this different movement has to do with the rhythm, which has less of the pounding “four on the floor” kick drum and more complex, multilayered polyrhythms: Ifyou listen to jungle, most of it, the bass line is half time from the drums, so it’s usually 80 or 85 BPM for the actual perceived time of the music. . . . You hear these break beats that are totally sped up, you hear this crazy snare drum and cymbals and shakers going all over the place. . . .”! What you do is dance half as fast you would normally dance to regular techno, even a quarter as fast, because you've only got a pulse in one place, you've got it one quarter of the time that you do in regular techno. And so actually you have to totally dance a different way.”

Overall, then, “rave music comes in a thousand different flavors. And, depending on the scene you're in, it dictates the kind of dance you're going to see.”

Moreover, each different set of characteristic dance move- ments produces a different type of experiential state and a corresponding shift in the body. As one raver put it, "The moment that we shift our movements, I think we’re creating shifts in who we are, in our beings, in our body-mind.” Thus, dancing permanently alters my perception and also alters my body and my body opens more and more. The alignment shifts and so the energies can flow through more clearly, more quickly, without resistance.”

Another way of conceptualizing this interrelationship between the type of music, the type of movement, and the experiential bodily state that many ravers use centers on chakras; the term chakra is drawn from Indian yogic and tantric traditions, and chakras are also used in some types of healing work. Chakras are a series of seven energy centers located on the central axis of the human energetic body, an axis that roughly corresponds to the physical location of the spine. Each chakra is associated with a different type of energy. For example, the second chakra is associated with sexuality, the fourth with the heart and emotions, and the seventh with spiritual matters. Ravers describe their awareness of chakras:

“To me, it’s all about chakras... . The higher the chakra, it starts to look trancy . . . so people look like they’re in a trance, whereas people that are dancing more of a groovy, funky stuff with house or acid jazz, they look more sensuous, like they’re in their lower chakras.”

“I definitely know about the lower chakra because that’s a lot of where we carry this music when we dance. The center of our bodies are down here and this is where we use our hips. I have had the experience of music hitting me at different points, like in my heart or my head. IDM [intelligent dance music] is very head-based electronic music. I’ve listened to IDM and I’ve written stories to the music. It’s very heady, mathematical sounding. And then I’ve experienced other music, just very beautiful house music, in my heart, in my chest, feeling your heart cracking open and loosening and opening. And then there’s other music, tribal, midtempo, you feel it in your lower chakra. It’s sexy, it’s sensual, and you feel it down in your genitals, that’s where it resonates with you.” And then there's drum and bass, you just get happy feet, you just move your feet around, jiggling." [Sometimes it's about communication [the fifth chakra], or some survival stuff. God, when I first started dancing, I had a lot of survival stuff. When I first moved here, My God, where am I going to live? I had a lot of survival, first-chakra stuff. And third, good Lord, I've got third chakra issues! So, yes, I use them all. Maybe I'm just a heart-centered person, but my heart informs a lot.] According to this model, then, some musics affect the lower chakras and produce a more earthy, sensual experience. Some affect the heart chakra and produce more of an experience of love. Some affect the higher chakras and produce more of an out-of-body spiritual experience, which is also something that many ravers experience: "I was outside myself looking down at myself. . . . I was above myself looking down, sort of in a helicopter if you will, looking down at all these people dancing." [84] TRANCE FORMATION

I talked with other people about this particular subject and that's a pretty common perception, to see yourself as if you're looking down on yourself.* Yet, perhaps the interesting thing about electronic dance music, according to some ravers, is that it seems to affect all of the chakras along the entire vertical axis at the same time. "I experience it actually affecting chakras above the head and all the way through to the earth. . . . Some of the techno is affecting the whole vertical dimension, so that the body will get a sense of both grounding and being very connected to the transpersonal. I'm getting that sense of both with techno."* Therefore, electronic dance music appears to open up the whole range of experiential states, from the earthy to the cosmic, including some unusual and extraordinary combinations.

Energy

The system of chakras is one of many religious and spiritual systems that map the flow of subtle energy in and around the body. This energy goes by many names. In Indian Tantric traditions, it is referred to as kundalini or prana. In Chinese Taoist traditions, it is called ch'i or gi. Among the Huichol Indians of northern Mexico, it is called kupuri. Ravers don't have a specific name for it, but they do know from their firsthand experience that very powerful energies are generated on the dance floor, and they frequently used the word energy to talk about these experiences: "I was stepping outside this world of limitations and stepping into this world that was just pure energy. . . . Energy, high energy, lots of energy, but very big and light."* For me, there's a tremendous amount of energy, a tremendous amount of—it's almost electric at times, a great deal of joy, and chi in movement. . . ."88 My experience of my body was just this pure column of energy, it was just this pure connection from top to bottom of this pulsing. . . . I just remember breathing in and feeling this rush from way above my head to way below my feet. . . ."** TRANCE FORMATION

There is simply a flow of energy that has no beginning or end, that starts with no one and ends with no one, there's no one person or thing that's causing it.% The energy of the earth can come through the body in a very unimpeded way, the energy of anything, another person's energy. . . . I experience it as a universal force that is present in every one of my cells and that moves through me.*° In many cases, not only do ravers recognize that energy is being generated, but they also seem to be able to consciously work with the energy by moving it and channeling it in specific ways. I like to dance on the dance floor and move the energy around, around me and through me. It's about energy manipulation for me. I manipulate my energy in a conscious way. You're weaving energy around. You're moving energy in. I feel like that's what I'm doing. When I'm dancing and I'm cleaning out all this garbage, inviting new energy in, and working with it, that kind of realignment of my energy is absolutely grounding, it's refreshing, it gives me hope, it helps me analyze problems and have a new perspective on things.

It's about channeling energy, for me. I think that would be a primary, the channeling energy is a big part of it, especially when I get into a spinning thing, that really takes it there. But channeling energy and creating sort of like, there's a feeling of a vortex or an elevator or a portal of some kind that's defined by the sound and the perimeter of the dance floor. It has more to do with frequencies of energy that normal society does not allow you to go there into those spaces, into these certain kinds of energy states.

I have distinct memories of, like, balls of energy sweeping a room, hitting everybody in a row, just like shwoo, shwoo, shwoo, spiraling. And you could watch it go. And it was just like hitting people and people are doing their thing. You can get sometimes just a vortex of energy coming out of heaven into the DJ, out of the turntable and into the speakers and into the people. And you can just see this energy, you know, almost a physical wave downloading into everyone.

The experience of energy can also go beyond specific formations to include the entirety of the dance floor as a unified energetic field, a term used by several ravers. There's an interesting phenomenon that occurs with speakers. You can take two subwoofers and let's just say that they're running at 110 DV and they have a certain amount of voltage through it. If the speakers are in phase, when you put them next to each other, they actually increase the output even though no more energy has been put into it. And I think what happens is, when you have a group of people in sympathetic resonance, not just individually but in this group, you start producing a field that is generating more energy than any one person could accomplish on their own. And this energy is in some way helping to dissolve the programming. And what happens is, you lead an experience like that, you feel like something transcendent has happened.

If the setting's good, and the general vibe of people is good, and people came with positive intention, and they're not too sketched out, and the music's good, you have this kind of feedback looping effects that start to happen, and everything builds on itself. For one thing, people get tuned to each other by the process of seeing each other, hugging, connecting, and then moving together on the dance floor, and all of these different components start to feed into one another and it just creates a spiraling energy field.

When you dance with people in this way over time, one of the things that becomes totally evident is the oneness, that we're all moving in this field, this vibrational field. What is even more remarkable is that this field also seems to include access to spiritual realms as well. This was clearly articulated when I asked one of my interviewees about his use of the words "vortex" and "portal" and pressed him to say more: "There's a feeling of a vortex that you get from the dance floor, where the vortex is going—it's like it is connecting different levels somehow, which is similar to what the shamans probably visualize with their whole thing of going up a world tree, although I don't generally have that kind of imagery myself, for the most part. But there's a feeling of making a connection between different realms somehow and allowing a flow to happen between those worlds."

Another image or metaphor that traditionally expresses the idea of access to spirits and spiritual worlds is that of a vertical connection that begins in the earth and touches the divine realm as it reaches upward. This is an image that goes all the way back to shamanism and the axis mundi, or the world tree that stands at the center of the universe. In fact, one raver specifically used the image of a tree in trying to express this connection: "It's like having the experience of seeing the illusory nature of reality, or seeing it through a different lens where my body is not just my body, my little window to the world walking around. Suddenly, it's like this entity and I step out for a moment and experience it from a different angle. And experience, let's say, myself as a leaf; the leaf is just one little element on this tree but it's part of a little branch, which is part of a big branch, which is connected in the root system, and everything is branching off from everything else at all different levels. I see that unfolding in my moves as I'm flowing with the music."

In a more general sense, the idea of verticality as a connection between different worlds was mentioned by several ravers: "There's that connection I always feel going down into the earth. It's just a very core connection to warm, deep earth. And I feel an upward connection to the divine." "I have a transcendent quality to my experiences. I have a lot of vertical connection." "My experience of my body was just this pure column of energy, it was just this pure connection from top to bottom of this pulsing, the beat just pulsed right through me and I could not stop. . . . I just remember breathing in and feeling this rush from way above my head to way below my feet." "Some of the techno is affecting the whole vertical dimension, so that the body will get a sense of both grounding and being very connected to the transpersonal. I'm getting that sense of both with techno."

What is interesting about this vertical connection to the divine or the spiritual realms is that there is also a connection to the earth, the body, and physical reality that is happening at the same time. In fact, just as with the image of a field, the physical and spiritual are integrated into a unified whole.

The Presence of Spirit(s)

These images of a unified field or a vertical connection provide a framework for understanding how it is possible for someone to experience the presence of spirits on the dance floor at raves. And, while there are many ravers and electronic dance-music aficionados who are uncomfortable with framing their experiences in spiritual terms, on the other side of the spectrum, many of the ravers I interviewed had no trepidation whatsoever in speaking about spirits in a clear and unmistakable manner: "There's all sorts of different forces and spirits in the world and some can come and visit, have things to say to you or through you." "I sense various spirits that help me in the other world, you know, spirits that I talk to.1 I operate in a belief that this world is filled with energies and entities and forces that we have just, in our Western way of perceiving things, very limited concern for.1% There’s this awareness of other beings, of other creatures, forms, something. What is more, it is not simply that spirits are present in the dance-floor experience at raves, but that ravers can develop a conscious and mutually beneficial relationship with them: While we’re dancing at the event physically, we also have a lot of help on the other side dancing with us, moving energy on the other side for us, TRANCE FORMATION 89 and they want us to live beautiful lives as much as we want to live beautiful lives and they’re willing to help us if we have a way of connecting with them and inviting them to participate with us... . The light beings, the ones you really want to be dealing with, are polite. And they'll wait for an invitation. And the guys you don’t want to deal with are impolite and you have to keep them out—you know, the darker ones. Spirits are just like people. People are spirits. And there’s people you want to invite in your home and there’s people you don’t want to invite in your home. It’s just common sense. And the same with spirits. There are spirits that you want to invite into your ceremonies and there are spirits you don’t want to invite, that you want to keep out. And that’s part of what the ceremonial container is about.1°5 When we're in a tribal dance culture sort of situation, we are even further vulnerable to whatever energies are present or being released, for that matter, into the atmosphere. And I’ve heard from healers or friends of mine that this is cause for one to make sure you clear your energy field after you've been at a gathering of that nature, because you may have accumulated excess energies or dark energies that were released unconsciously that have looked for a vehicle and they find you. So that said, I think I’ve had experiences where I consciously will say, I dedicate this dance to my relationship with the planet, with the environment where I'm finding myself dancing, with the ancestors of that land, with the elemental forces, using dance as a way to actually actively engage communication, and feel myself in harmony.1% I’m shamanically inviting those spirits in and asking them to flow through those that are open, as DJ.1°.” In these quotes, people are discussing spirits in the plural, implying a multiplicity. However, other ravers use the word spirit in the singular form: At those times I’m really glimpsing how spirit is, there’s a true is-ness of spirit in this endless creation, this vibrational play, that I get to see. It carries through to my own life. In other words, I get to see more and more that spirit is this endlessly moving creating playful energy that the dance has made very apparent to me.1°8 Checking in with spirit is how I’ve always thought about it. For me, spirit is not something out there but something that manifests.1 I became a little less human and a little bit more spirit.1"° 90 TRANCE FORMATION Still other ravers have formulated things in a kind of spiritual hierarchy that includes both the plural and the singular: There’s spirits of all kinds and then there’s the Great Spirit.!" From a shamanic viewpoint, also, if you want to go up the ladder, you can also talk about angelic beings who want to participate and you can talk about God-consciousness that wants to participate. I mean, as we reach up to God, God is reaching down to us. We meet in the middle." Possession

In my previous book, Traces of the Spirit, I examined the influence of Yoruba and Fon possession religions on American popular music. I followed the route of this musical-religious complex as it came to the Americas in the slave trade and went through a series of transformations to survive and adapt to the radically different circumstances of the New World.

In their original West African context, possession dances were ceremonial gatherings where drum ensembles and singers supplied beat-driven polyrhythmic music, and initiates danced themselves into ecstatic trance states. The primary metaphor for possession is that of the rider and the horse, where the possessing spirit is the controlling rider, and the dancer is the horse.

When the Yoruba and Fon were brought to the United States as slaves, their religions were outlawed, but many of their musical practices and experiential states were preserved in the cultural arena of African American 'secular' entertainment musics like jazz and blues, albeit in a highly transformed fashion.4 These musics then formed the basis for what was to become rock and roll when it crossed over to a mainstream white audience, carrying within it this hidden religious sensibility.

As rock and roll evolved into a major cultural force and spawned a variety of different musical youth subcultures, including the rave scene, several generations of Americans of all classes and ethnicities came of age under the influence of this hidden religious sensibility, which became part and parcel of the fabric of our common cultural heritage.

I mention all of this in exploring the idea of the presence of spirits on the dance floor at raves because many ravers' descriptions of their experiences sound uncannily like the possession experience of the rider and the horse:

I feel like, for me, another force takes over and I let go and my body just starts doing this dance, which is more intricate and patterned and fractalized than anything I could possibly come up with if I was actually trying to do it with my head. So my mind lets go and I'm watching myself, possibly even from a space slightly outside of myself. And just executing this geometric spiraling pattern.

There is a point that, when you achieve it, it's truly wonderful and it's kind of a mystical thing where the music literally—I mean, this all sounds so trite—where the music really sorts its teeth into you... my boyfriend always says, "It's got you," or, "It's got me." And it's that kind of thing where the music just completely—it's in you, it's around you, and your body is moving despite yourself.10 For me, it's also a feeling of something bigger than me looking through me and participating in what I'm doing, being aware of itself through me and through other people. And for me, the experience is recognizing myself looking at myself through other people, and feeling that.11

Moreover, it is not only the dancers who are having this kind of experience, but the DJs as well: When I'm doing my best DJing, it's the exact same thing, something hops in and takes over. I see my hands do things on the mixer they've never done in practice that sound amazing on the sound system. And everyone is getting off, just going nuts, when I get in that space as a DJ. I was completely in a trance state. It seemed like I could just do no wrong. And, in those times, I feel like the spirit's taking over. I definitely feel like there is some spirit force that comes over my body. Someone, something is assisting me. I've talked about it with a couple of friends. They agree that something just sort of takes them over. I don't know what is guiding me that way. I can just assume that it's a great mixture of my talent and a spirit that's taking over the set. I feel like something is traveling through me, that I am a servant of something. This sense of being so deeply in service to something, like I'm a conduit for something, and all I'm doing is anything that's happening through me—it's like, it's happening, I'm making it happen in a trance formation sense, but also not at all, there's something that's traveling through me, there's something that's coming through me that I'm expressing or I'm helping to deliver. I'm in service to something higher that's going on, something bigger than me. I am part of some sort of beautiful transcendent thing that exists but we don't have access to it all the time. I'm a servant of the vibe. I am a priestess of the church. I do have a sense of opening to something larger than myself when I play. I do have a sense of being divinely guided in the choices of the music and, when I'm truly in a flowing place, the sense of what to play is just coming. That's the place where, as a DJ, I like to get to, where each piece of music is just flowing from one to the next. And I believe that I can most help people enter that state of flow when the music is happening that way, when it's just coming through me.

Interestingly, in all of these quotes, no one specified what spirit was coming through them in these situations, which seems to indicate that this awareness of spirits in the dance-floor experience at raves is in an early developmental stage, especially compared with West African and Afro-Diasporic traditions that can skillfully identify the particular spirit and its domain of expertise. In all of the interviews, there were only two instances where anyone came close to identifying a particular spirit. The first was as follows: One of the energies of the heart that we worked with was what this teacher called a Christ force. And I love that one. It's this massive warmth. It's this huge benevolent, compassionate—it is grace. I do a lot of body work and oftentimes I will invoke the Christ force and that sends this chain reaction of all this warmth and this energetic flow, even when I'm not dancing. It's a label for something that I also often experience on the dance floor, often will invoke, although not intentionally . . . one just kind of happens with the other.

The second was when, in framing my question on this subject, I used the example of Kali, the fierce Hindu goddess of destruction, as contrasted with the serenity and enlightened quality of the Buddha, to illustrate the vast difference in types of spiritual energies that exist, and a DJ was able to see that contrast in her own experiences: The experience that I had the very first time I went out and DJed, and had that experience of humility, it was very churchlike, sacred, benevolent But then, there are other times when I’ve DJed, like at Burning Man, and a huge dust storm was happening. All of a sudden, there were all these people in the dome, and I was playing a serious tribal set. The energy and force were the same, but the manifestation of it was different. When you said Kali, as opposed to Buddha, I immediately identified with that. There’s something up here that’s the highest, and then there’s this manifestation of it, the energy of it’s a little bit different, though the purpose of it is the same. And that is this thought of being in service and serving this higher good and helping create higher good and helping enable higher good and helping enable beauty and truth and freedom—but the manifestation of it could be a Kali manifestation that’s kind of aggressive, and “urrr!” And then there’s the Buddha manifestation that is this beautiful mid-tempo groovy, sensual thing. But the overarching thing or force that it’s coming from is the same. 13

The identification in both these cases is still pretty nonspecific. Nevertheless, the language of all of these descriptions does seem to confirm that something akin to possession is happening, and this is remarkable in and of itself. As far as a more specific identification of particular spirits, I should also mention the events put on by the Oracle crew in Seattle, which has designed its own Tarot deck consisting of twenty-three images, each representing a spiritual archetype. Every rave they produce is based on one of these images, and they are very clear that the whole point of the event is to manifest that particular archetype: "What we have been finding, through this process, which has been really amazing, is the archetypes absolutely play themselves out in our lives. .. . So they really are our teachers and the Oracle literally is its own entity. And it just tells us how it works day by day. And we’re ultimately in service to what it’s asking us to do as a community.!4"

While it is common for many rave crews to name their events based on spiritual themes or figures, the Oracle is unique in that they are consciously trying to manifest these archetypes, not only on the dance floor at these events, but in the larger life of their community. It is a subject worth investigating more thoroughly and, accordingly, I will examine the Oracle in much greater detail in the next chapter on the ritual and ceremonial dimensions of raves. 

Or coming from a spiritually powerful background but not having it anymore, not having that spiritual background of their upbringing to support them anymore, and coming . . . and finding it again, or finding it for the first time.18 Another more general term that is widely used by ravers also appears in this quote—spiritua/—and it is often used interchangeably with the word spirituality. It seems appropriate to conclude this chapter with some quotes from ravers on this subject. It's definitely a spiritual experience. And I never had any spirituality before, so this was my first time that I had ever experienced that.!"" TRANCE FORMATION I consider it to be a very spiritual experience. In fact, I can say that prior to doing that, my sense of spirituality was pretty weak, pretty undeveloped, pretty dormant in me. . . . I definitely felt a very strong sense of spirituality.100 It showed me true spirituality, from within flowing out of myself and joining it with other people. Undoubtedly the most spiritual feeling I've ever had.!119 The Oracle, Seattle, WA, 2003. Photograph courtesy of Shawn "Skoi" Lass (Archivist@oracle.com).

TECHNO TRIBAL CHURCH: THE RITUAL AND CEREMONIAL FORMS OF RAVE

In the last chapter, ravers spoke at length about the sacred nature of their powerful experiences on the dance floor at raves and beyond. These experiences are extraordinary in and of themselves, particularly in a secularized world where genuine, transformative, religious experience is extremely rare. What is even more extraordinary, however, is that these experiences are not accidental or even unusual, but are instead the products of events that are deliberately designed and consciously constructed to facilitate just such experiences. Raves do this by combining certain identifiable structural components (e.g., DJ-mixed electronic dance music, lights and visuals, decorations and altars, opening and closing ceremonies, and so forth) in a consistent manner that has proven effective and reliable at producing these powerful experiential states. Used in this way, these structural components of raves function as a ritual technology, and the rave itself can be understood as a religious ceremony, a view confirmed by ravers:

There are some basic elements to ceremony that engender primary religious experience. . . . For me, all of the effort that I do for ceremony, and I see the purpose of ceremony, is engendering that. From what I understand of how it works, and how it works for me, is the ceremony is part of creating the container for that experience.1

There are two important and complementary aspects to the ritual dimensions of raves, and I will examine both in detail in this chapter. The first is what ritual studies scholars have called ritualization, a term used to describe the repetition of certain activities or practices in a consistent and identifiable manner.1 In terms of raves, this would include activities or practices such as planning, publicity, set-up, transportation, DJing, dancing, chilling out, opening and closing ceremonies, breaking down the rave at the end, and the "after-party." It also includes the temporal sequencing of such activities, the spatial arrangement, and the roles people play. The second aspect is the implicit understanding that the goal of these ritualized activities is to facilitate powerful experiential states and a connection to the sacred. Here I draw on the ritual studies work of historian of religions Jonathan Z. 

Smith, who argues that ritual serves as a kind of focusing lens through which the ordinary "becomes sacred by having our attention directed to it in a special way." This aspect is seen not only in the explicitly spiritual orientation of a number of structural components such as themes and archetypes, decorations and visuals, opening and closing ceremonies, altars, and the incorporation of material from specific religious traditions, but also in the overall intention of both the organizers and the participants. As the creators of the Oracle events in Seattle eloquently articulate it, the goal is to "call upon new ritual experiences based on the wisdom of our own culture, creating sacred space, transformational experiences, and art with intention."

The Weekly Rhythm and Comparisons to Church

As I have shown in the last chapter, newcomers typically begin their involvement in rave culture with a conversion experience. Following this experience, ravers often immerse themselves completely in the scene by going to raves once a week or even more frequently. "It [the rave experience] blew me away and suddenly I found myself going to parties every weekend."5 "It definitely, for a good number of years, was all I did and all of my friends were doing the same. . . . Everything we did revolved around going out to parties and going out to clubs and stuff like that."6 "There was a time where it was several nights in a week, you know, five, six nights in a week, we'd be going out somewhere and just dancing and carrying on."7

Considering that raves are typically all-night affairs that require enormous outputs of physical energy (and, for many, the ingestion of consciousness-altering drugs), this kind of temporal frequency and regularity of practice is strong evidence of the central importance of the rave as an ongoing ritual in their lives. For many ravers, this weekly rhythm led to comparisons with church:

"Raving was Saturday but, suddenly, raving was Sunday morning, too. We used to talk about [how] we should just find an old church and throw a rave every Saturday night on into Sunday. It was my first hit of religion as far as something organized."8 "We were all sitting around at the end of one [Saturday night] Sunday morning tweaking our brains out. And we were going, 'Yeah, we really should start a Sunday morning thing and keep the vibe going.' And my friend Frank said, 'Yeah, and we should call it Church because that's what it is. I mean, I go to a club on Sunday morning for my church.' And so we did . . . We actually started another one-off kind of thing that went on intermittently and we called it Church."9

Although, at first glance, this comparison to church may seem superficial, on closer examination, it is actually very accurate. Just as churchgoers attend church consistently, so ravers attend raves regularly, often on a weekly basis, and they regard them as a central activity in their lives. Just as with churchgoing, there is a consistent ritual structure that ravers can rely on. Just as with church, they experience a sense of communal solidarity and bonding with their fellow participants. And, finally, just as with church, they experience a connection to the sacred that recharges them and carries over into their day-to-day lives, providing them with meaning, direction, and purpose. In fact, as I will show in detail later in this chapter, raves and churches have had an interesting history of interconnection, beginning with the Reverend Chris Brain's "Rave Masses" in Sheffield, England, in 1993, and continuing to today with Episcopal priest Matthew Fox's "Techno Cosmic Masses" in Oakland, California. 100 TRANCE FORMATION Ritualized Time

In addition to the regular weekly sequencing, there is a strongly ritualized temporal sequencing of activities within raves. First, there may be a period of time spent tracking down the location of a rave through phone calls and driving to informational checkpoints. Raves usually start no earlier than 9:00 or 10:00 p.m., and the dance floor(s) may not get full until 11:00, 12:00, or even later. Many raves have opening ceremonies, which typically precede or follow the first DJ set. These ceremonies will be examined later in this chapter.

DJs spin two- to three-hour sets, starting slowly and then building to peaks. A good set includes several peaks, leading dancers on a musical journey. Dancers need breaks to recuperate, and there are chill rooms for this purpose. In the course of the evening, there is a rhythmic temporal oscillation between the intensity of the dance floor and the relaxing break of the chill room.

The overall peak of the rave, in terms of density of crowds and intensity of dancing, typically happens between 12:00 midnight and 3:00 a.m. This is the most highly coveted DJ time slot, and headline DJs are usually scheduled during this time. The dancers have been dancing long enough to be well warmed up and inducted into deep trance states, and those taking drugs are well feeling their effects. DJs tend to keep the musical peaks going for longer periods, and the dancers have their most powerful experiences of the night. Each DJ has his own strategies and techniques for this, which will be discussed in greater detail later in this chapter.

Sometimes, this peak time on the dance floor can go on for many hours, keeping the intensity level high until dawn. In many raves, however, there is an energetic scaling back in the pre-dawn hours, when the crowd thins out and the music becomes more downtempo and ambient. This time can be very sweet and intimate, in which the energy and connections established over the course of the night can be more personally expressed and savored.

Finally, for those who stay all night, the onset of dawn and the light of the new day provide another kind of peak, one that culminates the whole experience with a sense of uplift and completion. There is a feeling of having gone on a collective journey together and arriving at the end transformed, renewed, and unified. Many raves formalize this sense of completion by concluding with a closing ceremony. Organizers then begin the tedious process of breaking down the space, which can take several hours, often assisted by participants who have stayed all night. After this, many crews have an "after-party" at another smaller location with downtempo or ambient music. The after-party is an opportunity to decompress from the rave and continue to hang out with fellow ravers in a more intimate setting. The nocturnal nature of the rave, followed by daytime recuperation, leads to a lifestyle in which the daily rhythms of ravers are nearly the opposite of the mainstream world—up all night and sleeping during the day. Rave as Rite of Passage: Turner’s Concepts of Liminality, Communitas, and Anti-Structure

This nocturnal lifestyle is a powerful example of the liminal aspect of raves. Liminality is a term coined by anthropologist Victor Turner to describe the “betwixt-and-between” state of initiates in traditional rites of passage. In his classic book The Ritual Process, Turner developed a number of important concepts that laid the foundation for the field of ritual studies, and several of these concepts are useful in bringing out the ritual dimensions of raves.

In traditional cultures, rites of passage mark the transition from one phase of life to the next, and one of the most important of these transitions is from adolescence to adulthood. The hormone-driven rebellious quest for intense experience characteristic of those in this age group is often channeled into various types of initiatic trials, such as body mutilation, fasting, dancing until exhaustion, use of psychotropic plants, and going on vision quests. While there are many mixed-age raves that include people in their thirties and older, the vast majority of ravers are in their late teens and early twenties, and raves clearly serve the function of just such a rite of passage, an initiation experience for many of them.

Traditional rites of passage emphasize the liminal quality of this transition from adolescence to adulthood by separating the initiates from the rest of society, stripping them of their normal social identity, placing them in their own temporary form of alternative community—which Turner called communitas—and initiating them through a powerful encounter with the sacred. Raves do all of these things in almost exactly the same sequence. Furthermore, Turner identified the trajectory of these rites of passage in a threefold arc of movement from structure to anti-structure and back to structure, in which the middle stage of anti-structure contains the heart of the initiation. Again, the same arc can be found in the rave, with the dance floor as the perfect example of anti-structure where initiation takes place.

The enormous difference between the rite of passage of traditional cultures and those of raves, however, is that traditional cultures provide a framework within which young people can complete their initiation and be reintegrated back into society in their new social status as adults, and raves do not. One might argue that this leaves many ravers in a state of permanent liminality and adolescence, where they function at the margins of mainstream society, seemingly unwilling to grow up and become adults. While there is some truth to this critique, in my experience there are just as many ravers who are fully functioning, responsible adults with real jobs and careers, children, and families who are making important contributions to society.

Ritualized Space

In addition to having a temporal aspect, ritual also has a spatial aspect; in other words, ritualized activities unfold in space as well as in time. Ritual takes place in a controlled environment where everything is in its proper place and all activity unfolds in the correct sequence. In this regard, Smith has emphasized the importance of place, arguing that “a sacred place is a place of clarification (a focusing lens) where men and gods are held to be transparent to each other.” Furthermore, he notes, “if we take seriously the notion of a temple, a sacred place, as a focusing lens, the ordinary . . . becomes significant, becomes sacred. . . .”

Raves are a perfect illustration of this point—particularly the warehouse rave. What could be more ordinary and secular than a warehouse, whose drab, faceless environment is the embodiment of utilitarian functionality? Yet raves consistently transform decrepit warehouses into magical places of wonder. Here is an account of just such a transformation from the early days of the Los Angeles rave scene:

People would break into warehouses, huge monstrous warehouses downtown, and just spend days decorating and putting the sound systems in and black lights and Day-Glo paint. It was madness, always madness. Now, this was back in the day of map points, secrecy, you know, it wasn’t just ¢here’s a location. You find the flyer, you call the number the night of the party, it would tell you to go to this location, and you go to that location and they tell you to go to his location, [and then] you go to that location. Then you pay your money there and they actually finally tell you where the party’s at. So, everyone was like a secret agent, the whole outlaw thing. That sort of mystery just added to the excitement of what you were getting involved with. When you finally did arrive, you'd see like five hundred to a thousand people just going crazy, dressed up in costumes.

The mystery and excitement involved with the step-by-step process of simply getting to the location is another example of the liminal aspect of raves. It can also be seen as a kind of pilgrimage, which is another form of religious ritual that has a strong spatial dimension.

The account continues: How the warehouse was set up—it was three massive rooms but they were separated by brick walls. So, these guys came in through the main entrance and broke holes through each wall and put slides in one side and steps in the other so you entered up stairs to go into the next room and, to get out, you'd go through a slide to get down. Huge rope swings hanging from the ceiling. They even put, in one room. . . a small school bus totally painted in Day-Glo paint and it had black lights. So, after going to around three map points and then arriving in a scene like that, actually, it’s a bit overwhelming, it’s like an assault on your senses, but in a good way. It’s very much like being a kid going to Disneyland. And, to finish the metaphor, as we all know, for a kid, going to Disney-land is definitely a numinous experience.

The warehouse spaces are often very large and dark, with an almost cavelike atmosphere and an urban, postindustrial ambience. Bright multi-colored decorations, elaborate lights, and projected visuals are an important part of enhancing the visual field so that it has a strong psychedelic and cybernetic feel. Just as DJs invest time, energy, and money to hone their musical craft, decorative artists and light technicians do the same for their visual craft. For many ravers, this visual element is just as critical in their experience as the music: [he lights and visuals are really important to me. It definitely alters my consciousness. It’s crucial to have visuals and lights for me. The lights and the setting, the decorations, and all that—they bring you out of your ordinary self. . . . It prepares you to go into a transcendent state. The lighting and the decorations and all that wonderful beauty just brings out a state of awe when you walk into it. In many cases, there are also altars set up throughout the space that contain fabric, figurines, paintings, candles, incense, and various assorted sacred objects. (This is a subject I will examine in more detail shortly.) The altars, decorations, lights, and other visuals are often organized around particular spiritual themes. For example, for the subgenre of electronic dance music called Goa trance (or psychedelic trance), which originated in Goa, India, and subsequently spread to England, Germany, and the United States, rave visuals are likely to include images of various Hindu deities such as Ganesha, Kali, Krishna, and Vishnu, among others. The visual and decorative aesthetic of the rave also extends to the ravers themselves. Brightly colored psychedelic-patterned clothes are de rigueur and the designs often have a high-tech, cybernetic edge to them. Hair styles also reflect this aesthetic, with brightly colored dyes, dreadlocks, and unusual shaved patterns being quite commonplace. Many ravers have small high tech accessories such as glow-in-the-dark wands (called glowsticks) or flashing lights. Modification of the body itself occurs in the form of tattoos and multiple body piercings. The pain involved in such procedures closely parallels the ordeal aspect of traditional initiation rites. In this regard, the phrase "future primitive" is a pretty accurate summation of a lot of the rave fashion aesthetic.

In some rave circles, this aesthetic is important: Once you adopt the look of a raver, it definitely can open doors later. If you look like a raver, people are going to not be suspicious of you. They're going to tell you all kinds of crazy things. On the other hand, there has always been a strong element of the rave scene that has consciously devalued the importance of any particular fashion aesthetic and the judging of people based on external appearance. As one veteran of the original raves in England said, "In Britain, it’s so much to do about what you're wearing and how you're talking and who you know, etcetera, etcetera. It just wasn’t like that at the raves. You could go in designer clothes or you could go in a tee shirt and nobody cared. It was very nonjudgmental." Thus, in addition to the future primitive fashion aesthetic, there are also plenty of ravers dressed in nondescript clothing, as well as in a wide variety of eclectic styles. Many raves have multiple rooms with dance floors, each decorated in a different style, with DJs spinning different types of music. At such raves, one can move from room to room, depending on which atmosphere one is most drawn to at the time. Another option in this regard at most raves is the chill room, a quiet space where one can escape from the sonic assault of the dance floor music. The chill room is usually filled with couches, beds, soft cushions, or carpeting, where ravers can recline and relax. The lighting is low and, often, there is soothing downtempo or ambient music being played. People can have conversations here because it is possible to actually hear what is being said. It is a space where more intimate personal interactions can take place or people can just lie down and catnap. Most raves also have some sort of a bar area where water is available, as well as, often, chai tea, other beverages, or even fruit or other solid foods. The dance floor at a rave is configured in a very different spatial arrangement from that of a performance or concert in that there is usually no stage with a performer as the main focal point of the crowd’s attention. There is also no bank of speakers facing unidirectionally, but instead speakers that are distributed equally throughout the space. Therefore, for the most part, the dancers’ attentions are focused primarily on the dance floor as active participants and cocreators: When you're on the dance floor, who you're looking at, if you’re looking at anybody, is each other, and that’s really a big difference. You're not watching the stage; you're looking at each other.” Sometimes, one focuses on friends and other dancers who are in close proximity, and certain kinds of movement interactions can develop; but to a large degree, most of the dancers are deep within their own interior trance state, not directing their attention outward at all. If there is any reliable external focal point, it is often the DJ, who has a special space for her equipment and records, which is off to the side or slightly raised or even in a small, self-contained booth. Sometimes a significant percentage of the dancers are paying attention to the DJ, with their bodies facing in her direction. In fact, there is a high degree of interaction between the dancers and the DJ, a topic I will examine in greater detail shortly.

Conscious Recognition of the Importance of Ritual and Ceremony

The role of the DJ, altars, opening and closing ceremonies—all of these are important examples of the ritual and ceremonial dimensions of raves, and each is worthy of close and thorough examination. Yet, before undertaking such an examination I feel it is important to establish that, for many ravers, these components are intentionally used as a ritual technology to facilitate spiritual and religious experiences. In other words, there is a conscious recognition of the importance of ritual and ceremony in the context of the rave and, conversely, of the importance of the rave as a ritual and ceremonial context. Some ravers are highly articulate on this subject:

"I find it very important to do it in a ceremonial context. . . . I think people really have an innate craving for a spiritual context in our lives... so I think people will create ceremony in their lives, given the opportunity. Because there is such a spiritual potential and content in raves, people are . . . creating ceremonies in them.”

"I'm a big fan of ritual... I've had some incredible experiences at rituals in the RS and Sweet! has some really fantastic rituals. But, yes, I think overall, absolutely, whether it’s done in the community or alone or with a few friends before, however it’s executed, it’s a big deal. . . . I like the intention of opening the space. I like what they do. . . . And they would be a very different event if they didn’t happen, without a doubt.”

This conscious recognition of the importance of ritual and ceremony can be seen in a number of different ways, beginning with raver terminology. Intention "We are engaging our intention. We're setting intention and we're trying to connect with what the fruit of that intention is." Setting intention, what your intention is as you enter into the space and enter into the ceremony, is key towards the kind of experience that you have." It's just such a catalyst for really cool things to happen because of that intention. I'm trying to think of a better way to put it, but it really is because that's what everyone wants. That's what we're doing there. It's not a party. And that makes such a difference. That is the thing that sets Moontribe apart from pretty much anything else [in the Los Angeles rave scene]—there's a real element of intention to it."

This aspect is so important to the Tribal Harmonix crew in British Columbia that their annual New Year's retreat is named Intention. The basic intention of most raves is to have a smooth-running, safe event that has a good "vibe" and that "goes off." As far as raves with ritual and ceremony, the general intention is to create "sacred" space in which people can have a meaningful and transformative experience. There are also more specific intentions tied to the themes of particular raves, which I will examine in more detail a bit later in this chapter.

The Container

In discussing the use of ritual and ceremony to create sacred space, ravers often use the word container. The Rhythm Society, for example, writes the following on the information sheet each participant must read: "A foundational element of our divine celebrations is the creation of a ritual safe 'container' in time and space." In my interviews with them, ravers elaborated on this idea of the container:

"The ceremony is part of creating that container for that [religious] experience. You've got the lighting, the music, the space, the security so you don't have to worry about ruffians showing up off the street, and also, ceremony is just another aspect of it, but one which in our culture isn't really very well understood. There are some basic elements to ceremony that engender primary religious experience. Among them are an energetic container, so that the experience can be a sweeter one and less problematic. Having really good energetic grounding works a lot better because the more you ground, the higher up you can reach, the more transcendent you can get, if you're well-grounded. Having a good perimeter is good. ... What else? What kind of help and spirits are invited to participate from the other side, in a shamanic term or way to look at it? There are spirits that you want to invite into your ceremonies and there are spirits you don't want to invite, that you want to keep out. And that's part of what the ceremonial container is about."

"I'm stunned by how important the container is. . . . It's shocking to me how important it is to have. I'm really spoiled, between the Rhythm Society and various groups like it who really know how to create a vibe. They really know how to make that container beautiful. And I'm convinced it has to do with the whole clarity of the group, about why they're doing it. . . . Everybody's bought off on that; that's the point. And so everything informs that goal, everything informs that idea. . . . Connecting with spirit, connecting with each other through spirit, connecting with oneself. Recognizing one's own needs in a container that's safe." So that’s why I say for me the ceremony is very important because it creates a container to make the energy more palatable." It was in San Francisco that a big shift occurred for me. I experienced a different style of party that awakened me to the possibility of what could occur as an experience that creates a container for potential transformation for people.

There is a spatial metaphor in the image of the container, a physical object like a bowl or a box, that holds the contents of the rave and sets boundaries for what is inside and outside. Everything inside the container is safe, grounded, and in its proper place. Most importantly, everything inside the container is there in service of the stated intention of the rave, and it is held in place for the duration of the rave.

Opening and Closing Ceremonies

Many raves begin with an opening ceremony and end with a closing ceremony, demonstrating their explicitly spiritual and religious nature. These ceremonies are not window dressing; they create sacred space and facilitate religious experience. Typically, the opening ceremony occurs at the very beginning of the rave, before the DJs have begun playing music, or after the first DJ’s set, around 11:00 p.m. or 12:00 midnight. The music is brought down to a low volume or there is no music at all, making it easier to hear the ceremonial leaders, who often have a microphone.

Ceremonies start with a call for quiet and for everyone to come into a circle. Announcements and perhaps a brief explanation of the theme of the rave and the structure of the ceremony usually follow. The ceremonies are eclectic and diverse, drawing elements from various spiritual and religious traditions and cultures. Some ceremonies include breathing together, chanting the Hindu seed syllable om, smudging people with sage, calling in the four directions, and leading a guided meditation or visualization.

In general, closing ceremonies are simpler and shorter than opening ceremonies. They are less energetic and patient, but there is a more intimate bond among those who have stayed up all night together. The closing ceremony often involves gathering everyone into a circle, holding hands, and offering a prayer of thanks. In other cases, it is more elaborate. For example, when the Rhythm Society’s events took place in the Episcopal Church of St. John the Evangelist in San Francisco, as they did for seven years, the closing ceremony would end with someone playing Bach organ fugues live on the church organ, and ravers could watch the light of the new day as it illuminated the beautiful stained glass windows of the church.

TRANCE FORMATION
Each crew has its own particular approach to ritual and ceremony, creating its own distinctive style and feeling, and participants come to expect this. The Moontribe is a great example:

One of the things that really set the Moontribe apart on that spiritual level that was totally spontaneous but deep at the same time was the hand-holding circles. You'd have that somewhere in ’94 or ’95, the hand-holding circles that Moontribe started to kick in. And that became a defining feature of Moontribe. . .. Almost every single Moontribe, at least once and sometimes at multiple points, you'd have big hand-holding circles start to spontaneously form. And then freeform chanting will go on—om, whatever, we'll jump up and down, different things kind of come out of it. And there’s usually a point where it breaks and everybody rushes into the center and there’s this giant mush pile, basically.*°

Another key Moontribe ritual is watching the sunrise in the desert: That was also the first time in the morning, you know, the sun came up and people just sort of spontaneously made a circle holding hands and started dancing around. . . . It was all about the sun coming up. That was the focal point of the event, was the sunrise. . .. People would just find a little hill someplace and watch it come up and the sun cascade in the whole valley without any cars or smog or anything. It was definitely—watching the sunrise in the desert with your friends after you've been dancing all night—that’s a good thing.*

While the Moontribe ritual began as a spontaneous occurrence involving hand-holding, chanting om, and watching the sunrise, the midnight ritual for the Oracle Gatherings in Seattle is a tightly choreographed theatrical performance planned months ahead of time to express the theme of the event, with elaborate costumes, sets, and props. The ritual for the gathering I attended in November 2003, called Ocean Deep, took place on a set decorated with aquatic motifs, began with a procession of masked costumed dancers and stilt walkers accompanied by original electronic music, and culminated with an aerial dance duet on a piece of fabric hung from the ceiling. In my opinion, the Oracle has taken the ritual aspect of raves to its most sophisticated level of articulation thus far and, accordingly, I will explore the Oracle in more detail a bit later.

Those people who plan and lead the ceremonies take their responsibility very seriously and put a lot of time and effort into making sure it runs smoothly and effectively. In this regard, some even go so far as to do preparatory ceremonies before the rave ceremony: I do ceremony usually starting a month or more before our events to invite in the [spirits] we want and keep out the [spirits] we don’t want and start creating a container for events. And there are often people who participate with me. . . . In the last several years, I’ve been doing pipe ceremonies, prayer ceremonies, with the teams as the teams come together at their meetings. And then, usually before an event, I'll go into the space and do a ceremony there. I do a banishing and a warding and a blessing of the space. These preparatory ceremonies entail extra work. Why go to this trouble? First, to ensure the ceremony's success at a spiritual level. One ceremonial planner/leader described this idea with a metaphor:

"The ceremony and the spirits and that kind of ritual, it's more like plumbing or electricity. There are ways to wire a house that work, and I do them that way." Another reason is to protect oneself from negative energy:

"When you plug into the energy of an event with five hundred people and lead a ceremony, if you haven't built a container around it, you don't have the directions, you don't have the elements in place, you don't have all the spirits in place, you don't have your helpers in place, then you're very connected to the energy of the dance, and if you haven't cleaned it out and smoothed it out and saged the place and smudged it off and balanced everything out and got-ten everything contained, then whatever kind of murk or mud passes through that event as a result of not having done the janitorial work beforehand can affect you really strongly."

This level of dedication to preparation for a ceremony is impressive and compares favorably with that undertaken by ceremonial leaders in any religious tradition.

Obviously, not every rave ceremony is going to have that level of forethought and preparation. And not every rave ceremony is going to be successful or effective. In fact, not every rave even has a ceremony at all. However, my overall sense is that the inclusion of ceremonies at raves is becoming more widespread.

The DJ as Ceremonial Leader

In addition to the person or persons who lead opening and closing ceremonies, there is another important figure who can also be considered a ceremonial leader—the DJ. While the DJ's primary concern is to make sure people are dancing and having a good time, on a deeper level, the DJ is responsible for leading dancers into the powerful experiential states that connect them to the sacred. In this regard, the DJ is the de facto ceremonial leader of the rave, the one who guides the participants through their spiritual experience. Both ravers and DJs are very clear on this point, and they often use the words shaman and journey in describing this function:

"You do have a navigator, and I think a lot of people feel that with the DJ—the tribal connection to the shaman guiding you through and bringing you where you to need to go to experience what you need to experience." "I realized I was playing the role of the shaman, having a tribe, and bringing a tribe on this ceremonial ritual. . . . I facilitate realizations and transformations and healings, and all these things are completely shamanic."

"TECHNO TRIBAL CHURCH 113 As a DJ, I see myself taking the crowd on a journey and through a number of different emotions and feeling states. And, at some point, letting all that break open into an ecstatic state. And, over the course of the night, doing this a number of times. And the feeling in the room grows.**

And just like a shaman or any other skilled ceremonial leader, the DJ has a set of tools and strategies he employs to most effectively facilitate the peak dance floor experience. As one veteran raver put it: "A well-structured, a well-done DJ set really builds a flow and an ebb, builds it up and takes it back down again, and can bring you to the peak of something and then take you back down gently."

One of the musical techniques used by DJs to produce these peaks is to gradually increase the beats per minute in a sequence of songs over a period of time: "I will move the crowd up to a high level of energy by gradually increasing the beats per minute over time, and then I will take it to a peak if I can, to some ecstatic peak where I'll just keep going as long as possible. And then, when the crowd seems to fade, or have enough of that, then I will gradually take it down again, rest them for a while, and then bring them up again."

The speed of the music is one thing that the DJ uses to control the peak of the set. You start out playing slower music and it gradually speeds up with each song. . . . If you start out slow and then build it up, then definitely people are kind of forced to go along with it, you’re forced to higher levels of exertion to keep up with it.*4

This increase in tempo, called accelerando in musical terms, has been identified by ethnomusicologist Gilbert Rouget as an extremely effective and nearly universal cross-cultural musical technique for the induction of trance and possession states, particularly in combination with crescendo, an increase in volume and instrumental density."

Not surprisingly, DJs also employ the use of crescendo in their bag of tricks as well: "I like to definitely build up a crescendo and let it all explode. In his groundbreaking book Music and Trance: A Theory of the Relations between Music and Possession, Rouget also identified another nearly universal musical technique to induce trance and possession: the musical motto, a short musical phrase that serves as a kind of triggering device."

Electronic dance music certainly has a multitude of such musical mottoes, and DJs intentionally employ them in their arsenal of techniques. The most popular of these is well described in the following quote: "There’s definite motifs in electronic dance music you can use for a desired effect. If you want to build a peak, you bring in a sixteenth note snare roll and you change the pitch of the snare roll up as it quickens and that just all of the sudden gets everyone’s attention and everyone’s waiting for the payoff. Then you drop out the pounding kick drum and just have one long bass note, and it’s like, Boom! And everyone—all of the sudden—it’s like they hit a bump in a car and they’re floating in the air and they’re about to hit the ground. . . . It’s like the whole room has just opened up. It’s like the floor fell out from under you and you're just floating in space all of the sudden." And when it comes in again, it's like a big kick in the ass. It just sends you flying down this tunnel. In addition to the build-up/drop-out/payoff motto, which is nearly universal in all genres of electronic dance music, there are also musical motives that are more specific to the particular style of electronic dance music, and these vary widely from genre to genre. For example, in jungle, or drum and bass, it is often the thick, distorted, rumbling, sinister bass line that serves as the motive. In trance, the motive can often be the build-up of melodic, arpeggiated, layered synthesizer parts. In diva house, it is usually the soulful female vocal (which is why it is named for the singing diva).

One of the skills of the DJ is knowing when to employ these kinds of motives and other techniques, and this depends to a large degree on paying close attention to the dancers. A good DJ watches the dancers to see how they are responding to the musical flow she is creating and where she can take them with that flow: "I'm basically interacting with the crowd and trying to feel where their energy is that night, where the room can go as a whole, how I can have the most bodies dancing at once, and experiencing the most ecstasy at any one time."

Likewise, the dancers are paying attention to the DJ, especially to let him know when he is in a good flow or creating a peak, often through vocal exclamations or bodily gesticulations. Thus, there is a high level of interaction between the dancers and the DJ that flows both ways: "TECHNO TRIBAL CHURCH 115 I think it's a two-way thing. Not only is the DJ . . . part of this reality that's created somehow slightly outside of the normal day-to-day experience where I'm not really doing it per se, I'm letting go into it and everybody else is letting go into it and collectively we're all getting into this state of ecstasy."

When I'm playing music, I'm actively attempting to connect to as many people in the room as possible, which has become my spiritual thing. When you're in a room and music's playing and people are dancing, the mood is elevated into sometimes, most of the time, in my case, a spiritual realm. People are opened up, people are happy, they're just more open, their hearts are open. So I love that environment. And to be playing music is a complete and total honor to me. So I feel incredibly of service when I'm playing and, ideally, I'm really connected to the people that are there.

These observations identify another important aspect of the DJ as ceremonial leader, the idea that DJing is a spiritual practice through which the DJ accesses the spiritual realm and takes everyone else along with him; as other DJs noted, "I want to facilitate a moving spiritual experience for people, bring out the funk and the soul and the love and the joy, and just let that channel through people. I guess you could say I'm shamanically inviting those spirits in and asking them to flow through those that are open, as DJ."

That was a very defining moment, for me DJing, in that it all clicked for me. So that became a very spiritual thing for me, too. For the first time DJing, I got so into the music that I really lost myself in the music, to where DJing became very—I wasn't even really aware of what I was doing with my hands so much, I was just so into the music and the beats and everything. . . . DJing is more than playing records, people don't realize. I definitely got to the point where I wasn't really thinking about what I was doing. I was in the same place where those people were dancing, where I was DJing, and I was just into the beats. When I get to that place, that's when you rock the dance floor. You're in there, and everyone's on your ride, and you're just taking people for a nice funky dance ride. And for me, performing becomes a very spiritual thing.

In the previous chapter, I compared some of the powerful states attained on the dance floor to the classic possession experience, and this comparison included not only the dancers but the DJs as well. Many of the DJs I interviewed were very cognizant that some larger spiritual force was moving through them:

"It's the exact same as being on the dance floor. When I'm doing my best DJing, it's the exact same thing, something hops in and takes over. I see my hands do things on the mixer they've never done in practice that sound amazing on the sound system. And everybody is getting off, just going nuts, when I get in that space as a DJ."

Usually my greatest sets are the ones [in which] I just get myself out of the way and I just understand. I usually say a prayer to the universe, saying I just ask to be a vessel, you know, and get out of the way, and just to give as much as I can to those people that are here. There'll be situations where I've pulled the wrong record, but it turned out to be the right one. And I realize, it's not me; you know what I mean? It's like I'm doing this, I'm just a vessel, and it's doing itself.

The prayer that this DJ recites before his sets is very similar in function to the prayers in the opening ceremonies at raves. And just as some ceremonial leaders do preparatory work and ceremonies well in advance of the rave, so too do some DJs:

"It's a huge responsibility, you know, because really it's . . . not about just externally changing the lights or this or that—the work has to be done internally. And if the work isn't done internally, then something, it's going to be in the music, it's going to be in the party, it's going to be in these things. And so it's a process where one has to cultivate their own life in order for these things to start. It's kind of like putting into the forge and tempering the metal until you do it so much, the blade cuts through anything."

This idea of cultivating one's own life in the service of the rave indicates a sophisticated spiritual awareness and demonstrates that some ravers are beginning to take the spiritual dimensions of the scene beyond a rudimentary level to the next developmental stage. Several DJs spoke of their role in terms of being of service and feeling honored, and I'd like to include one such quote that uses this language:

"The gift that a DJ gives is a really huge one, and I never really understood that until I started to do it. I really got it the first time I went out and played in front of a bunch of people. . . . It's like creating that vibe, it's being part of that vibe in the sense there is no self, there is simply a flow of energy that has no beginning or end, that starts with no one and ends with no one, there's no one person or thing that's causing it. It's not me because I'm putting a record on, I'm putting the record on because I'm feeling this thing. . . . And then, when that comes out and you see people really getting off and you see people getting the vibe and you see people finding that sweet spot that happens for them, and you experience the energy just kind of moving and flowing, I get this sense of incredible humility, like I am just this tiny thing, not in a bad way, but I am just this thing, and I am so honored to serve." I am so honored to be part of this experience. I am honored to be the conduit for the energy that travels through me. I am honored to be the person that people on the dance floor are focusing their energies on.

Q: So you feel like, as a DJ, you're skilled enough to call in different types of energies?
A: Yes, appropriate to whatever is called for.

If the DJ can be considered a ceremonial leader, then ravers can likewise be considered ceremonial participants, and listening and dancing to music are their primary ceremonial practices. Ravers love their electronic dance music and see it as a vehicle through which they connect to the sacred: Music is the enabler to have a primary religious experience, destruction of the ego, sense of oneness with everything or nothingness, or how it is each person describes having that primary religious experience... . Music is a spiritual thing; if you choose to go there, it’s available. . . . Some tracks will take me there immediately, and everything, all the chakras will align and the energy will start shooting out of the top of my head and my whole [experience] will just be electric and I'll be brought to tears because this piece of music is so there, it’s so hit it.°°

Ravers intentionally use the music spun by the DJ as a vehicle to shift their consciousness into powerful experiential states that open access to spiritual realms. And, as we saw in the last chapter, dance and movement are important tools in this process. Moreover, this is not just an individual experience, but a collective one that is often shared by everyone on the dance floor. As one raver put it, The music synchronizes everybody's motion, synchronizes everybody's breathing, synchronizes everybody’s energy, you can just open up into a resonance of energy.*°

TRANCE FORMATION Altars

The DJ’s musical selection provides ravers with an important focusing lens through which sacred energies are generated and configured. Altars do the same thing in physical space and, for this reason, they are far more than just aesthetically pleasing decorations. As one raver put it, It creates a good vibe for people. Setting is an important aspect of it—the altar becomes a focal point, like an anchor for people’s trips and it creates sort of a sacred space.*”

Altars go back to the early days of the rave scene but, in the beginning, they were created spontaneously. For example, the following description is from a Gathering rave in San Francisco in 1990: Thad a friend who was into Temple of Psychic Youth and he started laying out a psychic cross with trash on the dance floor, like making a mini-ritual altar kind of effect, and I tried doing it by collecting water bottles and making a magical circle around his psychic cross. And that was without having much theory about anything.**

Spontaneous altars of a different nature began to appear at Moontribe raves held out in the Mojave Desert: Sometimes people would make big pieces of earth art. Like, one time, I don’t even know who did it, but right before the party started, somebody did a giant swastika in the sand, like dug out, like a trench thirty or forty feet long going both ways. Youd see things like that just pop up. People would do earth art, stacks of rocks, and it was different people doing things at different times without any particular coordination.*®

Over time, however, spontaneous altars began to give way to more formal, planned creations. For example, one veteran West Coast raver remembers the first altar; this woman, Mona Bryant, in San Francisco, I think she started the first altars at the Full Moon parties in 92 or so. These formal altars typically are set on a table covered in fabric, lit by candles and strings of Christmas-type lights, and tend to feature images and icons drawn from a wide variety of religious and spiritual traditions, as well as beautiful objects such as rocks, feathers, crystals, and so forth. Here is a description of a typical altar from a rave in Portland:

The Temple of Sound became one of the first places where I started to really see altars at a rave event. And there were these giant altars up against the front of the decks. Just a lot of different images on them. They had different styles, depending on who created the altar. But a lot of times you’d have Christmas lights underneath fabric, and candles. Really eclectic, they were always extremely eclectic. I guess anyone who saw it would categorize it as New Age, just having Ganesh, Siddhartha Buddha, Mother Mary, you know, every kind of religious iconography, all sort of belched up into one specific altar. And it was called The Altar, and people left various trinkets at the altar. It wasn’t uncommon to see candy bracelets or lollipops, feathers.

While this kind of eclectic syncretism is pretty standard, rave altars can also be designed with a unifying motif, such as one particular religious or spiritual tradition (e.g., Buddhist, Mayan, Wiccan, etc.), an element (e.g., water, fire, earth, air), a season, or a wide variety of other themes, including everything from space aliens to teddy bears. In the San Francisco Bay Area, the Rhythm Society’s events usually have two main altars. The first is called the High Altar, which is designed according to the theme of the event. Participants can place their own sacred objects on this altar, both to contribute their energy to the altar and for their objects to receive energy from the event. The second is called the Sharing Altar. Here, participants place objects as an offering to be given away and also can take objects they feel drawn to. It is not uncommon, in the course of the event, to see people spending time in front of these altars, focusing, praying, and meditating. In fact, many raves have a special meditation or shrine room for just this purpose, and these rooms almost always have an altar designed to help facilitate this. Although not every rave has altars, they are extremely widespread, to the point where one San Francisco raver estimates that “75 to 80 percent have altars or try to at least have a few candles, tapestry around the DJ or in front or on the bar or on the table or wherever, somewhere to keep the element.”

Specific Religious and Spiritual Traditions

Altars illustrate a number of important features of the ceremonial dimensions of raves, the first of which is that they draw from specific religious and spiritual traditions. Many ravers take an eclectic, syncretic approach, acknowledging that all religious and spiritual traditions have something to offer; therefore, there are a wide variety of forms to choose from. One of the co-creators of the Oracle articulated this approach: “I've been influenced by all kinds of religions. And seeing people seeking a deeper connection with God. And, obviously, all religions, all mystical sides of religions are saying the exact same thing.” So that kind of intention came into the tarot deck of "well, we can explore all these religious archetypes or paths and actually learn from them in the process. . . ." This view is shared by many other crews and ravers; one noted, "I'm trying to learn how to do it [ceremony] in our context in a good way and use all those things that I learned along the way in other paths, other traditions, to do that." This kind of approach is clearly seen in rave altars, where images and icons from a wide variety of different traditions are placed alongside each other. It is also seen in the ceremonies themselves, which include practices from a wide variety of traditions combined together in different ways.

What are some of the more popular traditions? Perhaps the most popular influence is from Indian/Hindu traditions. I have already mentioned the Goa/psychedelic trance scene, which began in India and is strongly influenced by its religious ethos, featuring Hindu images of deities like Ganesha, Kali, Krishna, Shiva, and others. Beyond the Goa scene, I have also noted the widespread practice of chanting the Hindu seed syllable om in all sorts of rave ceremonies. Many raves now also offer yoga stretching practice before the start of the dance music.

Other Eastern traditions are popular as well. Buddhist images are very common at raves, and simple Buddhist breathing meditation practices are often used in rave ceremonies. Although less common, Taoist influences are also found in the form of yin/yang symbols and practices like chi kung or tai chi.

In addition to Eastern traditions, another popular influence is that of indigenous cultures. This includes Native American-influenced practices like smudging with burning sage for purification, calling in the four directions, and even pipe ceremonies. The use of Mayan iconography and cosmology is particularly strong among certain rave crews—especially the Mayan calendar, its end date of 2012, and the glyphs associated with it. Shamanism is also very popular, but in a more general way as a metaphor for the rhythmic trance induction of the rave experience and the role of the DJ as a guide for the journey rather than for specific practices, although images from traditional shamanic art often appear at raves.

Wicca is popular as well, as evidenced in images of goddesses, raves held on solstices, equinoxes, and their midpoints, and the use of ritual practices like the spiral dance. The influence of Western magical (magickal) traditions is seen among certain crews and, in this regard, the Temple of Psychic Youth has been particularly influential. It is not unusual to see images such as pentagrams or ritual implements like cauldrons or wands. The Oracle is based on the tarot and also has a strong connection to mystery school traditions.

Other religious and spiritual traditions referenced in raves include African religion, Australian aboriginal religion, Celtic/Druid religion, ancient Egyptian religion, the Kabbalah, Sufism, and many others. In fact, it would be difficult to find a religious or spiritual tradition that has not been incorporated into a rave. This also includes Christianity, which has been conspicuously absent from this discussion thus far, probably because most ravers are alienated from their Christian upbringing and more interested in alternative (and exotic) forms of religion and spirituality. Nevertheless, some of the earliest experiments in combining raves with specific religious traditions were, in fact, Christian. 

For example, in Sheffield, England, in 1993, there were a number of experimental ritual gatherings organized by Reverend Chris Brain, which combined aspects of rave music and dance with a weekly Anglican church service, known as the Nine O'Clock Service, and also as the Rave Mass or Planetary Mass. As one raver remembered them in an online article, “The services, produced by and largely for a young working-class group, incorporated elements of rave-ambient house music, large video screens playing computer generated images and video clips with ecological and social themes, nightclub-style lighting, and the freedom to dance.”¹ Although these gatherings were to end in allegations of sexual misconduct that forced Brain to resign, thus bringing the rave masses to an end, the innovative combination of raves and Christian liturgy inspired other such experiments in England, including one version called “Rave in the Nave.”² These experiments continue today in the United States with maverick Episcopal priest Matthew Fox’s Techno Cosmic Masses, held regularly in Oakland, California. These events are not really raves per se, in that their primary activity is not dancing to electronic music and they typically last for two hours at most, rather than all night. They are actually more of a “hip” liturgy with a rave-influenced aesthetic, and their participants are liberal Christians rather than hard-core ravers. Nevertheless, the Techno Cosmic Mass is still an important development in combining raves with ritual components from a specific tradition, Christianity, and one that culminates in a very familiar ritual, the taking of communion.

Themes and Archetypes

Another approach ravers take in order to unify diverse religious traditions and components is to organize the rave around a particular spiritual theme. The Rhythm Society's events are a good example of this approach. Each event has a theme that is given a name, spelled out in an explanatory paragraph, and expressed in the decorations, the altars, and the ceremonies. Some of the names/themes have included Alchemie, Anima Mundi, Beloved, Creation, Chrysalis, Essence, Gift, Intimacy, Nirvana, Resonance, Rites of Spring, Shine, Terra Firma, and Wheel of Fortune. Obviously, some themes lend themselves to certain kinds of spiritual/religious traditions, ceremonial components, and decorative motifs. Anima Mundi, for example, focused on animal and plant spirits, and a connection to the earth. Beloved featured Sufi influences in the form of Rumi poetry and the motif of divine love through mystical union with the Beloved. Nirvana, of course, had more of a Buddhist influence. The theme for Rites of Spring was fertility and new growth, and, appropriately, in the opening ceremony, participants were given a seed of corn that they then planted in small pots of soil.

As one member reflected on the importance of themes, "I love the themes. I love that we think about that kind of thing and that the themes are somewhat archetypal and transcend all religious structures or schools of thought." In my own personal experience, I have found that the theme of a particular rave, especially as articulated in the opening ceremony, is often very timely and meaningful, providing a context in which I can make sense of events in my life and in the world, resolve important issues, and move forward with a fresh outlook and renewed energy. In this way, the theme transforms the entire rave into a rite of passage. The Oracle crew in Seattle has taken the approach of creating their own tarot deck with 23 specially designed cards, each representing a different spiritual archetype. Each rave event they produce is based on one of these cards, and the card for the next event is picked in a ritualized manner at the closing ceremony of the current event. The 23 events form a larger sequence, a kind of meta-tarot casting. The events held in order are: Father Sun, The Myth, The Elements, Alchemy, The Senses, Harmony, The Gypsy, In the Garden, Mystery School, Behold the Buddha, Atlantis, Imagination, Ocean Deep, Faery Magick, Mother Earth, Space Traveller, and Journey of the Shaman. The card images also reference specific spiritual or religious traditions. Oracle's creators are clear about the archetypal nature of each card and event, and how each archetype is a step in a larger spiritual path.

The Oracle crew started with a twenty-three-card tarot deck of archetypes, based on spiritual paths such as Buddhism, alchemy, or mystery school. Each card has a symbol, dance movement, and an affirmation poem describing the archetype. The midnight ritual's function is to express what the archetype means to the community, inspiring the community to understand the archetype. The events are centered around the archetype, with musicians, decorations, ceremonies, and the community diving into the world of the archetype for a while.

In the interviews with the Oracle crew, the degree of intensity in which each theme or archetype manifested its distinctive energy in specific ways was striking. Here is the first of two examples:

Gypsy is a clear example. The crew found an amazing space in Everett and spent a week decorating it. They were stoked, but two days ahead of the event, the fire marshal required everything to be fire retardant. They had to take everything down, fire retard everything, and put everything back up in 24 hours. The day of the party, the police came and said, "You guys can't have a party here." There's a new law that no one nineteen and younger could be in the same room dancing with anyone twenty-one and over. So, at 9 A.M., we were told we couldn't do our event there. We had to take everything down and pack up like a little gypsy tribe, then came back to Seattle. We found another space, and didn't get a finalized yes until about 7 P.M. The doors opened at 8. We started decorating at 4 or 5, without agreements. We ended up being like a gypsy tribe, essentially.

The second example has to do with the Mystery School card and event. At the time of the interview, the Oracle folks had become involved with an actual mystery school. I was a bit confused as to which came first, and I asked them to clarify:

What's interesting is how we found the mystery school was somebody from the Rocky Mountain Mystery School heard about the Mystery School Oracle, went to it, and started talking to some of the people from the Oracle, saying, "Hey, I'm a part of this mystery school that I want to share with you guys." So it took a couple of Oracles before we connected with the mystery school. But now, we're actually working with the mystery school. . . . So it did literally come from the event. But the interesting thing was, which is really the way it has to be for this process to work, was that the card came first and we had to, from an outside perspective, not really having a direct experience through a mystery school, create the mystery school archetype. That's what allowed it to be a new ritual experience.

I will explore the Oracle's involvement with the Rocky Mountain Mystery School in more detail in the next chapter. For now, the key point is that the theme and archetype give each Oracle event its distinctive energy and ties all of its elements together as a unified ritual: TECHNO TRIBAL CHURCH 125

We've found that every event and archetype is absolutely an initiation for all of us into a deeper part of our learning process and ultimately breaks our stuff down so we can be more open channels for what the Oracle has to share with us. Not just us, but the community, everybody. ... We're finding that there’s a process through each—before, during, and after the event—a longstanding ritual that the Oracle is expressing to us how it needs to play out, you know, to get more of the intention in there, the magic.”

While not every rave has the same high level of thematic articulation and spiritual orientation that is found in the Oracle or the Rhythm Society's events, nevertheless, most raves do have some kind of unifying theme that is often spiritual or religious in nature. This is especially true on the West Coast, and particularly in the Bay Area, which has a strong history of alternative spirituality. As one Bay Area raver put it,

"That kind of offbeat spiritual interest in the Bay Area just naturally took hold within the rave community. So, there’s a big part of the rave community that’s taking the New Age movement and moving it into the next century with a whole new technology built around dance. . . . They do want to have a transformative experience. And so there’s a lot of people who have been in the rave culture for ten years now. They’re not kids anymore, and they’re throwing these pretty sophisticated parties that have . . . ritual with intention."

An Experimental Approach

The experimental nature of these rituals is a crucial aspect of rave culture's distinctive approach to ceremony. Ravers are clear that they are not trying to mimic or reproduce traditional religious ceremonies but instead create something new through experimentation. They believe that experimentalism with spirituality is beneficial, as it allows them to experience rituals in a pure and connected way.

Ravers acknowledge that their approach can be seen as a hodgepodge, drawing from various cultures and traditions. They recognize the risk of creating a scattershot approach but remain committed to experimentation.

Ravers understand that their ceremonies are young and immature, but they are not quick to judge what they see. They are in an early developmental stage and are learning from their experiences. "We, in what we call tribal dance culture, are mimicking—kind of like almost babies mimick—our ancestors, as far as how far we've gotten. And there’s no call for us to profess any level of mastery. At the same time, though, we’re in an experiential frame of mind that will allow us to take what we can out of the experience. And that is very much worthwhile.

Recognizing that rave ceremonies are very young and erratic in their effectiveness, some ravers have taken their experimentation with ritual outside of the rave itself in order to try to focus more specifically on finding what works and cultivating it: I’m working on a very specific vision. . .. Something that I would like to be involved in would be a collective of people that would start working together and create sort of a laboratory for much more intimate events with a very definite ritual structure to try to really explore what the ideal nature of that container would be, that ritual container, and how to bring, get people into a resonant state without the use of psychedelics. And then be able to go on a trance journey together, sharing and generating the same kind of energies, and also bringing them down, grounding them, a whole process basically that would be more formal and more structured. . . . I think there’s a wing of [the rave scene] that is and will continue to move in the direction of more ritual, more intention, more deliberateness. It’s a small wing, in terms of size, it’s maybe five percent of the broad techno dance music thing, but it’s the source where the real dynamism, the real energy of the scene comes from mostly.

Such ritual “laboratories” are, in fact, happening in the Bay Area and elsewhere and, although they are in an even earlier stage than the ceremonies themselves, they would appear to represent the next evolutionary step in the development of rave ceremonies. Shambhala, Salmo, B.C., 2003. Photograph courtesy of Quana Parker (Quana.net).

TRANSFORMATION: RAVE WORLDVIEW, RAVE SPIRITUALITY, AND GLOBAL RAVE CULTURE

In the last two chapters, we have been focusing on “trance formation”—the ritual of trance dancing to electronic music at raves that generates deep experiential states and opens access to the sacred. For many ravers, this experience can be incredibly powerful and revelatory. However, while trance formation is clearly at the core of the rave phenomenon, this experience does not remain limited to the dance floor, but spills over into the lives of ravers in a variety of important ways, irrevocably and profoundly transforming them. The rave experience has been articulated into a spirituality, philosophy, and worldview that makes sense of it, contextualizes it in a larger perspective, and translates it into a code for living, a way to actualize its potential in the concrete details of daily life. Moreover, this transformation is not simply an individual experience, but one that has spawned a multitude of rave communities around the world and, indeed, a global rave culture that in turn has had an impact on mainstream culture. From trance formation to transformation—this trajectory exactly follows the model of religious development proposed by the ‘history of religions’ school of religious studies that I mentioned in the introduction. 129 130 TRANCE FORMATION

In this approach, the human encounter with the numinous, the religious experience, forms the basis for subsequent developments that lead to the organized external forms that we call religion." Religious experience is the underlying substratum for all cultural activity and serves as the foundation for culture in general. As Charles H. Long notes, “Religion is thus understood to be pervasive not only in religious institutions, but in all the dimensions of cultural life.” In terms of the rave scene, the religious experience of trance formation on the dance floor at raves forms the basis for the subsequent transformation of ravers in the rest of their lives and leads to the organized external forms of rave spirituality, rave philosophy and worldview, rave lifestyle, and rave culture. In this chapter, we will examine each of these in detail.

A Shift in Perspective

Many ravers begin their involvement in the scene with a powerful conversion experience and then follow this experience by attending as many raves as they can and immersing themselves in rave culture. In the process, they are transformed on virtually every level of their lives. To begin with, there is often a profound shift in perspective, encompassing one’s own life and how it fits into the larger world:

I found myself getting reconnected with myself, just picturing what I needed to do and what I wanted to do and how I wanted to enjoy myself, all in the course of an evening, just from the music, you know, losing myself on the dance floor. . . . It definitely gave me a larger sense of the world and how I fit into it and what I needed to do for myself. To me, music is something that is so much bigger than this reality. Sometimes I feel like, you know, I live downtown and when I go to my job or go to school, do homework, hang out with my friends, I get these blinders on, I think the world is everything that I can see. And I think that the whole world is just my world. Then, once I listen to music, it just brings me out of that and it just makes me realize that there’s something so much bigger out there. Specifically this music, it doesn’t have a lead singer who’s putting the words, putting the thoughts in. You're actually hearing that and maybe you're translating that into your own life, maybe you're translating your own life into it. I don’t even know if those two can be separated. To me, it’s something that has always put perspective on things, always just made me realize that life is good, not to get caught up in these little tiny details of life—Oh my God, I didn’t get this raise! I got a B-minus on this paper! It really puts things in perspective that life is amazing and that there’s really nothing beyond that.

When I’m dancing and I’m cleaning out all this garbage, inviting new energy in, and working with it, and wiggling it into my elbow, feeling it in my heel, there’s a kind of experience that it’s all going to be okay, it all is okay, it’s exactly what it’s supposed to be. . . . So that kind of realignment of my energy is absolutely grounding, it’s refreshing, it gives me hope, it helps me analyze problems and have a new perspective on things.

I realized what it was I wanted to do with my life. . . . Things really transformed in me. I really started feeling like I had a more noble purpose in life. There was something unique about a rave and that unifying experience that helped you on that path to just feeling like you were part of the big whole. . . . I knew I had gotten involved with something that was much, much bigger than I'd ever imagined I would be involved with. . . . I started realizing what was going on and my whole life transformed. I got the big picture. I got a picture of the universe as a whole and my involvement in it... . I finally put it all together and I began to realize . . . exactly where I’m supposed to be.° There was one particular experience I had at a party that was almost like a revelation, not specifically what I wanted to do with my life, but like the general direction of it. . . . It really was a momentous occasion. I remember very clearly it was a dramatic change in the way I perceived what I should be doing with myself. . . . It had pretty profound effects in my life... . The basis, the foundation of it all, just kind of shifted.'

Unity in Diversity: Kinder, Gentler; More Open, Loving, and Compassionate

Another key feature of the rave phenomenon that also facilitates a shift in perspective is the ecstatic feeling of love, unity, openness, and inclusivity people experience together on the dance floor. One important aspect of this experience that goes all the way back to the early rave scene in England is the ability to transcend normal social barriers of race, class, ethnicity, education, and even religion. One veteran of the original British scene put it this way:

'In Britain, I think it is so much about who you are in terms of what class you come from and how you talk and what clothes you wear. I think this was the first time in our contemporary history that this was broken away and it really gave this opportunity for people from all different classes and races just to be together.'

This same experience of unity in diversity has continued as a hallmark of the rave scene in the United States as well:

'It was a composition of a lot of disparate groups of people—gay, straight, men, women, black, white, Hispanic. It was a polyglot of a lot of cultures and races and mind-sets and orientations coming together in a very positive way. . . . Everybody was getting off on it.'

'You're able to incorporate a lot of diversity. Maybe some people don’t even have a high school education. Other people have three Ph.D.s. And they're all dancing together and dance is a great leveler in that we’re all simply moving our bodies in a vibrational field.'

The concept that I love about it the most is the concept of the beat as something that unifies dance floors and that unifies people. That has always been my goal in music because, on the dance floor, you can break down color barriers, sexual barriers. . . . It becomes universal and it brings a lot of people together.'

A second important aspect of this experience of unity is the ability to be unguarded and open and loving with other people, including strangers:

'I was really impressed with the vulnerability that everybody showed to each other. . . . That really shook me at the time because it didn’t occur to me that it was possible to be so unguarded with complete strangers.'

'Here was a place for me to go and dance with other people, to share love with people who are openly giving love. I never ever found that anywhere else, at least not that amount of love and nurturing.'

This open and loving attitude toward other people is something that ravers then seek to carry over into the rest of their lives. One raver said that raves “actually, I think, make people kinder and gentler and more compassionate.”

Another talked about his realization that “there was no reason why this openness can’t carry over to the rest of my life.”

Still another sought the answer to these questions: How can I live a better life? How can I be a better person? How can I know more about myself so that I can be in the world in a conscious, compassionate, and loving and connected way?'

Concrete Life Changes

This shift in perspective then quite naturally leads to making concrete changes in one’s life, beyond simply being more open and compassionate and loving:

'I had to make decisions about how my life was going to be.' ... And the only person who could make them quite right was me, and I had to do that all for myself. I think this is part of all the things that coalesced during this one time where I was just dancing. And so I started realizing I've got to make my choices, I've got to do this, I've got to do that, and this is how I will live."

The decision to change one's life can entail a wide range of choices. Many ravers make the biggest change possible—moving to a new location in order to be involved in the scene: "I moved here [San Francisco] because of the dance music scene." "Honestly, I moved to San Francisco for the rave scene and the rave scene only." "I moved here [Seattle] because I came to a dance culture event in '94 and was completely blown away and knew that I was looking for that, essentially."

Other ravers made equally momentous life changes, such as changing jobs or dropping out of school: "I changed my direction. I left school, actually. I said, 'Because I've found my new school. Why am I in the freaking school of classical music composition? That's not what I'm doing. I want to work with these people.' So I dropped out, started doing this. Spent every dime I had on records and CDs and music equipment instead of tuition."

Some ravers also begin to shift their circle of friends to reflect the new importance of raves in their lives: "It definitely changed me and filtered into the rest of my life. I stopped hanging out with all my friends so much. I couldn't deal with what they liked... . The people I started meeting were a whole different group of people from what I had ever known before. People were more open-minded and spiritual and much more holistic. They were much more loving and caring."

"It [the rave experience] blew me away and suddenly I found myself going to parties every weekend and meeting new people that blow my mind—artists and dancers and visionaries and people that were creative and doing all kinds of things with their energy to promote this great vibe. .. . I started meeting all kinds of people that were very spiritually inclined and doing all kinds of spiritual work in all different levels."

Some ravers choose to become involved with particular rave crews and help put on events: "I just dove into the Rhythm Society, basically spent the next three years just really intensely involved in the RS." Some ravers may even decide to live in raver households or warehouse collectives so that they are completely immersed in the scene on a continuous basis. And then you have to reconcile the two worlds: what did I experience and what is going on now? And that’s where the change starts slowly happening. You start thinking, "I need to read a book, or I need to investigate." And that’s what I saw happening in my own life. And now, as I go farther on that journey, it’s looking for more things that don’t use a specific external tool, cultivating more internal technology that’s available to all of us."6

A big part of the challenge of rave culture is that it opens up a lot of possibilities and moments of real human connection and communication and sharing, but without a structure and a system of knowledge for how to implement those kind of states, how do you translate those spaces of opening and possibility to the rest of the situations in life?1

Something that I’m really enjoying watching and being part of is the sense of taking it beyond the realm of music and the occasional all-night party or celebration and taking it into the realm of, "Okay, how are we going to apply the experiences we have here to our daily lives, what is the daily practice of unity and loss of ego that we get to experience when we're out there on the dance floor?" How can I live a better life? How can I be a better person? How can I know more about myself so that I can be in the world in a conscious, compassionate, and loving and connected way?1

One of the key answers to the question of how to apply the rave experience to one’s daily life is to create more lasting, ongoing structures in the form of rave communities, and I will examine several of these communi1ties in more depth in the next chapter. Yet there are many other ways to integrate the rave experience. Many ravers go more deeply into the music, either through learning to DJ, learning to produce their own original electronic music compositions, or simply by acquiring music on record, CD, or MP3 and listening to it in their daily lives. Other ravers express themselves creatively through other art forms like dance, painting, sculpture, computer visuals, fashion design, poetry, writing, or theater, and some even share their finished products in showings or performances. Still others undertake spiritual practices such as meditation, yoga, or chanting, or work with various ceremonial traditions, and some may go so far as to facilitate these activities in a public setting. Some ravers may choose to organize or lead educational events, and a number of them have even formed nonprofit organizations to help facilitate their efforts. Many ravers become politically active in a variety of causes, including the environment, the peace movement, gay and lesbian issues, human rights, and indigenous cultures, to mention just a few. In this regard, one issue particularly relevant to ravers is fighting the current reactionary wave of repressive anti-rave legislation."1 and the Electronic Music Defense and Education Fund and the San Francisco Late Night Coalition are two great examples of ravers (and non-ravers) banding together to become an effective political force.10

Integrating the Rave Experience into One’s Spiritual Path

Since this is a study on the religious and spiritual dimensions of rave culture, I’d like to focus more specifically on how the rave experience is integrated into ravers’ spiritual paths. Here are a few examples: I was just thinking about how grand the scale of perfection in synchronous occurrences was. I realized that God was behind everything, not just nothing. It seemed so obvious once I got there, but a little curtain got pulled aside that night, and I realized it was not just random. It was a gift, an illumination. Since everything is God, that realization forced me to start a process of breaking down everything I had ever thought about. It was just all right there, and once you get in there, there's no going back. That was the real beginning of what I would call my life and my path. I started to see something deeper and opened up to various practices that made me feel better. I stopped taking drugs and started looking at other ways of getting high, like dancing all night.

I had conversations with people, and it made me have different realizations. The Temple of Sound had a gigantic library of books on religion and spirituality. I spent a lot of my time there. I realized that changing the external environment of a party doesn't really move it to the place I was looking for. You can't change the external environment without making internal changes. So, during that time, I started to cultivate tools, like Vipassana. I definitely saw things in the meditations that made me question why I was doing what I was doing.

I've grown tremendously in my experience, and in that growth, I'm still coming to places like, "What am I trying to do with this? Where am I trying to go with this? Where am I growing as a person?" I think it's a lifelong journey in facing yourself and really being honest and going deeper. I put together my own construct for my own spirituality, which is the basic idea that, stripped of dogma and creed and specific practices, there are commonalities between all spiritual faiths. I've made it a niche for myself to combine that with my experience of music and dance culture. In there, I found something that nourishes my soul and connects me with something larger than myself, including community, the world, and larger rhythms than just my own day-to-day rhythm.

These transformations in ravers' lives are not simply accidental, isolated individual occurrences. They take place within the context of a larger rave culture that sees itself as the leading edge of a planetwide cultural transformation. PLUR: Peace, Love, Unity, and Respect

The first, and most influential, of these articulations came in the form of the acronym PLUR—peace, love, unity, and respect—back in 1993. It seemed to capture succinctly the main principles of the burgeoning rave scene and quickly spread to become almost universally used as a central credo. The peace and love part is an obvious throwback to the idealistic 1960s psychedelic hippie counterculture (as is the phrase Summer of Love), with which rave culture clearly has significant continuities. However, there are also significant differences as well, and I will explore these in some detail a bit later.

Peace here includes both inner peace (i.e., tranquility) and outer peace (i.e., living in harmony without conflict and war). Similarly, love is not only self-love and love of other ravers, but also a higher, spiritual, unconditional love that is understood to be the true nature of all things. In the same way, unity refers not only to the experience of unity on the dance floor at raves in which social boundaries are transcended, but the application of that same unity to the whole world, thus transcending nationality, ethnicity, race, religion, class, gender, sexual orientation, age, and the like. Finally, respect is both self-respect and respect of others, even if they are different, including non-ravers, and extending that even to the policemen who might come to shut down a rave. PLUR is obviously both very idealistic (perhaps to the point of naiveté, some would argue) and very difficult to put into practice. It has also been the subject of a great deal of ridicule and cynicism by ravers and non-ravers alike over the years. Yet, no one can argue its central place in the philosophy of rave culture, and it exerts a huge defining influence even today. As one contemporary raver put it, “I’m looking at things in terms of the old school word PLUR. It’s so basic and it’s just so true. So for me, just the principles of peace, love, unity, and respect go deeper. . . .” Thousands of ravers were initiated into the rave scene with this simple credo, and thousands are striving to live their lives according to its principles, even if they might not admit it.

Rave culture is an alternative culture in two important ways: First, there is an implicit critique of mainstream culture and the problems it has created, both on a personal and a planetary level; second, rave culture sees itself as an alternative model that solves these problems, a working template for a healthy, harmonious, sustainable, and spiritually conscious culture. Ravers are extremely articulate on this point: “How things are going is not working, so let’s be exploring the different ways that we can be creating goodness in the world and beauty and love and compassion and tolerance and unity. I think what the world really needs now is to learn to live from the heart in a world of connection. What we really lack as a culture is connectivity with each other. . . . I think what humanity has been going through is, it started out just about survival, about living to the next day. And then the human collective consciousness moved into the second realm, which was about reproduction and growing, and the third one, which is about power and control and building. I think we're still there as a race. But I think it’s time for us to start thinking about living in the heart, living in connection, and in love. I think that a group like the Rhythm Society, what it does, it patterns that.”

“There’s this huge force of aggression and an eye for an eye kind of warrior energy out there right now, and here’s this counterforce, if you will, that doesn’t have an aggressive bone in its body. How does it make a dent in this other part? I mean, it’s wonderful, we all have these wonderful experiences, and we all make more choiceful decisions as a result, and we all eat better, don’t finance evil companies, we're aware of that and starting to think that way, we all have more of a global perspective, and maybe that’s enough, maybe that will eventually help. . . . George W. Bush is running the show and . . . there’s this scary external world. But that having been said, there’s this energy that I have to believe has some larger force for positive evolutionary heart-centered ends, or development, that direction, I really do. I mean, if there’s anything that’s going to help usher in the next era of light, it’s this, in my opinion.”

The Bushes, you know, I think of . . . the petty tyrant and I think that’s what these characters are. They're showing such the archetypal imbalances of the world that now the other side is rising up. And I think it’s causing a huge acceleration. And I think what we're really involved with has been known in the beginning of time. It’s the fulfillment of a stage. This isn’t really like a surprise, this is what was supposed to happen. We were told to forget ourselves, become mired in compartmentalizing and dissecting everything, and at some point in time, it would get to a place where it's just completely breaking down. And that that community has to find itself in that breakdown. I think that's what drew so many people to the rave scene. I actually think we live in really auspicious times. And that the emergence of this culture and its transformation isn't just arbitrary. It's happening as other things are happening in the world. Things are bubbling up in the world. The world wants change. The earth wants transformation. The people want healing. And I think as we do the work and we get more out of our way, that there's something seeping up through the creation.*° Rave culture is certainly not the first alternative culture with this perspective, and ravers definitely see it as continuing and updating a lineage of a succession of alternative cultures, particularly the 1960s psychedelic hippie counterculture and 1950s beat culture: Rave culture is kind of that wave that you can trace back to the fifties beat culture, it went through the hippies, went through punk, and I think rave culture's kind of like hippies with jobs.*" I'd done my own take and study on the culture, as it were, everything from the Beat generation up to the hippies, the psychedelic movement, and into the rave movement, and just seeing this movement of consciousness waving through time, through young people. It's a different movement, but I think the movement of the '60s was a similar revolution. It's happening much more quietly here." Hippie was tune in and drop out, you know, leave culture. Try to live in right livelihood, try to live in a good way, but they thought you couldn't do that and be a part of society. But I see rave people trying to do that and be part of society, be part of culture. I think that's really the major difference there.

So you see it as carrying on that countercultural tradition, but in a slightly different mode.

Yeah, and in a more engaged way. People in the rave community, there's lawyers and doctors, people of all sorts, who do professional web design, all kind of stuff.°° It's not just a bunch of hippies running around getting psychedelic in the desert. There's people who have very respectable careers, a lot of people involved in music and art and multimedia. Definitely very into technology. Everyone's got jobs, kids.*! In this respect, ravers see rave culture as the next evolutionary step in the lineage of alternative culture.

In the mid-1980s, postmodern anarchist philosopher Peter Lamborn Wilson, a.k.a. Hakim Bey, developed a new strategy for countercultural resistance, an innovative model he called the TAZ, or Temporary Autonomous Zone:

The TAZ is like an uprising which does not engage directly with the State, a guerilla operation which liberates an area (of land, of time, of imagination) and then dissolves itself to re-form elsewhere/elsewhen, before the State can crush it... . The TAZ can “occupy” these areas clandestinely and carry on its festal purposes for quite a while in relative peace. . . . As soon as the TAZ is named (represented, mediated), it must vanish, it will vanish, leaving behind it an empty husk, only to spring up again somewhere else, once again invisible because undefinable in terms of the Spectacle. The TAZ is a perfect tactic for an era in which the State is omnipresent and all-powerful, yet simultaneously riddled with cracks and vacancies. The TAZ is a microcosm of the “anarchist dream” of a free culture, and it allows participants to experience some of its benefits in the here and now. The idea of the TAZ resonated with many sectors of alternative culture and became a well-known and widely used concept.

The rave scene emerged in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and many ravers saw the rave as the perfect manifestation of a TAZ. Raves are temporary, occupy areas clandestinely, and are festal in nature. One raver explained the TAZ as a sacred space that allows participants to free themselves from the ideas and mindsets forced upon them by a "fucked up corporate entity" that passes for culture. The TAZ is a direct response to and escape from the "crap" that fills up people's lives, allowing them to be who they really are and who they really can be.

In 1993, Geoff White took these ideas further in his influential essay “CyberTribe Rising,” where he posited a global rave culture called the CyberTribe, based on the newly emerging paradigm he dubbed C512 (community, consensus, cooperation, communication, cybernetics, intelligence, and intuition). According to White, "one way to look at all of this is to view C512 as the technology behind Temporary Autonomous Zones, and to see the CyberTribe as a step towards the realization of global TAZ networks."

Raves are ephemeral and temporary in nature, lasting for one evening or, at the most, several days. However, the rave scene has now been in existence for well over seventeen years and has proven to be more than a temporary phenomenon. Ravers are now envisioning and articulating the possibility of an alternative culture that is more lasting and sustainable in the long term. One way to accomplish this sustainability is through the emergence of rave communities.

Initially, in the early 90s, the rave scene was about taking drugs, mind expansion, dancing, ecstatic dance, connection with the divine, connection with others, destruction of ego and self, and oneness. There was an innocence about it then that prevented taking it further outside of that. However, the scene has evolved, and ravers are now seeking to apply and take it beyond the discrete experience. Like what’s the use of that if that connection isn’t lasting? It was kind of magical and beautiful as its own little thing, but, okay, what else? And so when I experienced the Rhythm Society later on, the experience I had was that it was a next step, evolutionarily, of something beyond the discrete experience that was being applied more holistically—about spiritual awareness, about self-awareness, about building community, and what community actually meant, what the possibility of community really was, what the potential of being in community really was, and having that be a lasting experience over time, and what that enables. However, it is one thing to put on a rave, but it is something altogether different to try to create a long-term, sustainable community. Ravers also touched on the challenges and difficulties of this endeavor: When you try to create something almost serious or fixed, with a sense of outcome, for something that can be as amorphous as an electronic dance culture, it enters a lot of ambiguity that makes it hard for you to establish anything lasting—because we’re not living together, because we're not depending on each other for our survival, we’re just seeing each other here and there. . . . So I've been working on this vision in various ways, trying to see how we can arrive at it with attention to our economics and how we work with that. Because, if we’re an alternative culture, perhaps we’re going to draw towards alternative economic structures and maybe we'll be better able to receive it. We'll be able to, through throwing events, provide ourselves with the training for us to work on larger projects, so that by the time we get to that stage where perhaps we’re really dependent on each other, we’re living on the same geographical space, on land, or trying to create business, that sort of thing, we have the skills. And I think, like any community, what we're going to come up against is all of our shadows, all of our issues that the mother culture has passed down to us, the world karma, and we're going to have to work through all of that. And that’s the test right now, I find, is graduating from these adolescents to mature beings that have inherited the benefit of that whole experience and can now take those tools and apply them in a way that will be useful for a long time, without growing cynical, without taking ourselves too seriously, and without losing track of what it was that made us so special to begin with.

Integration into the Real World

As noted earlier, one raver talked about the difference between hippies and ravers: Hippie was "tune in and drop out," you know, leave culture. Try to live in right livelihood, try to live in a good way, but they thought you couldn’t do that and be a part of society. But I see rave people trying to do that and be part of society, be part of culture. This concern with integrating the rave scene back into the mainstream is another important hallmark of rave culture in its efforts to be a viable long-term phenomenon: I think that the people that are within the cosmos of experiencing the dance culture can remember, maybe, that we’re not just an island unto ourselves and that we are connected to a larger world and that, in the end of the day, no matter how high or how amazing the experience we have goes when we’re together, it’s going to inevitably have to integrate back into the world. And the success to which we are able to do that is going to determine the sustainability of our communities. These communities, over a long period of time, will have more economic and social impacts, will have more interlaced networks amongst other communities. Actually, because of the nature of how they were formed, they have an interest in the workings of the world, and are willing and interested in impacting it in positive ways. Some ravers have even taken this idea to almost humorous extremes; for example: "I would like to see it the way we see 7-11s now. I would like to see little studios in every town where Friday nights, or whatever it is, you go and do your thing and you make your donation and you go home. Franchised. I want it out there. I want it everywhere. Just like Walgreen's in Cole Valley, you know? I really do. That would be fantastic. . . . Wally's Trance World—Sunday! Sunday! Sunday! . . . That would be awesome. Wouldn't that be fun? Because what that would represent is that this stuff is so enculturated and so integrated that it's not only a lucrative franchise, its reality is not even questioned—of course it's that way."

Humorous though the concept may be, however, it is actually a serious goal shared by many ravers who would "love to see the scene in malls and churches and out on the streets." Global

Another important hallmark of rave culture is its global nature, not just in the sense that electronic dance music and raves are found in almost every country around the world, but—perhaps more important—because ravers feel themselves to be part of a larger unified planetary network. It begins with the music, which, because it generally has no lyrics, has the capacity to bypass verbal and conceptual distinctions that separate people and, instead, unites them: "People are literally listening to it [electronic dance music] in every corner of the planet and it's wonderful because it unites a planet in a language that is beyond language. It really isn't about lyrical music, it's about a beat, and everybody can dance, so that's what's really great about it. I think that's what gives it hope to unify people in a way that maybe hasn't happened before."°

Dance music is so universal. It transcends language and so many cultural barriers, which is why it is such global music.°° Another global aspect is that electronic dance music has created its own network that, to a large degree, functions outside the framework of the mainstream popular music industry. Armed with a few affordable pieces of equipment, a techno aficionado can write a song in his bedroom and, if it's good, it can easily find its way to a local dance floor. If the song blows up on the dance floor in one location, it can quickly spread around the world in a short period of time due to the tight interconnectivity of global rave communication networks. In this way, electronic dance music is a powerful facilitator of planetary connections: "We want to be connected and this is our wire. Music is our link and always has been, but never in this way, never on the equal level between everything involved. I think it's the true music in the world, it's just going to feel like more of a together place. Closer connections, really. It's hard to specify because it's really large . . . . It will go anywhere and everywhere and it'll make just more and more connections and bring TRANSFORMATION 147 more things together to make them one. In reality, that's all we really map to, that's all we are, we're all one. I deeply believe in that and see it clearly and live it and breathe it." And music is our link. This is what's going to work for us more and more in the future, multiplying by every year. Beyond the music itself is the global nature of the rave scene, which has spread like wildfire throughout the world. As Jimi Fritz has noted in his study Rave Culture: There are well-developed scenes in almost every country with people of diverse backgrounds raving in every major center in the USA, Canada, Europe, South America, Scandinavia, Japan, Thailand, India, Australia, New Zealand, Russia, South Africa, and many other parts of the world.

Rave culture is alive and well in Bahrain, China, Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Iceland, Kazakhstan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Puerto Rico, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Taiwan, Turkey, Morocco, Korea, Jamaica, The Ukraine, Cayman Islands, Kenya, Ghana, Zaire, and Zimbabwe. According to Dave Jurman, senior director of the dance music department for Columbia Records: The Far East and Japan now have a huge scene. It's very, very big over there. It's growing all over the world. A friend of mine recently went to a rave event in Israel and said it was unbelievable. There are now rave events in unthinkable places.

The hot spots right now are England, mainland Europe, followed by Japan and the United States. I should also mention Australia. Rave culture is happening around the world, and it is a united culture that is making a big impact. Fritz writes: The phenomenal growth of rave culture throughout the world over the past decade has been astounding, proving that regardless of cultural conditions or bias, the appeal of rave is truly universal. Rave culture is an international movement with a unified vision and global sense of community. Rave may well be the biggest pop culture movement in history and it is only recently beginning to move from its underground status to a full-blown social revolution with the potential to positively influence a generation and ultimately change the course of human consciousness.

Some ravers have articulated the potential of global rave culture to spiritually transform the planet even further: We as a global dance community are keepers and manifesters of a vision, a vision of a conscious planetary party, a vision of global ceremony. Ceremony means gathering with intention, celebrating our vision of a peaceful, free, and love-filled world where mankind is unified and living in harmony with our planet, Gaia, Earth. When a large portion of the collective consciousness of humanity unites in love, it creates a ripple effect and triggers another large portion of the collective consciousness into the same state. Both personally and collectively we need to recognize how our mental and emotional states create the general psychic atmosphere on this planet. Through sending ecstatic energy that we generate into the grid, it automatically channels into the collective consciousness. As we individually activate ourselves as breathing, dancing, channeling vortices of light, we connect as one light. If we were to fly from above and imagine all of our brothers and sisters around the globe dancing for planetary peace, then we would see that they've woven a web, a matrix of light that surrounds the globe. "Tribal and Shamanic: While an important element of rave culture is looking to the future, there is also an important element of looking to the past as well. Ravers highly value ancient, indigenous cultures, viewing them as repositories of wisdom and models for living in harmony with the earth and with spirit worlds. At the same time, ravers are not about to give up their high-tech postmodern lifestyle; rather, they are seeking to integrate it with the ancient wisdom of indigenous cultures. One phrase commonly used to characterize this approach is 'future primitive.' Another word that is even more widely used is 'tribal,' which often appears in the names of crews and events (e.g., Tribal Harmonix, Moontribe, and Gathering of the Tribes).

'Tribal' is a dominant word because if you are in wonder with music that has rhythm, and a number of you feel the rhythm and you move to the rhythm at the same time, it's a way of coming together and that's what being tribal and ritualistic is all about. The dance music experience, ritual, and community are essential, especially when our culture is so devoid of that. They want to be part of a tribe. They're going back to a much more communal, tribal way. It's because they're not happy the other way, they're not healthy the other way. People who are part of this culture are willing to explore spirituality that they weren't allowed to. But they really look toward tribal traditions.

We are each part of an immense tribe of travelers, thousands and thousands huge, spread across the planet and circumnavigating it, now for the first time in the history of mankind. Enabled by communication technology and cheap airfare, we can now have friends scattered across every continent, and keep in touch by phone, fax, and e-mail, connecting and reconnecting in various places as our karma dictates. Perhaps we are the earth's first global tribe.

It's a modern-day tribal society. We're reinventing that experience in a modern-day context. While most ravers have no direct experience with real tribal cultures, one raver I interviewed actually does, and she discussed the influence it had on her involvement in rave culture, and more specifically, in the Oracle:

I'm from a tribe which is native to Guam. And part of the tribal culture, cultural dances or fire dances, are these really intense amazing staff dances, where they just get so rooted and raw and primal in their dance, and it's totally centered around creating magic. This is hundreds of years old, thousands of years old, just tribal dance, and creating spiritual intent and magic through dance. What I've found through the Oracle and through dance culture is the deeper I go, the more of that wisdom and knowledge comes through, when I'm sharing it with people. I feel like we're tapping into magic from the past to support magic for the present to guide us into magic for the future."

Another word that is widely used by ravers—often in conjunction with tribal—is 'shamanic,' which references the religious figure in tribal cultures, the shaman who journeys to spiritual worlds by means of an ecstatic trance state, often induced by rhythmic drumming, for the purposes of healing, divination, and community well-being:

This is a tribe; we're all a tribe. This tribe finds itself needing healing, needing magic, needing natural connection. I realized I was playing the role of the shaman, having a tribe, and bringing a tribe on these ceremonial ritual journeys." "I facilitate realizations and transformations and healings and all these things are completely shamanic." There is an element of shamanism involved with the way I like to DJ, or the alchemy of blending rhythms together, and the particular style of music that I tend to lean towards. I like people to think of what I'm doing as a tribal thing. Because I see the culture, as it is, as very fragmented and separate, and my attempts musically are to draw some more of that ancient tribal notion into our culture and attempt to shamanically implant those characteristics that tribes have that are valuable in our culture, that they can be revived, that give each individual a deeper sense of value.

The real root of shamanism is almost invariably drumming and chanting. And that's where I feel like I kind of channel that element in, is I do tend to play a lot of kind of a rootsy tribal style. That's what I like to make when I'm creating music. So that's my angle is to represent it in an extremely modern world with the highest technology I can have at my fingertips and reaching as far back as I can and finding elements that can apply.

I felt like I really was part of some quasi-religious cult: The shaman DJs in conjunction with nature's energy and the altered states of consciousness of the participants created a religious atmosphere.

The roots of raving are really intertwined with ageless tribal rituals of music, dance, trance, and the partaking of mind-expanding sacraments, where reaching a oneness with our inner nature links us to a oneness with the forces of nature around us and in each other. You don't have to watch many National Geographic to see the obvious similarities between parties such as these and the religious ceremonies of more "primitive" cultures. Ritualistic ravings will remain viable because it appeals to the sense of spirit in us that has been viable since the dawn of human consciousness.

On Sunday we were a tribe of the Universe, of the basic essence of life and energy, body and mind.

Many ravers see spirituality as a central aspect of rave culture. In fact, some ravers go so far as to view rave culture itself as a new form of spirituality or even a new form of religion. For example, Fritz, in Rave Culture, writes, "I have talked to many ravers about this issue and have become convinced that raving does indeed meet all the requirements of a grass roots people's religion."

Another raver put it this way: What I'm actually participating in here is a movement [that] . . . does everything a traditional religious movement does. At the same time, however, it is also very different from traditional religious movements. Fritz notes, "For the most part, ravers do not cling to the religious models of the past, preferring instead to create something new. Structure, conformity, and subservience have given way to a more personal and free-form model."

One raver articulated his vision of this model: What we model is how the openhearted can live together and cooperate while following many spiritual pathways to the same goal. We are ending the age of prophets and priests, and massive, institutional religion. Everyone who is so inclined will have the capacity for sacred knowledge and divine inspiration, without intermediary. Everyone will bring their own individual expression of the divine to share at the feast. We are each of us a full and perfect manifestation of divine presence. This quotation touches on a number of key features of this model—noninstitutional, nonhierarchical, unmediated, and individualistic. But perhaps the most important feature is its inclusive, post-denominational nature. As a new form of spirituality and religion, rave culture unites people from a wide variety of religious and spiritual paths: If you pull all those people off the dance floor and ask each one of them individually exactly what they believe and what their cosmology is about God, you'd find every one of them have a different answer. ... [But] if you get out on the dance floor, and you're all in that vibe, we suddenly become one regardless of cosmology. And that’s what seems to be so transformative is that people aren’t hung up on any particular dogma, like religion. It’s more about sharing this spiritual nature that we all have with each other, and an understanding that we all do have it.*° In a world where religious differences and dogmas have fostered division, hatred, violence, and wars that have killed untold millions, transcending these differences would indeed be a radical and hopeful development. 152

Trance Formation Music, Dance, and Mixing as Models and Metaphors

Electronic dance music is extremely different from almost any other style of popular music in a number of important ways: It usually has no lyrics, the beat is a central defining feature, its primary intention is to make people dance, and it is composed with an entirely different set of organizational principles. Moreover, most tracks are not meant to stand on their own, but, rather, to be incorporated into a sequence of tracks mixed together seamlessly by a DJ into a set that is itself a larger form of musical expression, a set that also does not stand alone, but is combined with several other elements that create the total dance floor experience at raves. While each of these features of electronic dance music has a largely functional aspect, each can also be considered as a smaller fractal template for the philosophies, worldviews, and codes for living of the larger rave culture. Thus, music, dancing, and mixing each are activities that serve as important models and metaphors for ravers and their culture.

The hallmark of most electronic dance music is the pounding, trance-inducing repetitiveness of the beat, coupled with the soaring visionary textures of the keyboards. The beat keeps one grounded in the body, while the harmonies and melodies transport one to higher realms, producing some of the incredible experiences we have examined at length. Because of the profound nature of these experiences, ravers have articulated a philosophical perspective of the deep transformative power of music, not only on a personal level, but at a universal level as well:

The feeling that music gave me was higher than anything. . . . And it’s the only thing that links me to all my deepest feelings and connections and ideas. Things that words could never say, music can. Music can be anywhere, anytime, in that same form, and fill the entire atmosphere and bring what it needs to bring, and connect people. . . . To me, that’s the ultimate bliss... music. Everything is music. If we really said what we really wanted to say, if we really said everything that is our deepest feeling within our soul, we'd actually be singing to each other, I think. And I'm only here for that reason. I’m only here to see that. And I can’t survive on anything else. That’s the only thing that I hope for as far as the future goes. 

Nothing else can feed me life. As far as I’m concerned, I’m pretty much dead right now until that happens. That’s the only thing that’s going to bring me to life. And I thank God for music every day. Nothing else can get me there, absolutely nothing.

This perspective is true for dance as well, particularly because dance is the primary means of entering deeply into the music. To illustrate this perspective, I repeat here part of a quotation I used in chapter 3:

It’s a form of entering a place that you can’t [by] just walking around and observing the normal everyday. And it’s a form of going inside the music. It’s a relationship that you have with the music. And, once you come in harmony, you're in bliss, really. . . . I think that every beautiful approach inside of life, every gesture can be a musical gesture. And it is, but it’s so on the surface that we don’t see it... . If you look at the leaves, the way they go in the wind, they're dancing! That’s all they’re doing, is dancing. It’s all anything does that’s natural. It’s all dancing. . . . If we cut down the bullshit, we'd be dancing. That’s what I see.*°

The picture that emerges from this perspective is of a universe made up of music, where everything is dancing: We start to feel that the earth is dancing with us, and trees and the wind and the sky. .. . One of the senses I get when I’m dancing, when I’m most in that flowing place, is that sense of I am the Creator... . At those times, I’m really glimpsing how spirit is . . . that spirit is this endlessly moving, creating, playful energy that the dance has made very apparent to me.*6

This picture of a dancing universe made up of music strongly echoes Hindu cosmology, in which one of the primary deities, Shiva, is often depicted as Nataraja, the Lord of the Dance, dancing in a ring of fire to maintain the cosmic harmony of a universe in motion. In the sonic theol- ogy of Nada Brahman, music and sound are understood as being synony- mous with God and, thus, music is seen as a particularly effective path to experience and unite with the divine.

In these formulations, dance and music are recognized as sacred practices that lead to understanding one’s true nature, the true nature of the universe, one’s place within it, and ulti- mately to union with God.

In addition to music and dance, the practice of DJ mixing also has important philosophical implications for ravers, particularly as a metaphor for how to follow a spiritual path and live one’s life in an artful and harmo- nious manner. Essentially, what a DJ does is to take a number of tracks, each of which has its own distinctive feeling and structural components (i.e., rhythm, tempo, melody, harmony, timbre, instrumentation, etc.) and 154 TRANCE FORMATION blend them together so that the transitions are seamless and the entire set is an integrated whole. In order to accomplish this task, a DJ must utilize the similarities between the tracks, through techniques like beat matching and key matching and, at the same time, must also utilize the differences between the tracks to create a sense of dynamics and forward momentum. This means that the DJ must devote a great deal of time and energy to finding the appropriate tracks and to acquiring an intimate knowledge of each one. These same skills are precisely what is required of the postmod- ern spiritual seeker in cobbling together a coherent spiritual path from a variety of disparate sources. One must devote a great deal of time and energy to find the appropriate traditions, teachings, and practices, and to acquire an intimate knowledge of each of them. Then, one must learn to deftly use the similarities and differences to blend them together seamlessly into a larger spiritual path that forms an integrated whole. And just as a good DJ must practice her skills for countless hours before she becomes technically proficient and must DJ live countless times before she learns the deeper artistry of how to craft a great set, a dedicated spiritual seeker must likewise put in countless hours of practice and study, and must work to learn the deeper artistry of how to craft a fulfilling spiritual path. The same metaphor can also be applied to the larger path of leading one's whole life, since everybody faces the challenge of mixing together the separate sectors of work, family, community, spirituality, recreation, and so forth into an integrated whole. In this way, the art of mixing can be seen as the ultimate postmodern practice—sampling, cutting, and pasting pieces from a melange of different contexts into a new configuration of coherent meaning, an important skill to have in the ever-increasing complexities of our contemporary world!

There is another postmodern aspect to DJ mixing as a metaphor, and that has to do with its highly technological nature. In contrast to the hippie counterculture, which viewed technology with suspicion, in some cases even as something inherently evil, rave culture embraces technology and sees it as a key component of our future evolution. Accordingly, notes Scott Hutson: The DJ is . . . a mixed symbol of human and machine. By spinning 'tribal' beats on sophisticated equipment, the DJ synthesizes our desire to be spiritual with our rootedness and dependence on the material. The DJ thus serves as a model of the place of machines in the world and a model for how the soul can be integrated with them.*" In his groundbreaking book More Brilliant Than the Sun, Kodwo Eshun has developed some of the most innovative thinking on this theme, essentially arguing that the machine sounds and beats of electronic music are reprogramming human consciousness to a new evolutionary paradigm in which humans are rapidly becoming the technologically advanced alien other so widely referenced in UFO imagery that is also very popular in rave culture.

To conclude this chapter, here is a taste of his unique writing style, which he calls sonic fiction, the intersection between science fiction and sound, and which he sees as reflecting the groundbreaking styles of electronic music:

It [the music] alienates itself from the human; it arrives from the future. Alien Music is a synthetic recombinator, an applied art technology for amplifying the rates of becoming alien... . Machines don't distance you from your emotions, in fact quite the opposite. Sound machines make you feel more intensely, along a broader band of emotional spectra than ever before in the 20th Century. Sonically speaking, the posthuman era is not one of disembodiment but the exact reverse: it's a hyperembodiment, via the Technics SL 1200. . . . You are willingly mutated by intimate machines, abducted by audio into the populations of your bodies. Sound machines throw you onto the shores of the skin you're in. The hypersensual cyborg experiences herself as a galaxy of audiotactile sensations. You are not censors but sensors, not aesthetes but kinaesthetes. You are sensationalists. You are the newest mutants incubated in womb-speakers. Your mother, your first sound. The bedroom, the party, the dancefloor, the rave: these are the labs where the 21% C nervous systems assemble themselves, the matrices of the Futurhythmachinic Discontinuum. The future is a much better guide to the present than the past.** Earthdance, Laytonville, CA, 2004. Photograph courtesy of Shawn “Skoi” Lass (Archivist@oracle.com).

LIVING LABORATORIES: RAVE COMMUNITIES AND NETWORKS

Perhaps the most important laboratory is one not mentioned by Kodwo Eshun, in More Brilliant Than the Sun (see chapter 5)—namely, the emerging communities in which ravers are attempting to integrate the rave experience into the nitty-gritty details of their daily lives. Rave communities provide a working context in which this integration can take place—through a supportive network of like-minded fellow travelers, through ongoing events and activities informed by rave culture, through organizational structures that are more concrete and lasting, and through a sense of ongoing spiritual and religious fellowship:

"It's more a part of my life than I thought it could be before. It's taken a whole other realm of meaning that's beyond music—the sense of building community, having an impact in the world, how do you live the lessons of community outside and spread the gospel. . . ."

To me, while the rave scene, while the music and everything is very, very important, what I've come out of the experience having is it was an enabler to create community and to explore what community really is. We all know that music is a great way to bring people together, but in this case, it feels like it's not the end-all and be-all, it's not where the experience ends. It's just a catalyst to create the experience to make the spark happen and then 157 158 TRANCE FORMATION there's all the stuff that happens beyond that when you stick with the connections that you make. . . .

This is no longer a new experience for me in certain ways and it's come to the point where I'm helping create the reality I want to create with that medium of dance culture—being a part of collectives, being a part of communities and networks where people strive towards some sort of goal with it all, whether it be creating change or creating a more spiritual sense of community. And we have a very unique culture in that we're not quite a dance scene, in the sense that we're not just a scene, we're a community.

And as far as communitarian movements, we're not quite your average community because we're based in this common ground of par- tying together." I think that's where community becomes a strong force in the process because, whereas the drug became the binding catalyst for this unified experience, in the new form I sense it's the community, the group of people that have done the work, that have created the increasing closeness, the sympathetic resonance, that when you come together and create, they actually are creating a field. . . .

New seeds have been brought to the table that whole communities are emerging around and new manifestations. . . . I've always said that when the economics crashes, it will actually be the community that stands. . . . And I think they will have the transformational significance that was at the root of the original rave scene. . . .

The real evolving communities, you can see it in the individu- als in the community, that they're growing, they're becoming stronger. These communities, over a long period of time, will have more eco- nomic and social impacts, will have more interlaced networks amongst other communities. That they actually, because of the nature of how they were formed, they have an interest in the workings of the world, and are willing and interested in impacting it in positive ways. There are a wide variety of rave communities, and each one has its own distinct flavor and modus operandi. Although there are rave communities throughout the United States and the entire planet, the West Coast seems to be one of the most fertile areas; here a significant number have emerged, taken hold, and thrived. As ravers note, "I think a lot of it has to do with the West Coast is such a hot spot for kids in America. It seems like if they've got any kind of light in them, they want to head for the West Coast."[1] LIVING LABORATORIES 159

I always look at the energy of the West Coast as having a bit more of the Goddess energy. There’s just more space, there’s a lot more nature, and the vibration is in the people.[5] And, within the West Coast, the San Francisco Bay Area seems to have the greatest density of rave crews and communities. For example, in addition to the Rhythm Society, I am personally familiar with several well-established like-minded underground rave communities (Cloud Factory, False Profit, Friends n Family, Koinonea, Opel, Pacific Sound, Radiant Atmospheres, Raise the Frequency, and Vibrant), and there are probably dozens beyond these.

Moreover, not only are there a significant number of West Coast rave communities, but they also seem to be connecting with each other more in the last few years. This is happening in a number of ways, but perhaps the most significant of these is the intentional creation of larger networks of rave communities at events such as Burning Man, Earthdance, Gathering of the Tribes, and the Storm Sessions. I will examine these networks in more detail shortly, but for now I will begin with some specific West Coast rave communities that illustrate a wide range of different approaches and models. This survey is not meant to be exhaustive or even representative, but simply to give a sense of a few important rave communities and their unique characteristics.

The Rhythm Society

I start with the Rhythm Society because it is the community with which I am most familiar and whose events I have attended the most consistently over the years. The St. John’s Divine Rhythm Society held its first All Night Dance Celebration (ANDC) in spring of 1996 at the Episcopal Church of St. John the Divine in San Francisco’s Mission District. This ANDC and subsequent events at the church took place with the cooperation and blessing of the church’s leadership, and not only were several members of the congregation in attendance, but several of them were members of the Rhythm Society as well. The vision of these events has been articulated in a specific statement that has remained consistent over the years: “The Rhythm Society comes together in dance and celebration to encourage spiritual and personal growth, community, and primary religious experience. We welcome people of all faiths or no faith at all. WE ARE ONE IN THE DANCE!”[6] All Rhythm Society events are by invitation only, and the only way to get an invitation is from a member of the Rhythm Society; they are not commercial raves open to the public. Moreover, the doors close at a certain time, usually somewhere from 10:00 p.M. to midnight, and once you leave, you cannot return. This is because, as I noted earlier, as the Rhythm Society states on its invitations, “4 foundational element of our divine celebrations is the creation of a ritual safe ‘container’ in space and time.” I have already described an ANDC in some detail in this volume’s introduction, so I will not repeat that information here except to say that all ANDCs have a theme, an opening and closing ceremony, and altars, thus reflecting the Rhythm Society’s strong spiritual orientation. In 2002, a series of events led to a rift between the Rhythm Society and St. John's Church, and this separation was formalized in the winter solstice ANDC, which was held at another venue for the first time. Since then, the Rhythm Society has dropped St. John's from its name, and subsequent events have been held at other locations. Needless to say, this has been a huge shift in the history and direction of the Rhythm Society.

The overall vision of the Rhythm Society (RS) as a community has also been articulated into the following statement:

"The Rhythm Society has a twofold purpose: First, we create space for direct, experiential forms of spiritual practice. Recognizing that divine rhythm is everywhere, the Rhythm Society celebrates spirit through music, dance, meditation, and play. Familiar traditions express our identity; new explorations evolve it. The Rhythm Society encourages each person to develop their own spiritual path. Second, we cultivate community in which we can play out the daily life implications of insights gained from primary religious experience. Our spiritual, social, and business meetings call upon us to balance our individual desires with the goal of harmony among ourselves, our neighbors, and the world."

Rhythm Society Friends meetings take place once a month and are consistently well attended. In a conversation with one of the founders, it became clear to me that one of the Rhythm Society's models is the Quaker Society of Friends. A person can only become a member of the Friends through the sponsorship of a Friend and then attending a meeting and other RS events. After a year or so, if the person is interested, she can advance to become a voting member. There is also a smaller council with key decision-making responsibilities, as well as a number of committees that focus on particular concerns, such as communications, development, membership, events, and so forth. The RS Friends, the council, the committees, their meetings, and their decision-making process are run on a consensus model, and, to my continuing amazement, it appears to be a model that works very well.

Given its strong spiritual and religious orientation, it is no coincidence that the RS has been associated with a church and, since the split with St. John's, the RS has decided to move in the direction of not only incorporating as a nonprofit organization, but also one that falls under the designation of both "religious organization" and "church"!

In addition to the four seasonal ANDCs, generally held on solstices and equinoxes, there are also a number of other ongoing RS events and activities. Each summer, there is a weekend-long campout rave at a remote location in Mendocino County. This campout includes two nights of dancing to electronic music, shared meals, and other organized activities. However, one of its main pleasures is the opportunity for RS members to socialize with each other throughout the weekend in a relaxed way in a natural setting.

Along similar lines, there is an annual weekend-long retreat, also usually held in a remote location north of San Francisco, but with indoor facilities and lodging. In addition to the opportunities for socializing, the retreat activities revolve more around workshops and discussion groups on a variety of subjects, including dance, spiritual and ceremonial practice, and community building. The RS has a group camp, Blyss Abyss, at the Burning Man festival each year, that takes a lot of time and energy to prepare and that serves as a central focus for RS members and is a place to spend time together. In the Bay Area, there are occasional Friday Night Gatherings, or FNGs, which are organized around a variety of themes or activities and generally last a couple of hours. Some FNGs have featured spiritual and ceremonial practice, talks and discussions, and various explorations in movement and dance. There are two weekly evening meditation groups, one in San Francisco and one in the East Bay. There is an RS choir that meets regularly for members to sing together. There are occasional "supper club" gatherings in which RS members have potluck dinners at a member's house or apartment, and these may also feature videos/DVDs or talks/discussions.

Beyond all of these semi-formal activities, there are also countless additional spontaneous activities constantly taking place, such as organizing a group of people to go see a movie, or attend a musical event, party, or political rally, and so on.

In addition, the RS has a thriving online community as well, with members posting on their confidential chat board messages on a wide variety of topics, ranging from the profound to the trivial, the universal to the personal—including successful calls for help with a number of different matters. Finally, many RS members live together in group households and are involved in each other's lives on a daily basis.

The sum total of all of this activity is a tight-knit group of people who have created a very strong sense of community and, in the process, created a context where the rave experience can be integrated into their lives. RS members touched on this in no uncertain terms:

"I have a couple of spiritual communities, but the Rhythm Society is my primary one right now. It's where I put most of my energy. Definitely, it's a spiritual community. People can have these transcendent spiritual experiences, but I think without a context to understand them in, they can get lost, they can get forgotten. They're seeds and they don't really grow into the flower, unless you have some place to plant them.

Like in the Rhythm Society, we have two meditation groups that meet weekly. And we have monthly get-together events where we talk about spiritual topics. We've had Huston Smith come and talk, we've done Sufi dancing, we've had a shamanic drum-down visioning ceremony, we've done lots of things like that where people come and participate and there's a lot of discussion on spiritual topics. There's a lot of people in the group who meditate or teach meditation or what have you. So I think what it gives everybody is a context to share these spiritual experiences in.

It's also a spiritual community that is intentionally trying to live in a heart-focused way. So I think it's very important to have that context. . . . I think it makes me a better person. I have the opportunity to take that spiritual experience, that experience of love and a way to be with people, out into the world with me. And I think other people in the RS have that same opportunity, too; we provide for each other. And also the Rhythm Society networks extend past just our all-night dances. People are always helping each other out. If you want to buy real estate, you've got a friend in the RS who's a real estate agent. If you need a doctor or psychologist, one of your friends is a psychologist or can refer you to somebody. So we're supporting each other in that way, in a day-to-day way. But I also think what happens is people come through the RS and they come to our events and they go back out in the world and they do their thing." There are people who run shelters for kids, and people who run recycling programs, and people who work at various jobs. One of my friends invited me to attend a meeting, and I discovered that it was not just a community of dancers, but a full-on community dealing with financial and planning issues. It was a real, honest-to-God community that met quarterly to dance. I thought, "My God, this is too unreal." It was my dream manifesting in a real Gothic cathedral. It blew me away.

It's a spiritual community. I think it's as close to a spiritual community as I have right now. I'm not in any church, but I feel like this community is a container for me to express spirit. I feel like there are a lot of people in this community with whom I have great spiritual conversations. I can name five people right now who, when we're dancing and having the same experience, resonate the same way. Yes, that's my spiritual community.

I wouldn't say that the RS as a whole holds my spirituality the way that spiritual expression does. It's very experiential, and there's a lot of talk on the list and times when we're not dancing together. That's friendship, connection, and a very strong community, but I wouldn't be able to say that I find a spiritual community with everyone.

However, I do think it's a spiritual community and a community around common interests. I don't know if you call doing self-exploration work a spiritual practice—some would call it a psychological practice. There are different realms you can exist within. Because I know that not everyone in the Rhythm Society's spiritual community considers it a spiritual community for themselves. They consider it a social community for themselves.

But, for me, it's a spiritual community. As well as other things. . . . I think being in community with like-minded people is a facilitator and a support network.

Moontribe is one of the original Southern California rave communities and has been throwing epic Full Moon Gatherings at various locations in the Mojave Desert for over twelve years. Inspired by the seminal outdoor Full Moon parties put on by the Wicked crew in the San Francisco Bay Area in the early 1990s, a core group of Los Angeles ravers threw the first Moontribe full moon desert party in June of 1993, and things took off from there, growing from a small, intimate event to large gatherings of several thousand people.

The full moon parties were . "Profound for me because I was going in knowing what I was doing. We would facilitate energy circles where the entire party would be holding hands and dancing together, giving each other energy and love. It was wonderful to see all these different people coming together through music, dance, and psychedelics. We had some very profound group experiences." And these profound group experiences led to a growing sense of community, not just out in the desert, but also back in Los Angeles, where people lived. As Moontribe veterans note, "It pretty much created a community, a network, or group of networks of people." It was very spiritually important to people. People came out and the energy they took back into the city from the events would keep them going. Friendly people, acceptance. Within the Full Moon Gathering, definitely there’s smaller groups of friends and everything, there’s probably maybe twenty, thirty of my closer friends that are sort of our community. We hang out a lot, spend a lot of time together. But the Full Moon Gathering became a place where people could go and have a sense of community, which I think is sorely missing in Western capitalistic society in general and particularly in a place like L.A., where it’s absolutely almost a void. I mean, I barely even talk to my neighbors here. And get a sense of belonging. The community’s the big thing, people you can turn to for help. There’s definitely people who look to the community to help them with finding places to live, work. I certainly don’t think I'd be as successful doing what I do. . . without this network of people. It’s largely due to the fact that these are all good people."

However, as the Full Moon Gatherings grew in size, they also experienced growing pains: "We had gotten to this size at our three-year anniversary where it was just like three or four thousand people or something crazy like that. And it was really starting to get a little out of control. And we didn’t have any security. And we all recognized it was just a matter of time before someone gets hurt. Someone’s going to drive home and get into an accident, or something bad was going to happen. And so we talked about it and we basically decided to take it farther underground. There would only be a handful of directions that would go out and you would have to caravan with somebody and follow them to get to the party, which greatly reduced the size back down to maybe a couple hundred people. We got a lot of flak about that in the larger southern California scene down here. But I mean, the party, we had basically lost control. Kids were showing up on amphetamines, doing nitrous, all this kind of stuff that we really weren’t about, all this negative sort of gross stuff. So we were just like, “well, we’re not going to lose this” and we took it more underground. Some of these concerns turned out to be prescient: The Moontribe had a really huge trauma when a kid died about four years ago now. And it’s a mystery exactly how he died, what happened, whether he was high on something or not, or tripped and fell, or jumped. But that was a big turning point and sort of a moment of people really having to start looking at what they were doing in a little bit more serious way. Then the Moontribe went on a more infrequent schedule after that, instead of every month regularly, which had been completely like clockwork, no matter rain, shine. They missed only one full moon out of seven of eight years up to that point. And then they kind of broke down to doing it every three months. But they've been through waves where it would get really large for a while and really chaotic, and then they'd have to shrink it down and get really exclusive and elitist in how they organized, and have the directions and the caravans. And it’s gone through a few cycles of that kind of expansion, contraction, expansion, contraction.166 TRANCE FORMATION

Despite accusations of elitism, Moontribe has managed to maintain its core identity and “vibe” by contracting and expanding. “We survived,” one member noted. “We just had our ten-year anniversary this summer. And I don’t think we would have survived nearly that long if we hadn’t done that, not even close. . . . It still does have that vibe today!”

A similar process has taken place with Moontribe’s organizational structure. There was always a core collective of about a dozen central people who were involved to varying degrees. The collective has been precise at times and loose at others.

After Pablo died, they tried to create a council and a collective. The council was the inner core, and the collective was people who volunteered and helped with various tasks. They also tried to establish a community to provide input for the council's decisions, but it didn't last long.

Moontribe is an interesting example of a rave community, having been in existence for over twelve years. The people have formed lasting bonds and grown together through various life changes. Many have jobs, kids, and have formed friendships that originated from the event.

The tribe's ten-year anniversary party was a great event, indicating that Moontribe may continue to be a model of longevity for rave communities in the future. So yeah, I think it [the vibe] really has been preserved. . . . There’s been a little bit of momentum, I think, from that ten-year event because it was such a good party. I know this past month, they had a really good one and I think they’re talking about throwing another one." The Oracle

While Moontribe is an example of longevity in a rave community, the Oracle in Seattle is an example of how a newly formed rave community can make a big impact in a short time. The three founders of the Oracle had already had extensive experience in two of Seattle’s more popular and influential rave crews in the late 1990s—Seelie Court and Starseed—and were drawn to join forces to create something new together. A generous contribution from a donor/investor enabled them to focus full time on developing their vision for a number of months:

"We got to quit our jobs and, for four months, just focus on how we were going to create an intentional, consistent lifelong process together. And we set a commitment together and decided to go as deep as we possibly could."

This process generated the inspiration to create a tarot deck that would be the basis of a series of gatherings:

"It led to this new model, which was . . . to set in motion a series that always changed its theme but that was mysterious. You knew what the possibilities were but you didn’t know what the exact outcome was going to be. . . . How could we do this where we're really capturing an energy and focusing it in a way to step up the level of inspiration each time we do it? And we came up with the Oracle Gatherings, and each of the twenty-three archetypes were born in a two-day period."

As I’ve described earlier in chapter 4, each event is based on an archetype represented by an Oracle card drawn at the closing ceremony of the previous event. This archetype is creatively expressed not only in the decorations, but also especially in the distinctive midnight ritual theater performance. The sequence of events, the Oracle’s website tells us, is usually as follows:

"The evening is opened with a ceremony, yoga, and meditation, as well as special workshops such as contact dance, butoh, etc. Musicians then begin with up to two rooms of up-tempo and down-tempo music. At the peak of the night, we offer the Oracle Ritual based on the archetype of the event, which usually lasts from twenty to forty minutes. Musicians in both rooms continue throughout the night with other community performances until the closing ceremony."

The first Oracle Gathering was held in June 2001 and was attended by several hundred people. Although there was some initial resistance to the tarot-based archetypes and ritual theater performances, this resistance faded as the Oracle found its audience, and attendance has more than doubled in the ensuing three years. In that time, the Oracle has become a well-established and influential rave event and community in Seattle and the larger Northwest region. In addition to all-night events in the city, the Oracle has also held weekend-long campout events in more remote locations, featuring a full slate of workshops and forums throughout the day.

I have already related the story of how, at one of these campout events named for the Mystery School archetype, a member of the Rocky Mountain Mystery School made contact with the Oracle founders and this encounter subsequently led to their close involvement with the school. Here is a bit more about the nature of this involvement:

"We had met with a few other groups that called themselves mystery schools as well that have a very long tradition, and our points of contact have always wanted this kind of fusion between the mystery school and what we were doing, but when we went to this one, that was not in the question." There was no fusion. It was a unique process. They just said, "We would like to supply an ancient foundation for you guys to build this new system." This is a unique, separate, and new system that needed to come out. And that's when we knew we were in the right place.

What the mystery school we're attending now actually teaches is that all the information is available to every person by themselves. No one needs to go outside themselves to discover anything. You just have to get yourself out of the way of the knowledge. And that's what this process has been for us.

What was really interesting is when we went to the mystery school in August, we brought representations of the Oracle, like our promotional pack, and described it to one of the teachers there, even our seal. And he took it and matched it to their lineage of information and realized they're very, very similar. And our seal actually works with Enochian magic—it's very aligned. And so what we're finding right now, in studying with the mystery school, is so much of what we've already done is totally aligned. And the mystery school is teaching us more about discipline and focus, and how to bring the magic in at an even deeper level.

We're going to be helping to create a new program for the mystery school in June and they're going to create a school that's centered around learning how to tune in and express through different forms of art like dance and music and performance, etcetera.

This involvement with the Rocky Mountain Mystery School has now extended well beyond the Oracle's founders into their larger community in the form of ongoing classes, workshops, practices, and ceremonies in Seattle, and it is clear that this work has had a powerful impact in everyone's lives. So, much in the same way that the Quakers' Society of Friends serves as a model for the Rhythm Society, the mystery school serves as a model for the Oracle community. This model applies to the organizational aspect of the community as well, and as one might expect with a mystery school, it is not a model that is based on consensus. The idea is, Organize a group of people that's small enough to maintain focus but not big enough to disperse that focus or imbalance the process. And then organize a group outside of that. So, if any of this group out here we lose or have differences with or they have differences with each other, as long as we keep this nucleus focused, it should vibrate out and rectify issues, which has been really successful so far.

We have a table, called the Oracle Round Table, of leaders that come together and talk about how the Oracle needs to grow. But, what happens is all this information comes and the three of us solidify it, take it in, and make decisions. And we're finding, when we had other production companies and it was an open consensus scenario, it worked for a while, but certain things just never quite got done or decided, really. There's a lot of decisions that were never quite made. So we found with this particular scenario that this system works for us.

Interestingly, within the framework of this kind of clearly delineated power structure, community members are strongly encouraged to empower themselves and take an active part in shaping the direction of the Oracle: One thing I've been finding that I really appreciate about dance culture is, when somebody comes, the process from moving from the side of the wall to the dance floor is almost like a stepping up, a showing up for yourself. So you move to the dance floor, there’s a safety of a lot of dancers dancing on their own or with each other there, but it’s almost like a development in finding yourself, breaking down by releasing through dance, and moving into a leadership position and showing up. Because, ultimately, we need leaders right now. And everybody is a piece of the puzzle. And so our intention with the Oracle is to create a foundation or space for people to come in and step into the dance floor, show up for themselves, do the transformational work that they need to do, go through the letting go process that they need to, and ultimately find a piece that they see that the Oracle may not be tapping into in any part of their life, and take a leadership position to help move the culture forward.

It's helping people discover what their personal power is and what their personal calling is. Because everyone's got a personal vision and the key is discovering how the visions match up together and how they support each other." As with other rave communities, members of the Oracle community also live together in group households, spend a lot of time with each other in various contexts, and actively participate in an online community forum.

Tribal Harmonix

While the Oracle was becoming an influential rave community in the Seattle area, Tribal Harmonix was doing the same thing north of the border in the Vancouver area and the Sunshine Coast of British Columbia. However, their evolution was more gradual and organic, arising out of community processes already in motion:

Mind Body Love [a peer-based harm-reduction project] went into the party scene and provided knowledge about safer use of drugs and safer sex practices and just provided a grounding point in the gatherings where people could get support. The notion behind this became so apparently needed and so nourishing that very quickly it accumulated its own community. And I found myself living with a household of people in this context of, “We're creating community now. This is what we’re doing. We're attracting this community and setting that intention.”

This began to precipitate into other realms where we were, like, “okay, now we discover that we have something beyond just partying that holds us together. How else can we create relationships so that we have more things we can do together?” And from that began a potluck series where people would rotate around and friends of friends would get to know each other as we were spreading ourselves into each other's homes and sharing space with each other in more intimate settings.

Another thing we did was create something called Sunday School, where we took Sundays as a time to gather and school each other in different things that we were interested in or that we had learned about or wanted to investigate. And out of that came dance projects, where we created dance ritual together. We investigated Timothy Leary's eight-circuit model. We explored communication and emotions, our relationships, all kinds of things that just built community.

And all of the sudden, it came through at Earthdance, that we're onto something really powerful, all of our solstices and equinoxes are generating this intentional atmosphere where people are coming out to connect with something more ancient and recognizing that in the modern-day context and putting things towards causes that can help benefit today. And a few of us involved in the Earthdance organizing began to imagine what it would be to create an ongoing organizational form that helps generate more of this kind of community building, helps to become more of service in the larger context than just for ourselves. And this is where Tribal Harmonix was conceived. In addition to Earthdance, there were other outside influences that helped shape Tribal Harmonix as well: [In 1996] several people from the Vancouver area that were doing underground-related events traveled to Burning Man for the first year that they'd been. And when they came back, they started to bring a very artistic level into their events that was also inspirational. That’s roughly around the time that the harm reduction stuff started taking off in response to a lot of need for it... And the response was creating slightly more intentional events, where people got to feel more nurtured and feel more a sense of family. The second year we went down to the Gathering of the Tribes, there were twenty of us, up from four the first year. And in our own community, we had gone through a process of fundraising to get to Gathering of the Tribes that brought us together as a collective, as we had to work together to fundraise our way. And the traveling experience was like a rite of passage where we took our community on the road and introduced it to other communities, and received feedback on our own community that we have something that’s special. And we came back with the information that we learned. And so we began entering into this whole other way of acting as a community.

The group has articulated its vision for this way of acting on its website: Tribal Harmonix is an umbrella organization that promotes the growth of sustainable community and tribal culture through dance, music, celebration, creative expression, and education. Our mandate is to encourage new ways of thinking by supporting gatherings, workshops, and special events that raise consciousness of environmental, social, political, spiritual, and youth issues.

I have already described my experience at Intention, Tribal Harmonix’s annual New Year’s retreat held over five days on the Sunshine Coast, but here I include a veteran Northwest raver’s description: The thing that makes those gatherings special is they're really not just parties. They're really more about workshops and sharing and learning and that goes on for many days and then there’s a party at the end for New Year’s. . . . It’s all these workshops and all this learning that went on that was really memorable and powerful and empowering and awesome. I think Tribal Harmonix, they do it the best of anything I’ve seen... The Tribal Harmonix crew, those people are completely open. Their doors are all open. They pretty much are all living their lives actively in the mission of the path. They’re very integrated with each other. So they're really working on community building and increasing the collective energy. It’s a very collective level. They've really moved beyond the individual. Up there it’s like the tribe comes together. We're not bringing all these individual elements—it’s the tribe. Those gatherings, you'll totally see somebody sitting in the middle of the dance floor doing yoga all night. There’s massage sessions on the side, Reiki healing going on here and there. It’s almost completely in excess, the spiritual practices that are going on around there. It’s like they’ve really taken the cork off the bottle and the genie’s completely out, so you get your complete fill with people being in spirit at those kinds of things.” The model for this community is clearly tribal in nature and the spiritual orientation is very earth-based. In this regard, they also reflect classic concerns of alternative culture in the Pacific Northwest—environmentalism, sustainability, permaculture, and bioregionalism. Like other rave communities, many Tribal Harmonix folks also live together in group households, both in the Vancouver and Sunshine Coast areas, spend a lot of time together in various contexts, and actively participate in an online community forum.

Earthdance
The vision for Earthdance began in 1996, when Chris Deckker, a member of the electronic tribal trance band Medicine Drum, had the idea to synchronize dance floors at raves throughout the world in a global meditation for peace that would also raise money to benefit Tibetan causes. At the Dalai Lama's suggestion, the scope of these causes was expanded beyond Tibet to include charities that benefit children, indigenous peoples, international relief and development, the environment, and peace. Through 2003, Earthdance events have raised a cumulative total of more than one million dollars.

According to the Earthdance website:

"What began in 1997, with 22 cities in 18 countries has now expanded to over 130 cities in 50 countries. Rising out of the global electronic music scene, Earthdance has now grown to include a diverse cross-section of musical genres including world music, jazz, conscious hip-hop, folk and reggae. Earthdance has shown how the potent combination of music, dance and technology can be harnessed for positive and humanitarian aims. For one night all around the globe, people join together to dance as one global community, united with a common vision for peace and humanitarian aims."

Some of the participating cities in 2004 included Vancouver, Los Angeles, San Diego, Calgary, Albuquerque, Colorado Springs, Madison, Chicago, Detroit, Ann Arbor, Pittsburgh, Asheville (NC), Sarasota, Miami, Toronto, Ottawa, New York, Mexico City, Rio de Janeiro, Buenos Aires, Santiago, Johannesburg, Capetown, London, Manchester, Amsterdam, Cologne, Vienna, Budapest, Sarajevo, Madras, Delhi, Beijing, Sydney, Melbourne, and several cities in Japan. Each city has its own sequence of activities and musical lineup, but they all unite at a prearranged time for the synchronized global meditation for peace.

I was in the Pacific Northwest at this time, so I attended the Vancouver satellite version put on by Tribal Harmonix at a beautiful beachfront location in Stanley Park, and it was a fantastic event. At 4:00 p.m., a couple hundred people joined hands and formed a large circle for the global meditation. This prayer circle was amazing in and of itself, but it was made more powerful by the knowledge that we were connected to thousands of people across the planet doing exactly the same thing. Live drumming followed, and then DJs spun electronic dance music as the dance floor went off with high energy and a palpably great vibe.

The central hub event, held on the Hog Farm's land in Laytonville, California, was attended by thousands of people, and featured several stages of music and performance, along with an area for activist and nonprofit organizations, a speakers forum organized by Gathering of the Tribes, a children's area, and a film festival. The success of Earthdance demonstrates that global rave culture is more than just a theoretical construct, and is truly an interconnected planetary network that can be mobilized as a force for good in the world.

Gathering of the Tribes
While Earthdance has done a lot to facilitate the planetary network of global rave culture, Gathering of the Tribes (GoTT) has focused more on linking up different rave communities on the West Coast of the United States and Canada. The inspiration for GoTT came from tours undertaken by Moontribe, during which they discovered a number of sister rave communities and felt it was important to link them all up. Gathering of the Tribes had the idea of getting together all these tribes up and down the West Coast for gatherings to put all their heads together and see themselves as a unified whole and work parallel themes. They've been doing a couple of gatherings a year.

Living Laboratories 175

Here is GoTT's mission statement and self-description: Gathering of the Tribes unites and supports dance music collectives and others in support of the dance movement by cultivating networks and promoting activism, education, sustainability, and the art and culture of the dance music underground. The Gathering of the Tribes is an annual conference and festival uniting artists' collectives from across North America and Europe. Founded in 1999, Gathering of the Tribes (GoTT) began as a networking and unity-building resource for organizers and artists within the electronic dance music culture. Five years later, GoTT has emerged as a meeting ground for artists, activists, organizers, and visionaries from across the progressive spectrum. Using a unique blend of interactive workshops, visual art displays, and live performance, Gathering of the Tribes provides participants with a space for dialogue and expression, and the information and resources necessary for building progressive change.

In 2004, GoTT decided to go beyond their annual conference and festival and work within the context of larger intertribal gatherings attended by different rave communities. One big project was to organize the speakers forum at Earthdance's central hub event in northern California. In addition, they also organized a forum at Burning Man, which the author was fortunate to attend, along with members of False Profit, Moontribe, the Oracle, Rhythm Society, Tribal Harmonix, and other rave communities. It provided a great opportunity for rave communities not only to feel they are part of a larger network and vision but also to make connections, learn from each other's experience, and perhaps even to collaborate on future projects.

Similar endeavors have been undertaken by other rave groups, such as the Storm Sessions, organized by the Cloud Factory Collective in Oakland the last three years, which feature workshops and forums that bring together a number of rave communities from up and down the West Coast. In general, there has been a notable increase in this type of larger networking activity in the last several years, perhaps indicating that rave communities have moved into a new developmental phase, a significant point acknowledged by a number of ravers:

"A new model is emerging. And a lot of new models are emerging out of that. You go to a different place and you can see, wow, that's happening too, but it's totally different, you know, how they organize themselves and everything. Before, it was like raves had a formula to it, you have these speakers, you put these flyers up and you have a party, but now, it's mutating in such a way that it's actually a group of people that are dynamically creating how the container emerges and what it looks like. And we're only into the phase now where those containers are at a velocity where a community can move. When it starts moving and interacting with other communities and those inspirations cause other inspirations, you'll start seeing a lot more stuff happening." There are people in this community doing it in other communities, and everyone is doing it with the same goal in mind—having a positive impact on the self and the world. They're focused on self-loving, self-awareness, self-actualization, and consciousness. They're creating a support network, working together to create a better world and break free from old paradigms. This movement is similar to the revolution of the 1960s, but it's happening quietly.

RAVE NEW WORLD

It's early October 2004 as I write the conclusion to this book. I just spent my Saturday at the inaugural San Francisco Love Parade. Local organizers brought it from Berlin, hoping to start an annual tradition in the United States. The parade wound its way south along the Embarcadero and past SBC Park, ending in a one-square-block area south of the stadium. Each sound system continued to play music for an enthusiastic crowd until 9:00 p.m., and then everyone dispersed to a large number of "after-parties" throughout the city, lasting into the morning.

San Francisco Examiner columnist P. J. Corkery wrote about the event, describing the "magical pavement-burning street dance" that originated in Berlin. About 15,000 people participated, dancing to electronic music played by DJs on floats. He compared it to the Summer of Love in 1967, calling it "a be-in gone bio-molecular."

Seventeen years after the rave scene first burst into public view, the San Francisco Love Parade proves that the scene is alive and thriving. In the past eight years, rave culture has matured and evolved, producing significant new developments like the Love Parade and other events. Earthdance, Gathering of the Tribes, the Oracle, the Rhythm Society, the Storm Sessions, the Street Parade, and Tribal Harmonix have all come into existence and had a strong impact. The MoonTribe celebrated its 12-year anniversary, significantly increasing its attendance and becoming more widely known in mainstream culture. The Street Parade grew exponentially, attracting one million attendees. The rave scene's qualitative growth is notable, as it has become a fertile ground for cutting-edge explorations in spirituality and community. The rave culture is maturing and entering a new developmental stage, which may lead to new forms of religion and spirituality suitable for the complexities of the 21st century.

The rave culture's exploration of new spirituality and religion could provide answers to the large and important questions regarding connecting with the sacred. The culture is out on the front lines, exploring new territory with energy, passion, and vision, creating experimental new forms and putting them into practice. Rave culture is a significant new spiritual and religious phenomenon, both in itself and as a template for the complex dynamics of other new spiritual and religious phenomena in the 21st century. The first and most important point I want to make is acknowledging the tremendous power of electronic dance music in triggering profound, life-changing religious experiences. In my interviews, I was truly amazed at the testimonies of ravers describing deep experiential states and their deep spiritual implications. In the modern secular Western world, such experiences rarely occur even within the framework of traditional religions. These testimonies clearly point to a significant religious phenomenon, one that thousands of people are participating in on a regular basis.

Although there is a universal connection between music and religion, most of us tend to think of this connection in terms of sacred music in a formal religious context. However, in rave culture, we see an example of an entirely new form of music emerging in a seemingly nonreligious context that, through the sheer power of the experiential states it triggers, leads people inexorably into the realm of spirituality and religion. This example confirms the ‘history of religions’ notion that the human encounter with the numinous, the religious experience, is primary and serves as the foundation for subsequent developments that lead to the organized external forms that we call religion.

Rave culture is an exceptional example of the lofty ideal of "unity in diversity" being put into practice, both on the dance floor at raves and in rave culture in general. Ravers spoke of how the powerful peak experience on the dance floor broke down traditional boundaries of race, class, ethnicity, nationality, religion, age, gender, and sexual orientation, bringing everyone together in an ecstatic unity that transcended these differences. This is especially significant in terms of spirituality and religion, because it demonstrates that even this historically difficult Pandora's box of divisions can be transcended.

This revelatory experience has given ravers a precious taste of unity in diversity actually manifested in the real world, and has provided the impetus to try to figure out how to implement it in a more practical, ongoing way. Some of the intentional rave communities I have examined in this study are compelling examples of this process, providing a context for people of different backgrounds and orientations to come together in unity in their daily lives outside of the dance floor and the rave. In many cases, there is also a strong, conscious spiritual component to these community functions, and again, one that transcends religious differences.

Beyond these communities are the larger networks that have been forged throughout the West Coast, the United States as a whole, and the entire world, and these are also compelling examples of transcending traditional divisions in a larger unity. In particular, the global nature of rave culture demonstrates that geographic, ethnic, and nationalistic divisions can be transcended, which is no small feat. Of course, I don't wish to naively romanticize or idealize rave culture, as it is clearly a primarily white, upper-middle-class, Western youth phenomenon. Every weekend, thousands of people gather in nightclubs, warehouses, and other venues all over the world. They come to dance, to share a communal experience, and to celebrate the spiritual and religious nature of rave culture. As rave culture continues to evolve, ravers are integrating the rave experience into their daily lives, creating communities that foster a sense of belonging and spiritual fellowship. They are forming organizations that can be integrated into mainstream society, and they are working together to positively impact the world.

Although some rave communities are superficial and flaky, many have demonstrated a mature and evolved development. These communities serve as exemplary models for growth and development, showing intelligence and grounded, depth, and integrity. The intentional rave scene has increasingly focused on the spiritual and ceremonial aspects of its culture, acknowledging the spiritual and religious significance of raves and rave culture in the lives of its participants.

In conclusion, rave culture has become a legitimate source of spirituality and a new form of religion. As it continues to evolve, rave culture is pushing the cutting edge of exploration and evolution forward, incorporating ceremonies, spiritual themes, and practices into its events. The excerpt from Gregory Sams' essay, "Dance Culture—A New Church," emphasizes this understanding and expresses the hope and optimism for the future evolution of rave culture and its positive influence on mainstream society. 

Half a million or more people gather in places of worship and joyfully celebrate their humanity and love for one another. The church I am speaking about has no central organization and no published doctrine. There is no one to worship in this church but God in whatever form the churchgoers perceive the universal concept. This new church takes many forms, and gatherings can be located in empty warehouses, purpose-built venues, open fields, on the beach or wherever circumstances lead.

The church goes by many names and here I will simply call it the New Party. I do this because the new devotees often refer to “going to a party” when they are planning their worship, though nothing in the history of partying has ever been the same. The celebration is of life, love, and harmonies.

Indeed, through these parties, today’s generation is reinventing the community, a valuable social tool that has become an increasingly endangered tradition over the last few decades. Central to the new church is the new music, techno. It is essential to the ritual of the dance and the nature of the party that it supports. It is pure music that works with rhythms and beats, made by musicians who work with computers as well as instruments, sampled sounds, and dedicated new technology.

It is music to take your mind where you like, with an absence of complex lyrics or story lines. It is music to dance through the night with. The closest thing to the preacher is today’s DJ, who draws people to a party because of his or her skill at getting the music right—being the vibrant pulse of the party, moving with it and being moved by it.

Dance is the ritual—a celebratory and traditional form of worship. As with some religions, there is a sacrament often taken at these parties, in the form of specific drugs—substances the same as or very like those taken at some of the earliest religious ceremonies recorded from different faiths. Many celebrants will take no drugs at all and just partake of the spirit that is tangibly present.

It is a church of personal enlightenment and revelations that are shared and compared. Participants see God in every aspect of creation and particularly in their fellow human beings. The new church, party, call it what you like, is evolution happening—meeting the needs of our society and filling some of the gaps that the old generation traditionally complain about. It has happened quietly enough on the fringes of society and without the benefit of PR companies or listings in events guides. The church has managed to grow large with a low profile. It is a church that takes great joy in the wondrousness of being—of life itself.

Natasha Singer, born in Minneapolis, Minnesota, in 1964, moved to San Francisco and works as a writer in a Silicon Valley startup company. She is also a DJ who is building a business that leverages good beats for the greater social good. The interview was conducted at her home. Rainie Sunshine was born in 1978 and lives in south Whidbey Island with her husband, James Frazier, and their two children. The interview was conducted at a hotel in Aptos, California. Shannon Titus lives in Oakland, California, and works as a high-tech marketing executive. Now in her late thirties, she is also a DJ who spins at various underground events. The interview was conducted at her home. Sobey Wing was born in 1972 and lives in Gibsons, on the Sunshine Coast of British Columbia. He is a cofounder and core leader of Tribal Harmonix and an organizer of Earthdance Vancouver. He has been involved in various projects in eco-education, youth empowerment through the arts, positive playgrounds, and harm reduction, and works at Urban Shaman in Vancouver, British Columbia. The interview was conducted at a home in Vancouver. In 1997, Bahar Badizadegan was born and raised in Iran, spent her adolescence in Los Angeles, lived in the San Francisco Bay Area for a number of years, and currently resides in New York City. She is in her twenties and works for a record store. She has been involved with various electronic music genres for several years. The interview was conducted at a coffeehouse in San Francisco. Joel Dinolt was born and raised in Detroit and now lives in San Francisco. He is in his twenties, is a guitarist in a band, and has been involved with the rave scene for eleven years. The interview was conducted at a coffeehouse in San Francisco. Jim Dunn was born in 1970, raised in a small town in Indiana, and now lives in San Francisco. He has been involved with the rave scene for nine years and has been a DJ for many rave events. The interview was conducted in Golden Gate Park in San Francisco. Charlotte Kaufman was born and raised in Chicago and now lives in San Francisco. She was exposed to house music as a teenager and has been involved with the electronic dance music world ever since. Now in her thirties, she is a respected DJ known as the Baroness who spins at numerous raves and clubs and has released two CDs. The interview was conducted at a coffeehouse in San Francisco. Gus Lanzas was born and raised in Nicaragua, moved to the San Francisco Bay Area in 1982, and currently lives in San Francisco. He is in his twenties and has been involved with the rave scene for twelve years. He works in multimedia technology and composes electronic dance music. The interview was conducted at a coffeehouse in San Francisco. Chris Lum grew up in southern California and moved to San Francisco in 1993. He is twenty-nine years old and works at a record store. He went to his first rave in 1990 and has been involved in the rave scene since then, as both a participant and a DJ. The interview was conducted at a restaurant in San Francisco. Alaura O'Dell was born and raised in London and, as a member of the band Psychic TV, was strongly involved with the original British acid house and rave scenes in the mid-1980s. Now in her thirties, she resides in Occidental, California, and has her own business conducting travel tours with a spiritual and geomantic orientation. The interview took place in her home. Sabrina Page was born and raised in New Jersey and now lives in Fairfax, California. Born in 1948, she has been involved with various dance communities for over ten years and is a DJ who spins twice a week in San Rafael, California. The interview was conducted at her home. James Romero was raised in various locations in California and has lived in the San Francisco Bay Area for eight years. Now in his forties, he became involved with the rave scene since moving to San Francisco and is himself a DJ. The interview was conducted in his home. Tiffany Scott was born and raised in Los Angeles and has lived in San Francisco since 1994. Now in her twenties, she was involved with the rave scene in Los Angeles since its early days in the late 1980s and has continued her involvement in San Francisco. She is a graduate student who also works for XLR8R, an electronic dance music magazine. The interview took place in a coffeehouse in San Francisco. Jeff Taylor was born and raised in the San Francisco Bay Area and lives in San Francisco. Now in his twenties, he has been involved with the rave scene since the early 1990s. He works in the computer industry and composes his own electronic dance music. The interview was conducted in his home. Vince Thomas lives in San Francisco and works for the computer industry. Now in his thirties, he has been involved with the rave scene since the late 1980s, including organizing large raves and ongoing weekly events in clubs. He is also a key figure in the local electronic dance music label Zoe Magik. The interview took place in his home.




===================\n\n\n



The Politics of Partying: Electronic Dance Music as Collectivist Experimentation and Subversion

Isobel Moloney

Abstract

This study examines how EDM events in Leeds function as a form of political action, using ethnographic research in the form of interviews and observations. This study looks at political action through the lens of Jacques Rancière (1999; 2006), who characterises it as a disruption of the dominant social order. The research also borrows from Elias Canetti's (1962) crowd theory as well as varying conceptualisations of ritual. The study finds that EDM events are able to provide an opportunity for participants to experiment with collectivism in a way that subverts society's neoliberal individualism. This is especially important for marginalised communities as a way of building solidarity and empowerment. Commercialisation, through the infiltration of brands and capital-orientation, threatens the politicisation of these events because it takes focus away from the collectivist experience. However, local collectives in Leeds further subvert this by using socialist organising structures such as being non-profit and the horizontal organisation of collectives.

Introduction

Electronic dance music (EDM) is a unique genre in popular music due to how it can communicate meaning without saying anything at all: "The fact that dance music is a new form of popular instrumental music is what makes it so striking: it is a music which is not based on songs" (Gilbert & Pearson, 1999, p.38, emphasis in original). It can easily be cast aside as repetitive and meaningless; at best, only a tool for mindless hedonism or disappearance, as Melechi (1993) characterises it. However, it is clear that in recent years, different events revolving around EDM have exemplified the interplay between this genre and political action. For example, DJs and EDM artists recently pushed forward the '#DJsForPalestine' campaign as part of the wider BDS movement (Faber, 2018), London welcomed the 'Stop Brexit Soundsystem' during the People's Vote demonstration (Eede, 2019), and Georgian citizens have protested their country's growing conservatism with a "rave-olution" (MacDonald & Vestbirk, 2018, n-p). The connection between music and politics also has the potential to go beyond these traditional modes of political participation by carving out a space for a unique type of collectivism to take shape.

The idea of EDM bringing people together is prevalent in popular discourse, but this is usually without explanation as to why or how this happens. Beyond popular culture, there is a wealth of literature that investigates the unique properties of music in a collective setting. This includes Turino's (2008) examination of participation as a type of musical performance, Hesmondhalgh's (2014) understanding of collective flourishing, and Street's (2012) case for how music has the potential to politically engage citizens. This theory helps to understand how music contributes to a collective experience. Fisher & Gilbert (2013) argue that we are living in a post-political era enforced by a hegemonic capitalist realism, where it seems as if a capitalist system is the only option. A "counter-hegemonic intervention" (p.98) that focuses on subverting individualism is the most viable strategy for re-politicising everyday life, and one way in which this can be done is incorporating communitarian values into cultural activities. This highlights the importance of culture, including EDM, in engaging citizens in political action; therefore, it is essential to understand whether, at this present time, these events are embodying the values that play into a counter-hegemonic intervention. This study looks to expand on this notion by drawing a connection to political action as Rancière (1999; 2006) understands it: a disruption of the dominant social order. Through this lens, I examine how EDM can interact with politics in a variety of ways, with particular focus on how the powerful collective experiences of EDM events can work as a subversion against the individualist and neoliberal ideologies that are prevalent in modern British society.

The research is shaped by the question, is political action present in the organisation and experience of EDM events in Leeds? If so, how does this take shape? The study will be using theory surrounding political action, collectivism, ritual, and collective musical experience and applying it to ethnographic research focused on Leeds's local music scene. This research is implemented through interviews with participants of EDM events and observation of a number of these events. I argue that EDM events in Leeds can act as an opportunity for participants to experiment with collectivism in a way that is inherently subversive in the UK's modern, individualist, and neoliberal society (Dean, 2016).

These events are subversive on a multitude of levels, starting with the powerful, meaningful personal experiences of individuals and how this feeds into a feeling of community and collectivism on the dancefloor. There is also experimentation with socialist organising structures within collectives as a way of subverting the growing commercialism and capital-orientation of EDM events. Throughout this, ritual as a form of social change is an essential mechanism, where participants in EDM events have taken the tradition of collective social experimentation that is prevalent in traditional ritual (Turner, 1967) and have transformed it into an activity that is accessible for citizens in today's society. This is especially essential for marginalized communities, such as the LGBTQ+ community, who see EDM events as a space to build empowerment and solidarity.

On top of this, EDM events are also sometimes sites of overt political action, for example, being a vehicle for fundraising and raising awareness for particular social concerns in the political sphere. The pushback from capitalism, embodied in the infiltration of brands into this subculture, is also subverted by EDM event organizers' experimentation with socialist values, rooted in the horizontal organization of collectives and non-profit structures.

Literature Review

This literature review will be examining key themes of political action and ritual before connecting these concepts to EDM and academia concerning raves. The first section explores the concept of political action, which has been used to guide my research, with special consideration towards Jacques Rancière's (1999; 2006) conceptualization of politics as subversion and applying this to collectivism and social movements. The second section looks at previous work on ritual studies and begins to make connections between trance and music. The third section will be discussing in more detail literature that looks at music as a form of collectivism, as well as the politicization of music, with emphasis on 1990s UK rave culture, where much academia about EDM is focused. This culminates in the argument that political action can be embodied not only by formal political participation but also through subverting the dominant social order in various ways, one of which is the experimental, collective ritualism prevalent in EDM events.

Characterizing Political Action in a Cultural Context
It is essential to acknowledge the distinction between traditional definitions of political action and characterizations that explore participation in a broader sense. Milbrath & Goel (1982) define political participation as "actions of private citizens by which they seek to influence or to support government and politics" (p.2). Political participation can involve activities such as writing to representatives, canvassing, or protesting (Street, 2012). However, political scientists have begun to favor definitions that fall outside of formal political arenas, partly due to the rising significance of social issues like feminism, which are marked by slogans such as 'the personal is political' (Hay, 2007). Politics can occur outside of traditional realms, but it continues to always be inherently linked to human agency (Street, 2012). Hay (2007) takes a more flexible approach with his definition: "Politics, I suggest, is the capacity for agency and deliberation in situations of genuine collective or social choice" (p.77). This characterization is too broad and unhelpful when attempting to apply it to this research. Therefore, Rancière's (1999; 2006) account of political action will be used to understand this concept in relation to EDM events.

He defines politics as "when the natural order of domination is interrupted by the institution of a part of those who have no part" (1999, p.11). 'The part who have no part' refers to those in society who are more disadvantaged or marginalized, with the 'part' signifying the conditions that entitle one to being part of a community. In effect, Rancière's conception of democratic politics is rooted in the disruption of the status quo rather than the more formal routes of political participation that revolve around governmental activity. Rancière (2006) goes on to outline how politics can occur in a cultural context, introducing the concept of the distribution of the sensible. This term conceptualizes how the dominant order determines which individuals, groups, and identities are more privileged based on what is received by the senses, causing both inclusion and exclusion and determining what voices are worth listening to. Politics occurs when an individual or group, belonging to an identity that is not ordinarily recognized in the distribution of the sensible, disrupts what one would normally see and hear; people we rarely see taking the center stage. Rancière focuses on subversive art, but this concept can easily be extended into other cultural arenas such as music.

Taking the idea of politics as a disruption of the dominant social order, it is important to understand the context in which this disruption would occur. In the UK, there has been a convergence of the neoliberalism originating from Thatcher's government in the 1980s and social and demographic changes where new social groupings have replaced traditional ideas of family, class, and community (McRobbie, 2002). This change in values has promoted individualism, where "people increasingly have to become their own micro-structures" (ibid, p.518), meaning that there is an increasing push on self-reliance rather than the community values of working with others to achieve a collective goal. “Neurotic individualism” (Fisher & Gilbert, 2013, p. 94) has become increasingly prevalent, where individuals anxiously construct their identities, constantly feeling in competition with others and repressing collaboration. This is reproduced in mainstream media, especially with the rise of reality TV, which consistently highlights and reflects these values. Western society is increasingly shaped by what Jodi Dean (2016) terms communicative capitalism, which leads to intense individualisation: “Each is told, repeatedly, that she is unique and encouraged to cultivate this uniqueness. We learn to insist on and enjoy our difference, intensifying processes of self-individuation” (p. 31). Dean argues that this process has diminished the power of modern left-wing politics because the assertion of autonomous individualisation has taken focus away from collective objectives, thus atomising members of a movement and shifting focus onto individual interests.

The stagnant nature of some politics is characterised through the term ‘capitalist realism’, articulating the idea that we are living in a post-political era where there is no need for politics or “big ideological conflicts” (Fisher & Gilbert, 2013, p. 90) anymore, and capitalism has dominated our conceptualisation of politics in the form of neoliberal hegemony to the point that it is increasingly difficult to see any alternatives. It has resulted in the depoliticization of work and everyday life, alongside a sense of resignation and lack of hope in how society is structured. May (2008) uses Rancière's understanding of politics in his approach, arguing that political action must be borne out of centring collectivism as an antithesis to wider society's growing emphasis on individualism. Within this, centring the same principles and expressing equality in our daily practices will, in Rancière's (1999) terms, disrupt the dominant order and trigger politics.

Canetti's (1962) crowd theory helps to understand how crowds can embody the collectivism that has the potential to disrupt the dominant order. He argues that the crowd is a space of equality through its complete lack of distinction when 'discharge' occurs: "In that density, where there is scarcely any space in between, and body presses against body, each man is as near the other as he is to himself; and an immense feeling of relief ensues. It is for the sake of this blessed moment, when no-one is greater or better than the other, that people become a crowd." (Canetti, 1962, p. 18) The egalitarian nature of the crowd subverts the hierarchical structure of everyday society, as well as contributing to the force of social movements. For example, Dean (2016) argues that Canetti's conception of the crowd, especially the egalitarian quality of 'discharge', can be translated into party politics, making room for a more collective approach to political objectives, thereby furthering political aims more successfully.

Eyerman & Jamison (1998) argue that "the collective identity formation that takes place in social movements is a central catalyst of broader changes in values, ideas, and ways of life" (p. 7). The subversive symbolic action that is often enacted by social movements can help to form a new collective identity, which in turn challenges the dominant political order (ibid). In social movements, there has been a transition from traditional political issues to culture. Where a movement "originally stood for an entity acting against the political and governmental system, [it] has now been rendered inadequate as a description of the reality of reticular and diffuse forms of collective action" (Melucci, 1996, p. 26). 4). This refers to how collective action has begun to be taken through culture itself, where collective action can take place at different levels beyond traditional political participation (ibid). Fisher & Gilbert (2013) extend on this, arguing that “one of the most effective first steps in the struggle against capitalist realism will be the invention of new ways in which people can become involved with politics” (p.92). Anti-individualism is emphasised here as a counter-hegemonic strategy, with Fisher & Gilbert also suggesting that reclaiming the festival form could be a viable option for introducing a concept of forward-thinking communitarianism. This argument highlights that a subversive, anti-individualist politics can find engagement through non-traditional routes such as musical and cultural events.

Ritual as Socially Transformative Collectivism

One means of collective action comes in the form of ritual. I will be drawing a connection between electronic music events and the socially transformative power of ritual in order to understand how this music can be involved in some forms of political action. Victor Turner (1967) has been a proponent in the anthropological study of ritual, and originally defined it as “prescribed formal behaviour for occasions not given over to technological routine, having reference to beliefs in mystical beings or powers” (ibid, p.19). However, this definition can be restrictive because, due to its strong focus on tribal ritual, it assumes that ritual is defined by a belief in supernatural beings or processes. It also characterises ritual as a formal activity, not acknowledging any room for spontaneity or improvisation. Therefore, many other types of ritual are overlooked (Alexander, 1991).

Alexander uses Turner’s work as a basis for his definition of ritual:

A symbolic, self-reflective, performance that makes a transition to a time and space out of the ordinary in order to reflect on an ideal of community and to create, sometimes through routine and sometimes through experimentation, the experience of community. (Alexander, 1991, p.24)

Ritual can work as a form of challenging or transgressing the hegemonic status quo (Rietveld, 1993), as well as working as a social practice with the aim of tying members of a society or social group together (Eyerman & Jamison, 1998). Alexander (1991) argues that ritual is socially transformative through its response to the divisiveness and alienation of everyday social structures and the introduction of communitarian values: “Because it is in the nature of social structure to work against the community, ritual emerges again and again” (p.3). They often involve suspending the individual’s social status through what Turner (1967) calls ‘communitas’, which allows for egalitarian exchanges that oppose the traditional social structure, questioning social roles and opening up new possibilities through experimentation — much like Canetti’s (1962) conceptualisation of the crowd.

Focusing more closely on musical events, Alexander (1991) outlines the concept of liminoid genres, which can be embodied in collective activities relating to art and music. Liminality refers to “ritual’s transcending the fixed social and cultural systems of the everyday world while exploring alternative arrangements” (p.15). Liminoid genres are liminal-like; not identical to traditional ritual yet similar in function. They differ to what can be conceived of as ‘traditional’ ritual through how they are non-religious, not necessarily collective, not obligatory for every member of society, and not central to the social process. As a result, this type of ritual isn't as beneficial for the working of social structure and tends to offer critique instead, but it can still provide a "transitional framework" (p. 21). In modern societies, liminoid genres tend to be more prevalent, and this is the kind of ritual that EDM events belong to. Schechner (1993) highlights how expressive non-verbal communication is often present in ritual as a way of potentially shortcutting thinking and consideration:

Individual and collective anxieties are relieved by rituals whose qualities of repetition, rhythmicity, exaggeration, condensation, and simplification, stimulate the brain into releasing endorphins directly into the bloodstream, yielding ritual's second benefit, a relief from pain, a surfeit of pleasure. (Schechner, 1993, p. 233)

These personal, pleasurable experiences are related to trance. Trance has long been examined in an attempt to decipher its connection to music, but there are many conflicting accounts of this relationship (Rouget, 1985). Rouget (1985) describes this phenomenon as often embodying movement, noise, and sensory overstimulation, and occurring in the company of others. It can also often induce impulsive behavior that would be considered strange in a normal setting.

Rouget (1985) attempts to determine what features of music induce a trance state by comparing many different cultures that incorporate trance into their ritual practices. He identifies two significant musical features in rhythmic breaks and an intensification of sound, for example, an acceleration of tempo or a building crescendo. He also notes that dance is very significant as a form of physical release and expression: "In all its aspects, it is, above all, communication — with oneself and with others" (p. 17).

Many of these characteristics of trance that Rouget (1985) identifies can be found in experiences of electronic dance music. For example, the intensification of music that Rouget describes is a common trait in this genre, with a very common structure of breakdowns and crescendos that are further emphasized when mixed by DJs. Dancing is also a common activity at these events.

Canetti (1962) also discusses the significance of the 'rhythmic crowd', where the crowd is focused on movement, revolving around intense, growing excitement and frenzy: "There appears to be a single creature dancing, a creature with fifty heads and a hundred legs and arms, all performing in exactly the same way and with the same purpose" (p. 32). Canetti focuses on synchronized dancing, but this idea can be communicated to the more improvised nature of electronic dance music events, where everyone who partakes in the crowd is guided by the same music.

These concepts all feed into an idea of ritual as primarily functioning to facilitate social exploration, equality, collectivism, and impulsive expression that can be encouraged by specific musical features. The key features of ritual that have been identified historically draw close connections to typical behavior at EDM events, emphasizing the subversive value of anti-individualist community in these spaces, as well as the potential for ritualistic activities to be translated into a contemporary context.

Rave as Ritual and Resistance

Important connections between culture and politics are often downplayed (Eyerman & Jamison, 1998). Street (2012) argues that music events can work as unconventional political action and have historically acted as an infrastructure for such politics by inspiring collective action and providing a foundation for social action. The arts can emotionally engage us, allowing for internally reflective political deliberation and the development of an ability to empathize. Street (2012) argues that cultural experience is important, as music can help construct individual identity and contribute to the building of collectivism through shared values (DeNora, 2000; Hesmondhalgh, 2014).

Turino (2008) focuses on how people can engage with music. He defines participatory performance as a performance with no artist-audience distinctions, where the primary goal is to involve the maximum number of people in the same performance role (Turino, 2008, p.26). Participatory performance emphasizes the potential for social bonding and creates an egalitarian environment, subversively democratic.

Many characteristics of participatory performance correlate with what can be expected at EDM events, such as the value placed on the level of participation displayed through dance. Turino points out that participatory performance doesn't fit with the wider capitalist, competitive approach to music-making and societal structure. Rancière's (1999; 2006) concept of politics as a disruption of the status quo can be seen in EDM events.

Rietveld (1998) argues that raves, popularized in the UK in the 1990s, are inherently political. The disruptive nature of this music has tied in to making political statements, as seen in a 'Stop Brexit' protest in London on 23 March 2019. The politicism of this genre was emphasized when 'rave' was written into law in 1994's Part V Section 53 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act, named 'Powers in relation to raves' (Rietveld, 1998). This legislation outlawed unlicensed open-air music events with specific emphasis on repetitive beats, placing significant restriction on this subculture (Gilbert & Pearson, 1999). Acid house parties and raves need to be understood in the context of Thatcherite politics, where restraints were constantly put on 'moral excesses,' highlighting a fear of the unregulated body. This emphasizes the moral panics reinforced by the sensationalist press, which is historically common regarding the working-class youth that these parties attracted (Rietveld, 1993). This again reflects the subversive nature of politics that Rancière draws attention to. However, there is a clear split in literature regarding rave as a means of escape, where some academics view it as an apolitical void, and others view it as an intense, affective experience that can feed into politics. Fraser (2012) sees electronic dance music clubs and spaces as oriented towards producing hedonistic spaces, where it is difficult to find a political message, even if there is subversion and resistance.

There are strong themes of disappearance and ‘the void’ in this literature; Rietveld (1993) writes, "Rather than creating a spectacle of resistance or 'alternative' patterns of living, the rave offered a release from day to day realities, a temporary escapist disappearance like the weekend or holiday." (Rietveld, 1993, p.58). Melechi (1993) goes into more detail with this, highlighting that popular music critics saw rave as the death of youth culture with no resistance or empowerment. Ravers 'implode' and disappear into the music: "A fantasy of liberation, an escape from identity. A place where nobody is, but everybody belongs" (p.37).

However, Hutson (1999) acknowledges the strong personal experiences potentially acquired in raves, making a clear connection between rave and ritual as a form of spiritual healing by identifying the DJ as the shaman who guides the ravers on their journey, achieving synchronicity by being guided by the same music. In Hutson's research, many interviewees expressed how EDM events had released their anxieties, opened their minds, empowered them and helped them find inner peace. The similarities between rave and traditional ritual even run through the religious terminology that is used in reference to rave, and how raves have quite often taken place in religious locations. Hutson also acknowledges the anti-individualist, anti-capitalist element to rave, in one way embodied by the lack of focus on the DJ (Hutson, 1999).

Dance music has consistently been viewed as subversive in a number of histories. Straw (2001) notes how Britain's rave culture is often considered a revolutionary subculture. Dancing has consistently been seen as controversial through how it is uniquely intimate and expressive in a way that would be perceived very differently outside of the context of dance music events - "the very model of social disorder" (Straw, 2001, p.158).

Generally, it is clear that EDM events, including raves, offer a way of subverting the dominant social order through their disruptive nature as well as their focus on communitarian values. The Commercialisation of Electronic Dance Music

Even though EDM has historically been considered subversive, as this music scene has grown in popularity, it has become more commercialised and increasingly reflects neoliberal, capitalist ideologies because they have started to feed into how these events are run (Fraser, 2012; McRobbie, 2002). Fisher & Gilbert (2013) deem modern festivals, a popular type of EDM event, as being "sanitised and corporate" (p.101). This has been an issue for almost as long as EDM has existed, with Brewster & Broughton (2006) pointing out that even one of the original gay clubs oriented towards house music in the early eighties, the Warehouse, became "increasingly diluted" (p. 

318) as more straight clientele were entering the space and owners doubled the entry fee in light of the club's growing success. Relating to Turino's (2008) argument that participatory performance is antithetical to profit-making, competition and hierarchy, there is an increasing conflict between the powerful collective experience of EDM and the commercialisation and corporate interference that directly contradicts the collectivist values of this experience. EDM has been increasingly infiltrated by corporate sponsorship and branding as companies have co-opted dance music culture as a way to reach a new audience. Moore (2005) outlines how, as baby boomers grew older, advertisers found the younger generation was a more difficult market to penetrate as they were considerably more sceptical of advertising. Because of this, advertisers began to use associations with music, fashion and celebrities in order to construct an image of authenticity, realising that "youthful expressions of alienation and rebellion can be valuable commodities" (p.231). This led to a commercialisation of subcultures that had been valuable for youth as a symbol of rebellion, and as this developed, young people began to feel alienated "because they no longer own or control the culture they have produced and their expressions of rebellion are now consumed by the 'mainstream' audience they define themselves against" (p.233). On top of wanting to penetrate a new market, brands want to connect emotionally with customers in order to increase loyalty in a climate where competition is constantly increasing. Developing a brand personality, where the brand is associated with human characteristics so that they are perceived as a friend, can be achieved through entering new, 'cool' markets such as the music business (Taylor, 2016). This works as a "trojan horse" (ibid, p.59) where brands can more subtly insert themselves into youth cultures. There are increasing examples of this, for example, stages at festivals across Europe branded as '#SmirnoffHouse', with the alcohol brand even running sponsored editorials in popular music press (Mixmag, 2017). Additionally, energy drink company Red Bull has had a long-term involvement in music via the Red Bull Music Academy. Running for twenty years, the company took aspiring musicians and DJs to various cities across the world for a series of workshops focused on electronic music, marketing itself as a "global music institution committed to fostering creativity in music" (Red Bull Music Academy, 2019). The penetration of branding into EDM culture is also not a recent development. 1994's Criminal Justice and Public Order Act caused large, unlicensed dance events to be outlawed and replaced with the clubs that are a more familiar environment for EDM today: "The underground scene was legalised (and largely sanitised), and the money started rolling in" (Brewster & Broughton, 2006, p.533). Because of this mainstreaming of EDM, advertisers saw clubbers as ideal targets, meaning that they increasingly penetrated the clubbing scene through brand deals with some of the UK's larger clubs. Brewster & Broughton (2006) argue that "never before had a musical culture been so thoroughly infiltrated" (p.544). This literature review has outlined how political action can take the form of a subversion of the status quo or dominant social order, as per Rancière's (1999; 2006) theory. Ritual can play an important part in subverting traditional social structures and acting as a method of experimenting with new social organisation. Previous literature has looked at some of the ways in which EDM events can work as a platform for social experimentation and subversion, as well as more traditional types of political participation. However, most academia focuses on UK rave culture in the 1990s, so it is important to understand how EDM has developed from there to the present day. In addition, there is growing infiltration from capitalism and commercialism into musical subcultures, which can often de-politicise EDM events by taking value and focus away from the collective experience. This theoretical basis will be used to explore how political action is implemented in Leeds's EDM scene.

Methodology

The research consisted of semi-structured interviews and participant-observation. I interviewed six people in Leeds who are active participants in the local EDM scene, ranging from local promoters and DJs to people who regularly attend EDM events. I also attended and observed a number of various EDM events in Leeds over a period of around four months.

Qualitative, ethnographic research was most appropriate for this project because the research involves understanding participants' world-views and opinions. I wanted to gain a detailed understanding of their personal experiences of EDM events and their attitudes towards certain subjects. Therefore, this information cannot be easily measured by quantitative data. It also means that as a researcher, I can have a more flexible involvement in data collection, where I can explore new paths in the research where this would otherwise be impossible (Allan, 1991).

To find a sample for the interviews, I used my already-established trust network in the local community, as Garcia (2011) suggests, to find participants in the local EDM scene who would have enough experience to contribute to the research. This included some 'snowball sampling' and was one of the few options to find interviewees when conducting research in 'closed' communities such as small, local music scenes. However, this can lead to only sampling a social network rather than a whole scene, so it was important that I branched out by attending events in Leeds to meet new people to interview (Garcia, 2011). It was also important to interview a varied sample of people from diverse backgrounds who were not just promoters and DJs in order to avoid data that was homogenous and potentially biased.

The interviews were semi-structured, so I prepared a list of questions (Appendix 3) which were the same for each interview, albeit some minor differences depending on the interviewee's occupation in Leeds's music scene. This meant that I had some structure through which I could compare what different interviewees said but could probe further if needed, for example, where I wanted more details from interviewees, or to explore an idea in more detail (May, 2011).

I recorded the interviews with the interviewee's permission and later fully transcribed from the recordings to allow for better analysis and the use of full quotes when exploring the material further (Sherman Heyl, 2001). In regard to ethical considerations (appendix 4), I ensured that I had informed consent through having participants sign a consent form (appendix 1) and provided each interviewee with an information sheet (appendix 2) that gave detailed information about what the research was for and how their data would be used. I also kept interviewees' data safe and private, and protected their identity through the use of pseudonyms. The interviewees were also informed before giving consent, given how the interviews concern public events, that even with the use of pseudonyms, it may be possible for their identity to be deduced if they are well-known in Leeds's local music scene (Garcia, 2011). Consent was given with this in mind. The main objective of participant-observation was to understand Leeds's EDM events in more detail through my own experience. Emerson et al (2001) write that it involves "establishing a place in some natural setting on a relatively long-term basis in order to investigate, experience and represent the social life and social processes that occur in that setting" (p.352). Most of the research is guided by the interviews, but the incorporation of observation meant that I was able to validify some of the interviewees' claims and also experience these spaces first-hand. This meant that I was later able to make connections between the interviewees' own experiences and beliefs, what was observed at these events and the principal themes of this study, including political action and collectivism.

I attended a number of different EDM events in Leeds from January 2019 to April 2019. I immersed myself in the event, talked to other attendees as well as the event's organisers, and observed how they were organised and how people behaved and engaged in the event. In ordinary participant-observation, it is expected to take constant field notes and other means of 22 recording such as photos and videos. However, Garcia (2011) argues that doing nightlife fieldwork is very unique, and traditional ethnographic methods do not fit or apply in this circumstance, partly on ethical grounds, because these methods originated from a different context.

First, people often go to EDM events as a "remove" (Garcia, 2011, p.5) from their ordinary lives, even adopting a different persona. Therefore, this must be acknowledged through respecting attendees' anonymity and confidentiality. Second, it is virtually impossible to receive consent to record in these environments, and it can also be very disruptive, which may jeopardise the authenticity of the event and the research gathered while there. Therefore, it is important to only take photos and videos when it seems appropriate and ensure that these do not include anyone's face in the frame in order to protect their identity.

Garcia (2011) recommends to mostly use field notes as a means of recording. This can also be disruptive in EDM spaces, so to avoid this he also suggests doing "memory work": During my time at an EDM event, I focus on "being there": taking note of and interacting with the music, the people and the environment. Then, when I return home (or immediately after I wake up the next morning), I write down as much as I can recall from the event—including any details that I have retained, such as verbatim quotations, particular music tracks played, clothing, décor and so on. (Garcia, 2011, p.9). Taking this approach ensures that the research is as genuine and realistic as possible and the unique environment of EDM events isn't being disturbed by my observation.

Generally, Garcia (2011) suggests that it is essential to embody what is appropriate, and the norms and habits of these spaces. The final factor to be aware of when conducting ethnographic research is acknowledging that researchers can construct reality through how they present their research, which means that readers can only engage in an interpretation. Therefore, it is essential to be aware of how language is used and treat it as a transparent medium. In addition, researchers must be reflexive: "The mature ethnography requires a reflexive awareness of its own writing, the possibilities [p.180] and limits of its own language, and a principle of exploration of its own modes of representation" (Atkinson, 1990). An awareness of all these factors meant that I was conscious of producing an interpretation of Leeds's local EDM scene that reflected reality as much as possible.

Findings
The findings and discussion of this research are separated into three sections. The first section outlines the overt politics that can be found in Leeds's EDM scene, based on the interviewees' own identification of political action. This involves particular focus on fundraising, house and techno's origins in gay black clubs in the US, and attitudes prevalent in 1990s British rave culture. The second section looks at how interviewees' powerful, personal experiences at EDM events feed into a feeling of community and collectivism on the dancefloor through ritualistic behaviour. In turn, this constitutes political action in Rancière's (1999; 2006) terms as these collectivist behaviours and attitudes subvert the individualist, neoliberal structure underpinning British society. This has been especially significant for marginalised communities, such as Leeds's LGBTQ+ community, as this collective environment has contributed to the formation of solidarity and empowerment. The third section looks at how commercialisation has posed a threat to the potential politicisation of an EDM event. This is due to brands increasingly appropriating EDM culture as a means of co-opting subcultural capital (Moore, 2005) as well as capital-orientation in the organisation of EDM events, taking focus away from collectivism and subversion. Despite this, many of the actors participating in grassroots EDM projects in Leeds are aware of this and use alternative methods to subvert the capitalist framework that is prevalent in popular culture.

Overt Politics in Electronic Dance Music
The use of EDM events as an arena for political action is evident in how a Leeds-based charity uses EDM events to fundraise. The charity provides alternative education for disadvantaged young people in Leeds who are struggling in traditional educational environments with the objective of reintegrating them into mainstream school. Joe, the communications manager at the charity, emphasised the "de-prioritisation" of arts funding by the UK's conservative government, emphasising a class divide where the poorest areas in Leeds have little to no arts provisions. This has put onus on the charity to engage disadvantaged youth in creative and practical skill-building. The charity has gained a high profile in the UK's wider EDM scene through its monthly fundraising parties, hosting a number of famous DJs in the room next door to its education facilities. Joe regularly sees an effective and direct relationship between music and politics: "“What I think is really special about [the fundraising parties] is the tangibility... the fact that directly in the room next door to our club space is our classroom space." Essentially, connecting the charity's political cause to an interactive and enjoyable experience like EDM events has, in Joe's view, encouraged attendees of the fundraising parties to take a more community-minded attitude both at the party and with their wider political participation. A number of the interviewees saw dance music as holding a strong connection to its history, creating an inherent relationship between EDM and politics. Two moments in EDM's history were brought up: the origins of house and techno in gay, black, disenfranchised communities in Chicago, Detroit, and New York, and British rave culture in the 1990s. Those involved in events catering to the LGBTQ+ community emphasized reconnecting with this music's roots to develop their own local communities and form their own sense of identity.

In regard to this history, house originated from Chicago as a more electronic progression from disco, becoming popular in the early eighties. One iconic venue for this genre was the Warehouse, which was a space for marginalized communities, often seen as marginal in the wider Chicago club world. Frankie [Knuckles'] music was written off as 'fag music' (Brewster & Broughton, 2006, p.317).

Arnie and Hank, two members of Leeds's LGBTQ+ community, discussed the relevance of this history in navigating the organization of EDM events today. Arnie, a gay man, felt a need to connect with the LGBTQ+ community in his city after feeling he had neglected that part of his identity in relation to dance music growing up. He is a DJ and part of a collective that organizes a popular LGBTQ+ party in Leeds on a monthly basis. The party takes place in a small co-operative venue with a capacity of 200 people. Arnie feels a connection to LGBTQ+ culture through the medium of house music and has tried to connect this to the ethos of his event: "That is kind of what house music was about, it was a space for disenfranchised people to hang out that didn't exist otherwise... And a way to empower people who otherwise wouldn't be able to be." (Arnie, promoter).

Hank, a non-binary DJ with South East Asian heritage, organizes their own events in Leeds as well as helping with Arnie's party. They felt a need to reclaim this music and emphasize the importance of creating spaces for the LGBTQ+ community, especially because Hank and some of their friends often do not feel as comfortable in mainstream EDM environments. Hank felt that prioritizing these communities, with emphasis on QTIPOC (Queer, Trans, and Intersex People of Colour), was essential because they were such an influential catalyst in the beginnings of EDM.

Arnie and Hank's acute awareness of the LGBTQ+ identities they see as ingrained into EDM has meant that they felt a deeper political connection to this music because it is connected to their own identities as well as the wider political challenges that the LGBTQ+ community continues to face. This demonstrates Hesmondhalgh's (2014) argument that music can provide a basis for forming both collective and self-identity. Here, Arnie and Hank drew on the collective identity formation that occurred in the LGBTQ+ community during the birth of house and techno, and they used this to feel more connected to their own sexuality and gender expression.

Interviewees' accounts of the presence of politics in EDM in 1990s rave culture further evidences the connection between EDM and politics. The political aspect of rave was particularly prevalent in light of the 1994 Criminal Justice and Public Order Act that placed heavy restrictions on unlicensed music events, which specifically targeted raves (Gilbert and Pearson, 1999). Joe identified rave as a significant political period in EDM's history due to the government pushback against EDM events. He emphasized the rebellion and subversion that was prevalent in this period as something that can be built upon today. Noah, a local Leeds DJ, longed for EDM to return to its roots, when participants in EDM were more engaged with politics and its relationship with the music: "Why isn't there a bit more political discussion in the scene anymore? Like music, electronic music, has become quite like distanced from... when it started, its roots of being against the law. Well, became against the law, sorry, and there were literally riots in the streets to stop that happening, and now I don't feel like anyone would care if... there was like a pushback to it." (Noah, DJ). Tim, an amateur DJ and regular attendee of EDM events, also inferred that others had denied that EDM had connections to politics while emphasizing that, despite this, EDM is inherently political because of its origins. "Dance music is politics... Dance music started through gay clubs... Because it was like, 'We're not welcome anywhere else so we're gonna go here', so to say that dance music and politics can be in any way separated is completely wrong and really naive." (Tim, DJ & party-goer).

Overall, there was a strong awareness among interviewees that EDM had, during different periods in the last forty years, functioned as a means of political action, either through LGBTQ+ empowerment and solidarity, or the subversive nature of the UK's nineties rave culture. However, some interviewees found it difficult to recognize a similar political action in modern EDM culture. This can be explained by how a number of the parties in Leeds that were identified by interviewees as overtly political cater to specific identities, such as people of color, the LGBTQ+ community, or women. The political aims of these parties seemed to be much more obvious to those they were catering for, where those on the outskirts of these identity-based groups didn't register the political meaning as easily.

The way in which some events are considerably more politically significant for marginalized communities was epitomized by attending Arnie's event and talking to someone who had been working on the door. He told me about how a group of men, who he suspected were straight, had come to the door late in the night to try to get in, but the party was sold out and the venue was very busy, so he turned them away. Not much time had gone by before he had found this group of men trying to sneak into the party, at which point he stopped them and berated them for trying to intrude on the space without paying, especially when all the money that is made from ticket sales goes towards booking popular DJs that sometimes come from abroad. He seemed very discouraged by the situation, saying, "I don't think they understand what this means to the people here. I think it means so much more to me than it does to them." This highlights how an individual's identity and their place in society inherently ties into the political value that they can find in an EDM event that is focusing on empowering a specific community.

Generally, it is clear that EDM events can be used to fundraise as well as raising awareness for specific political issues, which is embodied by the charity that Joe works for. In addition to this, for most interviewees, EDM in Leeds embodies politics because of the way in which its subversive history has set a foundation for attitudes towards EDM today, as well historically working as a platform for solidarity, community and empowerment for those belonging to marginalized communities, which will be explored in more detail in the next section. Forming Collectivism on the Dancefloor

At EDM events, strong personal experiences can, in the right moment, initiate a chain reaction that creates a sense of community and collectivism on the dancefloor. Intense and emotional experiences can reinforce music as a basis for collectivism and vice versa (Hesmondhalgh, 2014). These collectivist values are inherently political due to their subversion of the neoliberal individualism that is prominent in British society, where “neo-liberal rhetoric draws on discourses of individualism and self-responsibility to constitute the self as a project of self-realization” (Riley et al, 2010, p.35).

The powerful personal experiences of EDM events are often intertwined with trance, which has the potential to feed into a collective trance, relating to Canetti's (1962) crowd theory. This creates a space for ritualistic social experimentation, where new social structures and communitarian values can be explored in a collective environment (Alexander, 1991). This experimentation is often embodied by a sense of 'oneness' or 'togetherness' at these events; in effect, constructing a feeling of community that is increasingly difficult to experience in a society inundated with individualism.

All of the interviewees were easily able to recall their most memorable experiences of EDM events, whether they were an attendee, promoter or DJ. The descriptions of these experiences were passionate and detailed, with Tim, an amateur DJ and regular party-goer, even able to remember the exact set times of an event he attended over three years prior. EDM events were also important for some in negotiating their personal lives and identities. Amie said that EDM helped him 'find himself as a teenager, and Hank said that these experiences were very significant in helping them come out as non-binary:

"It was like one of, one of many things that kind of shaped my own process of being able to come out, and [queer parties] gave me a space where I could genuinely be who I wanted to be and explore that side which was fantastic." (Hank, DJ/promoter)

Music can act as a basis for helping an individual "identify identity" (DeNora, 2000, p.69), and it can be "appropriated" (ibid) as a way of constructing self-identity. Here, it is clear that both Hank and Arie have used music to explore their identities as part of the LGBTQt community. They explored collectivism through the experience of being at a queer party that is rooted in solidarity as well as through an understanding of house and techno's origins in gay clubs.

A number of interviewees referred to escapism - attending EDM events allowed them to be released from the normalities and stresses of everyday life, where they can 'shut off', 'lose themselves' and 'let go'. Hank explained how the feeling of letting go at these events through dancing could work in contrast to the strains of everyday routine:

"I think especially when you get into kind of like 9-to-5s and when you've got, like, routines that you have to do to just pay the bills, you kind of... just like letting go and refreshing yourself [sic], and I think that's always been the case like historically. When you look at northern soul, like, that was industrial workers literally doing ridiculous hours until Friday and then just dancing until they couldn't stop on the Saturday. I think it's just part of it, it is just the fact that you can just wash away a week, and, like, "Yeah, I'm over that,' and start something new." (Hank, promoter and DJ) 31 On a personal level, trance can be a powerful meditative experience for attendees. Tim said he has often intentionally tried to achieve a trance state to connect to the music and "get in the zone." Noah, a local DJ, characterized this as a "meditation" that is easy to connect to at EDM events because of its simplicity and repetition. This pure feeling of rhythm, because it's not tied to thought, it's not tied to language necessarily, it can be just a way of losing yourself. And I think that goes through most disciplines, if somebody likes a discipline, if it's art or it's music, usually it's, I think, to shut off that voice in your head, like we're forgetting about that for now. It's just you know, it's like, it's kind of this nice focus that it gives, and dancing is a way to kind of get a lot more in line with your body and feel, you know, work yourself out I guess. (Noah, DJ & party-goer). Arnie similarly described this experience as a type of work or exercise: "Just on a psychological or a mental level, there's something incredibly powerful about just dancing to repetitive beats to just feel in the moment and be very present where you are now... like... 'I feel like I've exercised something there, I feel like I've got something out my system'" (Arnie, DJ & promoter).

These rich descriptions demonstrate how participating in an EDM event can involve a juxtaposition of "focus" and being "present" with shutting off and losing yourself. This demonstrates that there is more engagement here than some academics have described in their analysis of EDM (Rietveld, 1993; Melechi, 1993). The escapism that these academics have outlined can, in fact, feed into a form of meditative engagement, where actors have a heightened awareness of the present, their experience of trance and ritual, and the feeling of community that comes with this.

Hank's description of what they felt was the perfect environment for an event highlights the careful balance between being free from the ordinary restrictions and stresses of everyday life while still feeling present in a collective experience: "You want a space to be kind of like not too dark but... enough that you can see each other but dark enough that you can let loose." This emphasizes the potential for a collective trance that builds a subversive collectivism in a space. Achieving a collective trance holds similarities with Canetti's (1962) characterization of crowds, especially his concept of discharge, which is the moment where the crowd rids itself of its individual differences and, in pursuit of equality, moves as one body. This is inherently subversive when, outside of these spaces, hierarchies are ubiquitous and emphasis is put on individual difference (ibid). In terms of EDM events, discharge can be achieved in various ways that are centered around collectivism and equality, including the relationship between the DJ and the crowd as well as a feeling of shared values within that crowd. Most of the interviewees pointed out how they liked to feel connected to the DJ, with both Hank and Tim describing a feeling of being "with the DJ." This can be embodied on a physical level where the DJ booth is at crowd level rather than on a stage, with a smaller, more “intimate” crowd. This highlights the importance of creating a communal, egalitarian space, breaking down traditional hierarchies in a similar fashion to Canetti's (1962) crowds. Noah and Tim both expressed a disdain for elitism and the concept of a 'superstar' DJ because this created a disconnect between the crowd and the DJ, with Noah stating that "it's not about the DJ". Noah also referred to a quote painted above the DJ booth in the bar he works in: "You're not God, you're a DJ." This emphasises the importance for these interviewees that a feeling of equality is prioritised, contrasting against more performative moments of music which are elaborated in Turino's (2008) more dichotomous approach to participatory versus presentational performance. He argues that there is no artist-audience distinction in participatory performance, with all focus on "the sonic and kinesic interaction among participants" (p.28).

Another aspect of collectivism in EDM events comes from knowing that other attendees share similar values. Joe said that, because there is a clear community-based and political focus in his charity's objectives, the fundraising parties maintain an ethos revolving around community that most attendees will be aware of. In Joe's view, the objectives of the charity and how it operates, based in community values, feed into how attendees approach the fundraising parties: "I really do think that the element of the charitable aspect and the fact that we're, there's a deeper purpose for it, you know, it transforms the clubbing experience, and we so rarely have people coming down here being, you know, arseholes, basically. People show a respect that they wouldn't maybe show at, in other spaces or at other nights." (Joe, charity worker).

These shared values can also be important at EDM events in more subtle ways. For example, Arnie said that he wanted a "good crowd" at his events that was "non-confrontational" with an "absence... of toxic masculinity". Noah identified that the very action of going to these spaces and relating to other people on the basis of shared values was "in its way a little bit political" and this was a principal reason that he enjoyed going out and dancing: "[Seeing] other people who think the same way as me, that's kind of political in its aim, isn't it? Like, to go out and see versions of yourself in the world or whatever."

These ideas of collectivism, relating to one another and feeling 'together' with others, including the DJ, are particularly pertinent for those belonging to marginalised communities. Hank explained their approach to this by pointing out that varying forms of collectivism at events, both within and outside the LGBTQ+ community, can allow marginalised people to feel empowered within their community: "With everything that I've ever done, it's about, 'We will create segregated spaces, but we will also create spaces for everyone.' And in doing that we're creating a segregated space where we can kind of recuperate, reclaim our space, be empowered and love what we're doing and embrace ourselves as people and who we are, but then we have the joint spaces so that when once we're strong enough, our allies can come into the space and see our strength." (Hank, promoter & DJ). Hank hinted at a significant point that resonates in Rancière's (2006) work focusing on the distribution of the sensible. In the spaces that Hank describes, the distribution of the sensible is being disrupted through the overwhelming presence of people who are never usually in the spotlight, which translates into political action through the act of subversion. Hank further highlighted this concept through how, in terms of physical space, they champion QTIPOC dancing at the front when they DJ because it creates a symbolic form of solidarity and empowerment. Despite this only being symbolic, it clearly has a lasting impact on Hank, and they believe that they are able to effect social change by showing 'outsiders' the collective empowerment of LGBTQ+ and QTIPOC communities.

The most powerful forms of collectivism that I witnessed were in spaces that were carved out for marginalised communities. For example, an event that was launching a zine focused on race, Arnie's party, and events run by a local feminist collective. These events had more diverse crowds than the average EDM event in Leeds, as well as more diverse DJ line-ups, and the feeling of solidarity was palpable, mostly because these events were inherently connected to the empowerment of marginalised communities.

Overall, EDM events are able to facilitate an experience of collectivism and equality in a similar vein to the traditional ritual described by academics such as Victor Turner (1967). This ritual often takes shape through escaping from the mundanities of everyday life and experimenting with non-hierarchical, collectivist crowds in a way that echoes Canetti's (1962) crowd theory. Collectivism is a common theme in many EDM events in Leeds, and inherently subverts wider structures of neoliberal individualism.

Commercialisation and Responding through Socialist Experimentation

A prominent theme in these interviews was a wariness of the commercialisation of EDM through the infiltration of corporate branding and a capitalist approach to the organisation of events. This has effects as seemingly inconsequential as an overcrowded venue but can extend to the repackaging of genres such as house and techno that is so extreme that it can strip this music of its heritage and meaning, especially to LGBTQ+/QTIPOC communities. Any of these effects can dramatically de-politicise EDM through filtering out the importance of community and collectivism, shifting attention onto business and branding.

Hank said that they felt EDM was being appropriated: "[Queer people of colour have] been part of our music for so long, and that music is now becoming appropriated, watered down and fed to kind of like the white [cisgender] male masses." Hank emphasised the harm that this 'watering down' could do to LGBTQ+ and QTIPOC communities in particular, who have essentially relied on this space for a sense of community and empowerment, as mentioned in the previous section.

Joe echoed this scepticism using his experiences of promoting as an example, where a colleague who ran numerous EDM events in Europe asked him to organise an event that was paid for by an e-cigarette company. The event was covered in their branding and Joe expressed discomfort with the event, calling it a "data mining exercise" as the event was free entry if attendees provided their email address. He identified how brands like this "try to latch onto cool or trendy cultural events" but he said that it "strips the event of any real authenticity." When asked to elaborate on what he meant by authenticity, he explained, "It shifts the focus away from the music and the dancing and the lights and the, you know, the conversations you're having with people, and it shifts it towards, you know, a kind of profit-driven capitalist agenda which is about selling a product." This demonstrates the way in which brands have attempted to infiltrate this ‘authentic’, ‘alternative’ subculture, but brand involvement in EDM potentially strips the events of their focus on community and collectivist values. The politics of EDM events is also threatened by an increasing pursuit of money by promoters instead of aiming to give attendees an ‘authentic’, enjoyable experience. Both Tim and Elizabeth, another regular party-goer, mentioned the same event as an example of a bad night because it was too crowded. The night was a dub, dubstep and drum & bass event that is held in a West Indian community centre. This event has held a significance for Leeds’s black communities, with Hank identifying it as being an important space for people of colour. Much of this is rooted in dub’s origins as a highly politicised genre focusing on the “persistent racism and police brutality” (Stirling, 2016, p.137) that black men in particular face in Britain. However, compared with previous versions of this event, it was overcrowded and filled with a young and predominantly white crowd that was incessantly pushing against each other — very few individuals were engaged in the music compared to how the event worked in the past, with more room to move and engagement between older members of the crowd and the younger dancers who may be experiencing this music for the first time. There is also a tension between the more traditional ideology of ritual at EDM events and pursuit of money, usually made obvious by an overcrowded venue.

One of these contradictions, and an important example of how the ritualistic ideology of rave can be appropriated, was in a club that had been converted from a church. I met the promoter at the front of the grand venue at about half past midnight. He gave me a gold wristband that read, ‘FOR WHAT WE ARE ABOUT TO RECEIVE’ and lead me further into the venue and through a sea of people towards the looming stained glass window that stood behind the DJs who were currently playing on a 37 massive stage. An immense light rig was installed in front of the window, providing an intense, flashing light show for everyone below. It seemed like a pit had been carved out in the centre of the room, which was filled to the brim with heads. The music was loud and intense, and the main area for dancing was filled with people to the point where it was uncomfortable. The experience watching from the stage, which was positioned high above the crowd, felt detached from everything else that was going on below. I was surprised by how little people were dancing, mostly looking blankly towards the stage and swaying with the movement of everyone around them. Later, I went to the bar at the back of the room and could see the DJs as distant figures. A more old-school rave track was mixed in and in almost perfect synchronisation I saw at least 10 people take their phones out to record a video. It was a strange contradiction of a venue that was trying to incorporate elements of ritual through the construction of the space around the architecture of the old church, as well as the religious phrases on the wristbands, but it didn’t translate into the feeling in the room. Looking at people as I walked past them, they were detached and just shuffling where they could, with the occasional ‘whoop!’ as a beat kicked in. There was little engagement with the environment or with each other, therefore little embodiment of the collectivism that I had seen in other venues. There was a clear money-oriented approach to this event that had appropriated tropes of rave culture, such as using religious language and symbolism (Hutson, 1999), without emphasizing the collectivism and engagement that many other events in Leeds highly valued. Demonstrating this focus on community above all, Arie expressed a wariness of prioritizing capitalist objectives with his LGBTQ+ party, sacrificing selling a large amount of tickets at once for a system where an individual can only buy two tickets. This approach has the intention of making the parties more accessible to a wider range of people and curating a community feeling inside.

So an idea that it should be as cheap as possible for people to access, and that all the profit that comes from the organization or that we make on the night goes back into the... and I think when you start operating like that you can put on world-class DJs for £5. Unfortunately, it does mean that the rest of us all work full time, there’s no opportunity for people to work full time, to have this as a full-time job. So it is a lot of hard work, but I think the rewards that you get from that, are sort of far... it gives me a lot of creative freedom operating like that. Whereas if I was trying to like pay my own wage or pay my own rent, you might make different decisions about what DJs you book and how much you charge. And therefore, who comes through the door and who can afford it and who... you know what I mean? (Arnie, DJ & promoter).

Arnie also described his collective as “fundamentally socialist” as a not-for-profit organization with a horizontal organizing structure. Evidently, Arnie has prioritized collectivism and community over profit by placing value on accessibility for all and equality within the collective. Many of the regular events that interviewees identified as being political or community-based, such as Amie’s LGBTQ+ event, a local feminist collective’s parties and the fundraising parties for Joe’s charity, follow a similar not-for-profit system, often with a horizontal organizational structure. Generally, working to put on events from within a collective is very popular in Leeds’s EDM scene — Hank plays a part in numerous collectives in Leeds and believes that it is much easier to achieve goals working within a community where people can collaborate, encourage each other and build on each other’s successes.

This demonstrates how, through the way they organize, participants in Leeds’s local EDM scene are experimenting with socialist practices, which has the potential to translate into the collectivist values that are experienced at these events. This is another way in which certain aspects of Leeds’s local EDM scene subvert the neoliberal practices of wider society, as the proliferation of working within a not-for-profit system with a socialist backbone is actively protesting against the capital-orientation and brand infiltration of more mainstream divisions of EDM and wider culture.

In Leeds, EDM events have been used as a fundraising platform as well as to draw local attention to specific social and political issues. In the case of Joe’s charity, this is emphasized by the deliberate formation of a connection between a community focus in traditional political spheres and a communitarian ethos at EDM events. Participants in Leeds’s EDM scene also see a significance in EDM’s history as contributing to subversive and rebellious subcultures such as house and techno’s emergence in the early eighties, facilitated by black, gay communities. British rave culture has also been very influential in how the community-based values of EDM are translated into today's culture, especially due to its subversion of the strictly conservative politics that developed from eleven years of Thatcherite influence in the UK. Rancière's (1999; 2006) conceptualisation of the democratic politics being enacted through subversion helps to bring a new perspective to understanding how politics is manifested in EDM, as well as Canetti's (1962) crowd theory and academia surrounding ritual as a form of social experimentation. Using this literature as a basis for the research highlights that EDM events have the potential to be inherently political through their prioritisation of collectivist values that subvert the neoliberal individualism prevalent in wider society.

This collectivism is embodied by participants' involvement in an escape to meditative engagement that has previously been misinterpreted as a detachment from their environment. This engagement opens up an opportunity to experiment with new social arrangements, which is often seen in traditional ritual, and embodies Canetti's (1962) conceptualisation of the crowd through the breaking down of hierarchies and an emphasis on equality. All of these features contribute to an understanding of many EDM events in Leeds as collectivist, community-oriented, and inherently subversive — therefore embodying a form of political action.

Fisher & Gilbert (2013) argue that "to really make a political challenge to neoliberalism viable, we would need to see some significant cultural upswell of radically democratic, libertarian yet anti-individualist sentiment" (p.100). In effect, many EDM events in Leeds have embodied this in the way that local collectives function and the values that they prioritise, for example, equality and community. This is especially significant for marginalised communities, with interviewees who belong to the LGBTQ+ community emphasising the value of unity and cooperation in these spaces as a form of symbolic solidarity and empowerment.

The collectivist sentiment of EDM events is even more pertinent in spaces that are emphasising the empowerment of marginalised communities, and the contribution of these events to the personal development of self-identity is extremely significant for some participants. Smaller promoters in Leeds also subvert neoliberal values of competition and capital-orientation by experimenting with socialist practices that emphasise the importance of community over profit, through improving accessibility and removing corporate and brand influence from the event. This is exemplified by the horizontal organising structures of local EDM collectives and the reinvestment of revenue into future events over the pursuit of profit, which dramatically improves accessibility for these events.

Focusing on one city with a limited range of interviewees and limited time frame means that this research cannot reflect EDM culture as a whole. However, this research highlights the value of EDM events in engaging local communities in a vast array of political and social issues as well as the potential for this phenomenon to be translated into political action on a wider scale. This research can be taken further by extending the study in Leeds with more interviews and observations to get a bigger picture of not only the subversive collectivism of EDM events, but also the effect of commercialisation and capital-orientation on a local music scene. The theoretical structure that I have used, focusing on ideas surrounding politics as subversion, ritual, and crowds would be useful in examining other genres of popular music and their relationship to collectivism and politics. It would also be useful to understand the organizing structures of local collectives on a more in-depth level, as well as within local venues, to understand the interplay of capitalism and commercialism within local musical cultures. This research structure could also be applied to other localities to understand any similarities and differences between places and what potential reasons for this may be.

Essentially, the somewhat pessimistic outlook from academia on how EDM is de-politicized due to increasing commercialization (Fraser, 2012; McRobbie, 2002) as well as only acting as a tool for escape (Melechi, 1993; Fraser, 2012; Rietveld, 1993) is not necessarily true. While commercialization and neoliberalism are threats and EDM can provide an escape from everyday life, it is essential to understand that on this local level, collectives are prioritizing community and ritualistically experimenting with socialist organizing structures as a way of subverting the neoliberal individualism that is prevalent in today's society. These events are also provoking a unique type of engagement among participants that places significant value on collectivism, equality, and solidarity. There is value in experimenting with collectivism, and this, on a smaller, local scale, translates into political action that engages participants with values that subvert and challenge the prevalence of neoliberalism in modern society.




==========\n\n\n


Social Choreography and the Aesthetic Continuum

Introduction

Social Choreography and the Aesthetic Continuum

In 1796, Friedrich Schiller—arguably the nineteenth-century's leading proselytizer and disseminator of an idealist aesthetic of bourgeois humanism—chided the tardy contributor of an essay on dance to the following year's issue of Musenalmanach for not profiting from "the newly awakened interest in this art." In contrast, by the beginning of the twentieth century, Havelock Ellis—a significant champion of dance—could cite as characteristic a contemporary's 1906 evaluation that "the ballet is now a thing of the past and, with the modern change of ideas, a thing that is never likely to be resuscitated." The historical arc traced between these two aesthetic assessments serves nicely to map out the field of the central arguments in this book.

A dance historian might wish to demonstrate what "went wrong" with theatrical dance in the years that separate these assessments—and, indeed, to explain why Ellis, a fervent amateur and promoter of dance, would himself in turn so quickly and definitively be proved wrong. This book is not a work of dance history in that sense, however—although it does seek to suggest new interpretive paradigms of interest to dance historians and critical theorists alike. When my consideration here of social choreography does focus on dance in the stricter, or theatrical, sense of the word, the aim is neither to produce an immanent dance history—examining the emergence of certain forms and codes according to an internal logic—nor, indeed, to locate dance within a broader social history.

The historical claims I make in this volume might be said to work in the opposite direction: they are claims for the historical agency of the aesthetic as something that is not merely shaped but also shaping within the historical dynamic. By attempting to reconnect to a more radical sense of the aesthetic as something rooted in bodily experience, I use the category of social choreography as a way of examining how the aesthetic is not purely superstructural or purely ideological. Social choreography is an attempt to think about the aesthetic as it operates at the very base of social experience. Substantiating such claims might begin by returning to Schiller. Even though the general "newly awakened interest" of which he writes was aroused by performances of theatrical dance, Schiller's own interest lay primarily (although not exclusively) in dance as a social phenomenon. In a famous passage from a letter of 1793 to Christian Kröner, Schiller writes: "I can think of no more fitting image for the ideal of social conduct than an English dance, composed of many complicated figures and perfectly executed. A spectator in the gallery sees innumerable movements intersecting in the most chaotic fashion, changing direction swiftly and without rhyme or reason, yet never colliding. Everything is so ordered that the one has already yielded his place when the other arrives; it is all so skillfully, and yet so artlessly, integrated into a form, that each seems only to be following his own inclination, yet without ever getting in the way of anybody else. It is the most perfectly appropriate symbol of the assertion of one’s own freedom and regard for the freedom of others."

In a sense, it is the history of Schiller's observation that I trace in this book; that is, dance not simply as a privileged figure for social order but as the enactment of a social order that is both reflected in and shaped by aesthetic concerns. The English dance, for Schiller, is not just an example of the existing social order but rather a model for that order. For him, the force of his observation lies not in the description of an English aesthetic and social phenomenon but in the prescription it entails for his German contemporaries. Schiller gazes at a social dance from the gallery, as if observing a theatrical performance, while with the same regard looking across to England for a model of social organization.

My central presupposition in this book is that Schiller's project of what I will call social choreography has been dehistoricized and depoliticized by a prevailing modernist understanding of choreography as an essentially metaphysical phenomenon oriented around questions of transcendental subjectivity rather than social and political intersubjectivity.

What is at stake in proposing an analysis of social choreography is a threefold determination of the modern: namely, a redefinition of modernism as an aesthetic program; a rethinking of modernization as a social process of rationalization that would not, as is generally assumed, compartmentalize and trivialize aesthetic experience; and, finally, a rethinking of the relationship of two terms—aesthetic modernity and sociopolitical modernity—that have either been taken to be irremediably at odds or assumed to be reducible to each other.

Certainly Schiller's own writing on dance elsewhere—specifically the famous poem Der Tanz—does use dance as the figure for a self-transcending aesthetic in which spirit and body are taken up into each other and the subject completed/annulled. This sublation, however, is not itself one that negates historical time. It was only with the symbolists of the late nineteenth century, along with their international avatars, that the figure of the dancer would be most definitively removed to the realms of the metaphysical. In the writings of Théophile Gautier from the mid-nineteenth century—but most markedly since the end of that century, with Stéphane Mallarmé's famous essays inspired by the dances of Loie Fuller—the figure of the dancer within the project of aesthetic modernism has generally served to invoke aesthetic experience in its most self-enclosing and immanent yet transcendent aesthetic form. In the moment of the dance, the possibility of a movement beyond the limitations of the body is paradoxically embodied; human potential supposedly resides as much in the vital energies that move and displace the body through space as it does in the contingent materiality of the body itself. In this study, by contrast, I use the term social choreography to denote a tradition of thinking about social order that derives its ideal from the aesthetic realm and seeks to instill that order directly at the level of the body. In its most explicit form, this tradition has observed the dynamic choreographic configurations produced in dance and sought to apply those forms to the broader social and political sphere. Accordingly, such social choreographies ascribe a fundamental role to the aesthetic in its formulation of the political.

This argument for the centrality of the aesthetic to the elaboration of social configurations places the critical project of social choreography in opposition to two alternative approaches to the consideration of dance. If the most obvious polemic is against the critical tradition that takes dance as a physical experience of metaphysical transcendence—that is, against the vocabulary developed in the symbolist and aesthetic-ist writings of the late nineteenth century—this study no less resoundingly resists any reduction to the specific social "determinants" of dance, such as race, gender, or class. My argument here will not be that these categories do not hold with respect to social choreography, but that both in the practice of choreography and in the critical discourses it generated, such categories were themselves being rehearsed and refined. The aesthetic thus functions in this study neither as a quasi-metaphysical realm separate from the sociohistorical nor as a practice that can be fully explained in terms of sociohistorical analysis. The aesthetic will function—and here we encounter the importance of the performative within our notion of social choreography—as a space in which social possibilities are both rehearsed and performed.

Although this work certainly seeks to situate the moments of its specific analyses within their historical and art historical context, the aim is less a history of the aesthetic than it is the uncovering of the operation—in modern social thought—of a certain aesthetic of history. In the absence of any detailed consideration of the modes of production of given dance forms, either theatrical or social, it might seem audacious to make materialist claims for the analysis presented here. As I seek to demonstrate, however, in the debates around dance that took place from the mid-nineteenth through the early twentieth centuries—even as dance as an aesthetic practice fell into decrepitude only to reemerge all the more triumphantly—what was at stake was the question of defining just what constituted matter and materialism. If Marx famously argued that the materialism of Feuerbach was too invested in the inertia of bodies and lacked the dialectical insight into the dynamic nature of matter, his own position would later be assailed from the other extreme by a tradition of vitalist Lebensphilosophie that, in turn, saw nothing but energy, and grounded in the "dance of life" itself—to quote the title of Ellis's treatment of choreography—a new and paradoxically embodied metaphysical biopolitics. Because modern dance was from the outset imbued with the terminology of Lebensphilosophie—either explicitly or simply because the language of vitalism was so unavoidably "in the air"—an avowedly materialist critique might be expected to ground that aesthetic ideology in a specific politics and politics itself in the material social conditions of production. Better yet, one might demonstrate how the vitalist ideology derives from the economic base in its parallel aesthetic and political forms. In the first case, a certain agency and intentionality are implicit: "This art reflects this political agenda, which in turn derives from this social and economic situation." In the second case, there is room for what we might call the political unconscious in art: art reflects a social situation directly but may not do so with any explicit political agenda. In this second model, art might, of course, reflect social realities in direct opposition to the artist's explicit political stance.

Thus, for example, Marx famously claims that Balzac reveals progressive social tendencies despite his own avowed conservatism because the aesthetic imperatives of his realism oblige him to face realities that his political ideology otherwise forces him to obfuscate. Such models of materialist analysis may be serviceable enough when dealing with an art that consciously reflects a reality external to itself, but they obviously require modification when facing either an abstract or nonfigurative art or an art that foregrounds the performative rather than the mimetic.

In the face of abstract or nonfigurative art, the reflection model might still be workably retooled: abstract art "reflects" an increasingly abstract world, perhaps; or, in a more sophisticated model, abstraction marks the inevitable failure of the bourgeois artist to countenance a social totality that is historically destined to obliterate him. In such accounts, abstraction would be a sort of refusal to represent—or simply an incomprehension; in another, more positive formulation, abstraction would mark the attempt to distill the essence of a social formation from out of its contingent and confusing manifestations. These possibilities have been well rehearsed and debated by the Left.

In taking dance merely as the most aestheticized form of social choreography, however, I wish to move beyond that debate to ask how we might understand the relationship between the political and aesthetic when the prevailing paradigm for art is performative—that is, when we focus on the dynamics of the "work" of art as a system of production, rather than on the artifact itself. What, precisely, will the politics of social choreography mean in the end? Are we talking metaphorically, or are there more substantive entailments? How do various notions of choreography correspond with, derive from, or reflect political ideologies or social conditions? Can we talk of an "aesthetic ideology" without rooting it in a political one?

My argument here will be that dance has served as the aesthetic medium that most consistently sought to understand art as something immanently political: that is, as something that derives its political significance from its own status as praxis rather than from its adherence to a logically prior political ideology located elsewhere, outside art. In short, we are not talking metaphorically. When we talk of an "aesthetic ideology" we talk not of an ideology of the aesthetic but refer instead to the intrinsic aesthetic component of any ideology that seeks to structure itself in narrative form. Thus, the aesthetic component of ideology is the utopian lure that enables that ideology to operate in a hegemonic rather than a simply coercive fashion.

In making materialist claims at this level of embodiment for a study that seems to open the door to an idealist inversion of the base-superstructure model of ideology by arguing for an aesthetic component operative at the base, I obviously need to qualify what I mean by "materialist" and explain how this study relates to a more traditional form of history. To remember that the problematic term in the traditional characterization of ideology as "false consciousness" was originally "false" not "consciousness," we need to invoke—in a crassly undialectical manner—some putative materiality of the body as guarantee of the materialism for our analysis. Although we now have more sophisticated models for thinking about ideology, the most commonly invoked notion of "false consciousness" reminds us of how "consciousness" itself has long defined our sense of the ideological. Fredric Jameson's concept of the "political unconscious" marked an important advance in our understanding of ideology, and it helps us understand what I think is going on in choreography. My challenge to the "political unconscious" model lies in its tendency to abstract ideology from the realm of social performance—that is, from what actually happens.

We need to be clear about what material analysis is not in this presentation, before we can begin to understand just what it is. To this end, we might invoke debates internal to dance studies to make broader claims about the terms of a materialist critique. The recent turn, across the humanities, toward cultural studies and away from the text-based models of high theory seems to have favored a reemergence of dance as an object of analysis. Certainly, traditional dance history has been supplemented and enhanced both by a new openness to literary and philosophical theory and by the willingness of scholars to situate dance in its broader cultural and social milieu.

The downside of this latter development, however, has been the unfortunate and often merely implicit identification of "the body" with materiality per se, as if—with the move toward cultural studies—that body might guarantee the "reality" or "materiality" of the critical method. As dance scholars have pointed out, however, this by now tiresome return of the ubiquitous body has had little effect in placing dance back at the center of critical cultural analysis. Amy Koritz points out how dance in fact refutes the immanentist fallacy that would see in the body a quite literal "materiality of the signifier," reconciling cultural studies with high theory. "Surely," she writes, "twenty years of poststructuralism ought to have taught us the impossibility of accessing unencoded experience of any sort."

The obsession with the body to the exclusion of dance is perhaps symptomatic of a failure to think beyond the binary opposition between body and mind that seems to hold out the body as the realm where the problems of the mind take on a concrete form that removes from them the stigma of scholarly abstraction. The pervasive absence of dance from cultural studies may well reflect dance's inability to provide the sorts of bodies cultural studies scholars find most engaging. But this, far from being a disadvantage, suggests the importance of what cultural studies has to learn from dance scholarship. What Koritz seeks to counter is a critical tendency to fetishize the body as the bearer of "the real" in ways that replay some of the more crass ideological pretensions of the early dance pioneers themselves. The "return to the body" in cultural studies bypasses dance because dance locates the social energumen not in bodies but in the dynamic spaces that separate and link those bodies, in dialectical "movement" rather than in brute soma. For this reason, I share Jameson’s antipathy to the reemergence of “the body” as a ubiquitous, yet undialectical, grounding topos in the cultural turn of recent years. Social Choreography

Of course, simply to displace the body with a fetish of “movement” would itself be to replay the grounding ideological gesture of vitalism: out of the Feuerbachian frying pan and into the fire of Lebensphilosophie, so to speak. It is in the uncomfortable encounter and collision of bodies in space that we need to find a model for material analysis. Thus, in this volume, in the chapter on Nijinsky, I provide a model of how this analysis might look by invoking Charles Sanders Peirce’s semiotics, not in order to fold bodies into text but to demonstrate how dance brings into doubt the Saussurian privileging of “negative relations” over “positive terms.” Nijinsky, and Peirce, provide a model for understanding how acts of signification depend not only on the interplay of signifiers but also on a certain “knocking up against” reality (to use Peirce’s description of the icon). Stressing the moment of performance or enactment in ideology over the ways in which ideology lays down pre-determined social “scripts” clearly has micrological implications for the analysis of dance itself.

While I do not seek to present this volume as a work of dance history, the methodological questions it raises are certainly central to the practice of dance historians. By schematizing somewhat, we can distinguish between studies that seek to “read” the body as text and rely on “a vision of the body’s movement as an act of writing” and those that argue, with Peggy Phelan, that “to attempt to write about the undocumentable event of performance is to invoke the rules of the written document and thereby alter the event itself... The labor to write about performance (and thus to “preserve” it) is also a labor that fundamentally alters the event.” Polemically, this study is much closer to the latter position. Although I am trained as a literary scholar, I resist attempts to somehow “legitimize” performance by subjecting it to a hegemonic epistemology of textual reading. (This “literarizing” gesture is one, for example, that Isadora Duncan made when, in seeking to ground the high cultural credentials of dance, she acknowledged only writers and philosophers as her teachers.) Bodies are not writing. This being said, however, they clearly do signify; the challenge is to understand how they do it. I seek to do so without locating “real” meaning elsewhere (i.e., in the realm of the social) and then tracing the ways in which bodies reference this external stratum of significance. At the other extreme, Peggy Phelan’s insistence on the “undocumentable event” is appealing for two distinct reasons. At the most mundane level, those performers I do consider in the second half of this book—specifically Isadora Duncan and Nijinsky—refused to be “documented” in the then new medium of film, and the reconstruction of their actual dances is a difficult and painstaking task for historians and choreographers alike. As a literary scholar working unapologetically on various forms of “document”—diaries, reviews, memoirs, and so forth—I do not seek to approach the moment or “event” but rather understand “performance” itself in a very different way. Performance, in this book, needs to be understood along the lines of “ideological work”—as something analogous to the dream work in which Freud (resisting the simplistic schism of latent and manifest meaning) located the stratum of the dream’s significance. The "work" of a performance lies as much in what it unleashes as in what it encloses. The second reason for embracing Phelan's position is its refusal to reduce the aesthetic performance to the level of "document." While cultural studies have taught us to locate aesthetic phenomena within their respective historical and cultural milieus rather than assume their transhistorical validity, it has also tended at times to dedifferentiate different types of ideological performance (aesthetic, political, etc.) by "reading" all as documents. Rather than taking text as a model for reading performance, I propose instead to take performance as a challenge to our model of "reading texts."

To question the status of a dance interpretation on the grounds that it is, after all, a trope or a certain approximation of interpretive reading strategies is to naturalize the act of reading itself as non-metaphoric, as the hegemonic medium for the production of meaning. A study of social choreography entails opening up to the many different ways in which meaning is produced in both aesthetic and social arenas. It is also important, however, to note a danger implicit in this second approach proposed by Phelan—namely, the possible fetishization of the unrepeatable, undocumentable moment of performance itself.

Throughout this work, I note within the critical discourse of modern dance a tendency to romanticize as moments of "truth" precisely those moments of physical contingency that for a traditionally "metaphysical" discourse were the things that stood in the way of the performance of transcendental truth. For example, if the symbolist celebration of the body's self-transcendence and self-obliteration in the dances of Loie Fuller is ideological in its metaphysical and transhistorical pretensions, any celebration of the somatic body or of the "laws" of gravity is potentially no less so. Indeed, I would argue that the latter is all the more dangerous for presuming the translatability of metaphysical longing into physical form.

In this regard, I consider briefly in chapter 3, for example, the emergence of racist and eugenic discourse within the writings of early modern dance pioneers. Our task, then, must be to develop a critical hermeneutic that eschews the undialectical "materiality" of the body on the one hand, and the vitalist celebration of "force" or "movement" on the other. We need a semiotic that articulates their interactions and collisions.

The critical challenge is to marry text-based analysis to the analysis of performance; a challenge that is not simply for dance historians but also for those cultural historians who wish to learn from dance and who are dissatisfied with their discipline's tendency to reduce aesthetic phenomena to the status of document, to its simple sociological determinants. As one critic has put it with regard to reading strategies: "If—as has been customary since the sixteenth century—the literary motif can be conceived of in its Latin sense of motivum, as a principle of narrative motion that drives the action, it would be tautological to speak of a "motif of motion," since the motif—by its very definition—is what "moves" the literary narrative. The question as to dance's figurative function therefore necessarily links thematic and rhetorical or textual readings." Dance, then, is not simply another object onto which text-based "reading" strategies can be projected; it is a motif, a challenge internal to the operation of textuality. One weakness of the high critical tradition that culminated, so to speak, in deconstruction, was its antipathy to any consideration of motif, which it tended to write off as mere "thematic criticism." By insisting on the motivum, I wish to suggest that by criticizing a traditional tendency to enclose critical reading in a consideration of thematic topoi, deconstruction reinforced a certain structuralist synchronization of the reading process. The diachrony of the text suggested by this invocation of the motivum provides a model for thinking across the barricades of high theory and cultural studies. We need not eschew the "textuality" of high theory in order to focus on cultural determinants: the task, instead, is to demonstrate the insufficiency of our prevailing understanding of the text. The opposition of textual and performative paradigms is a false one, and there can be no question here of a paradigm shift from one to the other. Performance is Introduction 11 something that stands not outside the "text" but operates from within it. Consequently, it is a linking of thematic and textual readings that I attempt here.

What I am calling "choreography" is not just a way of thinking about social order; it has also been a way of thinking about the relationship of aesthetics to politics. In other words, as a performative, choreography cannot simply be identified with "the aesthetic" and set in opposition to the category of "the political" that it either tropes or predetermines. In the bourgeois era, I argue, choreography has provided a discursive realm for articulating and working out the shifting, moving relation of aesthetics to politics and for thinking about questions of semiotic "motivation" in systems of representation. In this study, then, politics and semiotics work closely together.

In his study The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of Meaning, Imagination, and Reason, Mark Johnson has proposed the category of "force" as a way of understanding what I have thus far been referring to as motivum in the text. By implicitly arguing for the centrality of a certain rhetoric, he seeks to demonstrate how "through metaphor, we make use of patterns that obtain in our physical experience to organize our more abstract thinking."10 As I will demonstrate in chapter 2, this argument has precedent in bourgeois political philosophy all the way back to Thomas Hobbes.

While I have great sympathy for this critical move, however, it is by way of contrast that I might best describe here what I mean when I say that social choreography is not a metaphor. I seek to counter the prevailing interpretation of a metaphor of dance within modernist poetics. The model of causality here is more structural. An aesthetic form could be judged ideologically not simply because it expresses a clear agenda or because we know its author or choreographer belonged to a certain class or party. Actions—not just representations—are ideological.

There are two reasons for this antimetaphorical approach: one methodological and one substantive. This study differs in substance from the writings on the dance metaphor cited in an earlier note by stressing the social and political function of choreography—its disposition and manipulation of bodies in relation to each other—over the metaphysical resolutions that dance offers. Rather than being interested in questions of how the metaphor, or even the practice, of choreography resolves problems of metaphysical subjectivity, this study will concern itself instead with the historical emergence of choreography.

Particularly when dealing with a performance genre, one that constantly demarcates its own artistic borders even as it acknowledges what its material (the body) has in common with the extra-aesthetic—“metaphor” is an inadequate model for understanding the relationship of aesthetics to politics. Whereas writing on dance’s function (as image) within modernism has tended to stress the movement of self-transcendence as the dancer disappears into the dance, here I envisage instead a more “lateral” transcendence whereby the dancer is integrated into a social organization. Although it will be necessary to look at the ways that social choreography addresses fundamental philosophical questions regarding the relationship of the body to the spirit and the possibility of transcendence, I will consistently situate such reflections within a broader aesthetic and political ideology.

In the treatise On the Aesthetic Education of Man, for example, Schiller characterizes the play of sensuality and order—the two competing moments in dance—as follows: “The sense-drive demands that there shall be change and that time shall have a content; the form-drive demands that time shall be annulled and that there shall be no change. That drive, therefore, in which both the others work in concert (permit me for the time being, until I have justified the term, to call it the play-drive), the play-drive, therefore, would be directed towards annulling time within time.” If this insistence on “annulling time within time” opens up the possibility of political readings, it also suggests a rather troubling aestheticization of politics.

In his study The Aesthetic State: A Quest in Modern German Thought, Josef Chytry notes how “according to Schiller, dance symbolizes wholeness of the psyche; beauty is developed ‘through the free play of limbs’ that represents harmony between individual freedom and group order.” In other words, dance figures a kind of liberal ideal of freedom of movement rejoined at the level of the articulate body politic. In the Schillerian tradition, dance expresses two levels of harmony: it is, in Chytry’s paraphrase of Uber Anmut und Wiirde, “the premonition of a grace that expresses humans’ inner harmony between spirit and sensuousness. A society of beautiful human beings requires that they be creatures of grace.” But it is also the harmonization of individuals within historical societies.

The prevailing modernist paradigm for thinking about dance—inaugurated by the romantics and carried through by the late-nineteenth-century aestheticists—has consistently privileged the philosophical, aesthetic, and even religious question of individual “grace” over the politics of social choreography. What Schiller intends is a temporal sublation—“within time”—that reconstitutes rather than negates history. Thus, dance offered him a specifically historical and political model.

Commenting on the very passage I cited from Schiller’s letter at the opening of this introduction, Paul de Man has insisted that we not only restore to the aesthetic the political concerns that have gradually been stripped from it, but also—perhaps more troublingly—that we acknowledge the aesthetic moment in the political itself. “As is clear from Schiller’s formulation,” he writes, the aesthetic “is primarily a social and political model ethically grounded in an assumedly Kantian notion of freedom . . . The ‘state’ that is here being advocated is not just a state of mind or of soul, but a principle of political value and authority that has its own claims on the shape and the limits of our freedom. While de Man might not be the most obvious source for this reminder, his observations indeed articulate a central axiom of this volume—that philosophical reflections on dance do not simply need to be politicized or historicized by context (although, of course, they may be). They are themselves direct political and social interventions in which the aesthetic is an integral part of the vision articulated rather than a convenient metaphoric medium. This is by no means to suggest that there is no need to offer political and historical context, but rather only that the politics of social choreography are not exhausted by that context.

Because choreography takes as its material the human body and its relation to other human bodies, an examination of social choreographies is particularly suited to a presentation of the ways in which political and aesthetic moments shade into each other and delineate themselves with respect to each other. By insisting on an aesthetic continuum, I seek to resist two equally seductive ideologies of the body politic.

First, there is the identification of "choreography" with the practice of writing per se—an ideological move that sees all physical embodiment as the pre-scripted playing out of determinant social discourses. According to this model, all gesture—albeit unconsciously—would always be language in the discursive sense. At the other extreme, we have an ideology of physical immanence that would take the body as the final point of resistance to both social and discursive determination. Such a model would stress physical lapses as moments of resistance to discourse, or—in a supreme restitution of the discourse of the subject—as "expressive" gestures indicative of an aesthetic (and, presumably, social) subject.

These broadly sketched approaches to the question of ideology replay, in essence, the oppositions in dance criticism that I outlined above. In this book, I think of the body as doubled: neither as the brute soma that must resist or conform to a social choreography, nor as the purely discursive construct that it can become in an overzealous new historical reading.

My second challenge to the notion of metaphor is methodological. Greek philosophers explicitly presented musical training in the broadest sense—let us call it "choreography"—as the very foundation of socialization. It was not a metaphor for, but rather a precondition of, social integration. If the idea seems quaint, I nevertheless wish to show how it was adapted by bourgeois aesthetics and exercised considerable power over the construction of art in the post-mimetic twentieth century (and earlier).

It is in reflections on dance that artists in the bourgeois era have most consistently focused on two key issues: the limits of art (when does a dance cease to be a dance and become mere movement?) and the potential of art to provide models for—rather than mere reflections of—social organization. I am interested here in precisely those instances where art is supposed not to "derive from," "correspond to," or "reflect" the social but rather to shape, determine, or illuminate it.

In this introductory chapter—and subsequently throughout the book—I wish to demonstrate how choreography has served not only as a secondary metaphor for modernity but also as a structuring blueprint for thinking and effecting modern social organization: it is not only a secondary representation but also a primary performance of that order. Social Choreography: A Metaphoric Relation

In this text, I argue that choreography should be viewed as catachresis, a rhetorical term that brings into being what we might ordinarily presume to have preceded it—its referent. Choreography is not just another thing we "do" to bodies, but also a reflection on and enactment of how bodies "do" things and on the work that the artwork performs. Social choreography exists not parallel to the operation of social norms and strictures, nor is it entirely subject to those strictures: it serves—"catacritically," we might say—to bring them into being.

In Chapter 2 and Chapter 4, I examine the trope of stumbling through political and aesthetic writings from the eighteenth to the twentieth centuries, and the choreography of Nijinsky, to demonstrate the instability of metaphor's basic assumptions: the ability of something to "stand for" something else. The logic of catachresis, notwithstanding our example of the table leg, is a logic of stumbling.

I do not claim that aesthetic forms do not reflect ideological positions: clearly they can and do. But they do not only reflect. My claim, instead, is that choreography designates a sliding or gray zone where discourse meets practice—a zone in which in an earlier era it was possible for an emerging bourgeois public sphere to work on and redefine the boundaries of aesthetics and politics.

I will read "choreography" neither as aesthetics nor as politics but rather as articulation—not as one term in a relation but as a discourse, and performance, of that relation. Although I examine how bodies are bounded by textual conventions, I am less concerned with discourse than with practice. At what point, for example, does simple movement become dance? To answer this question by saying that, in the end, all dance is really just movement; or, on the contrary, that all movement is choreographed and, in some sense, pre-scripted ideologically, is simply to dodge the question. The distinction between dance and mere movement is real but contingent. While I do not seek to trace that distinction's history throughout this work, I believe that our conception of "choreography" allows for a focus on praxis rather than metaphor. Thus, for example, the emergence of bourgeois social dance forms—aestheticizing social interaction as a diversionary imperative—might be taken to represent in aesthetic form a political ideology of seamless social harmony that serves as cover for the social antagonisms it unleashes and seeks to contain. I do not question the validity of such models of ideological reflection, but neither do I engage here in the historical work necessary to trace such a history of dance as (mis)representation of social relations. Instead, I will be suggesting the possibility of strategic reversals of this structure of ideology—reversals that locate social and political fantasies within an aesthetic practice that I call social choreography. This choreography is ideological by virtue of what it both produces and instills rather than for what it reflects.

While I do not wish to engage in broad political-historical arguments for which I am unqualified, there is historical precedent for my thesis regarding the role of the aesthetic in the institutionalization and inculcation of the political in bourgeois everyday life. Historians and theorists have demonstrated how it was within the realm of relative aesthetic autonomy that a bourgeois public sphere first negotiated for itself a limited political freedom from within the authoritarian social structures that had characterized the baroque period.

As the bourgeoisie sought ideological and political liberty from the tutelage of absolutist states in the eighteenth century, art was guaranteed a degree of freedom at the cost of its disempowerment as a social force. Within limits, one could reason freely in art because it was agreed that art was without direct social consequence. Obviously, the emerging class utilized this freedom to rehearse ideas that would only subsequently be set free into a truly political bourgeois public realm. To assume that proto-political ideas developed within one sphere of discourse, with its own norms and traditions—in this case, the aesthetic realm—would be completely unmarked by this period of gestation, seems counterintuitive. The (aesthetic) form of expression allowed to the politically emergent bourgeois class cannot have been without effect on the content of the ideas that were developed under its protection. Thus, aesthetic concerns entered from the very beginning into bourgeois political calculations.

More specifically, here I wish to argue that dance—as an aesthetic form that had yet to fully establish its autonomy as something other than a social observance or entertainment—was a particularly "porous" membrane of communication between the aesthetic and sociopolitical realms. With the emergence of the relatively autonomous bourgeois aesthetic realm—generally traced to the eighteenth century—we might think of choreography in terms of "rehearsal"; that is, as the working out and working through of utopian, but nevertheless "real," social relations. My argument is that discourses around dance—in the bourgeois aesthetic and public spheres—have tended to recognize choreography as a form that not only exemplifies a certain ideological relation of aesthetics to politics but also reflects on and/or performs that relation. Dance's overt choreographing and conventionalizing of the body has allowed it to serve as a performative reflection on social choreography in the broader sense. In other words, if the body I dance with and the body I work and walk with are one and the same, I must, when dancing, necessarily entertain the suspicion that all of the body's movements are, to a greater or lesser extent, choreographed. This may sound, once more, like the thesis that dance reveals the ideological functions of the body as mere text. But an aesthetic continuum such as this is not a simple chain of cause and effect—rather, it runs both ways. Dance also serves to demonstrate how the “textual” acquires significance when embodied. This complicates the operation of any critique of ideology. My task in this book is to demonstrate the scope and limits of embodied experience as an indicator of the operation of ideology rather than to trace the social relevance or derivation of specific forms of choreography.

To take an example from the work of Isadora Duncan, one of the central figures discussed in this book: recognizing that ballet conventions and positions are historically and politically determined on the one hand, and physically debilitating on the other, is a form of critique of ideology. That critique might be articulated intellectually, but it is experienced by the body itself. Physical experience is a crucial component of this critique of ideology. To this extent, one can follow Isadora Duncan in her rethinking of the operation of ideology. However, if the body can serve as a marker of what is wrong in ideology, it becomes ideological itself when taken as the arbiter of what should be “set right.”

Here I contend that the body that “experiences” critique—ballet is “wrong” because it hurts, as Isadora Duncan would pithily argue—cannot serve as the locus of an experience of “truth,” as Isadora would go on to argue. An entire tradition of modern dance thinking about the body—from Frangois Delsarte through at least as far as Martha Graham—shares this belief that the body cannot lie. Such a belief is the very essence of ideology. Pain might serve as the embodiment of a critique of ideology but its absence can never mark a position of non-ideological truth, for the reification of the body necessary to disentangle it from the social milieu it “critiques” involves an ideological gesture.

This rejection of the body’s normative claims may sound like a resignation to the fashionable cultural platitude that everything is just ideology, that there is no nonideological space from which a critique of ideology might be launched. Not so. In the performance of dance itself—not in any act of representation—it is the physical experience of pain that tells us that ballet posture might be “unnatural.” This experience has not necessarily passed through consciousness. Where the implicit critique itself becomes ideological, however, is in its movement out of the performative and into the mimetic, for the body thereby becomes the arbiter of “true” consciousness.

It is one thing to envisage (as Isadora Duncan did) a dance form that did not involve pain, but it is another to assume (as she also did) that the performance of that dance would adequately represent the experience of joy, thereby providing a model for social order. In combating the pain that physically marks the ideological fallacy of ballet, for example, it is tempting to celebrate the merely somatic—the seamless experience of embodiment—as the truth. Nothing could be more ideological: for without some pain of alienation, some schism within the embodied subject, no experience is possible. Experience is a category of consciousness, and consciousness becomes unconscious and irrational when the body is celebrated as at once brute soma and immanent truth. The operation of aesthetic ideology relies on the suppression of the contingencies that structure experience, and to ontologize the body itself as a minimal resting place of untrammeled, noncompromisable subjectivity is to engage in the worst form of aesthetic ideology. To counter such tendencies, a truly materialist analysis can only be a social and historical analysis, in which even the category of "history" itself cannot be granted immunity from critique.

The choreography I invoke throughout this book operates along an aesthetic continuum and does not only find expression in dance or in forms of movement we might recognize as "aesthetic" in and of themselves. Only in the second half of the book does my focus move to instances of theatrical and social dance to demonstrate specific ways in which they inculcate ideology. In the first half of the volume, by contrast, a critical choreography traces the movement of bodies through social space and further examines the ways in which an idealized body negotiates that space according to bourgeois political and aesthetic theory.

Chapter 2, for example, focuses on the minimally "aesthetic" achievement of walking and on the significance of stumbling in bourgeois theories of community and subject formation. My task here is to follow this aesthetic continuum, noting how and where, historically, a threshold of the aesthetic was established to differentiate the aesthetic continuum into categories of "art" and "experience."

In focusing on a continuum of bodily movements—from simple walking, to "taking a stroll," to the most highly conventionalized balletic forms, and even to such "subsocial" phenomena as convulsive vomiting (see chapter 3)—I wish to suggest a different relation of aesthetics to politics. Rather than tracing aesthetic effects to their social and political causes, I will suggest throughout this book that a certain codification of the aesthetic both predates and serves as a threshold to society.

Rather than simply reading the body as trope, we need to observe a double agenda in this work: dance as the production and presentation of social order; and dance as the articulation and disposition of bodies at both work and play. To examine choreography thus is necessarily to follow two trajectories: one tracing the ways in which everyday experience might be aestheticized (dance aestheticizes the most fundamental and defining motor attributes of the human animal); and another tracing the ways in which "the aesthetic" is, in fact, sectioned off and delineated as a distinct realm of experience. This is what I mean by the aesthetic continuum of social choreography.

I must acknowledge also slippages inherent in my use of the term "aesthetic" —slippages I take as fundamental to the category of choreography as something both social/political and aesthetic. By working with the notion of an aesthetic continuum—a scale of experience that would extend from apparently (but only apparently) somatic experiences of the body through to the most formal and conventional aesthetic forms in the more limited sense—I do not simply invert a causal relation of aesthetics and politics. It is not simply a question of saying that, in certain instances, aesthetics determines politics, rather than the reverse. By positing an aesthetic continuum—within which more limited and conventional concepts of "art" arise and shift at given historical points—I wish to stress the relational nature of the category of the aesthetic. Again, this relationality will not be examined in a strictly "historical" manner. I will trace only as background the institutional shifts that mark and define the changing boundaries of aesthetic discourse.1 I focus primarily on two extremes of the aesthetic continuum—apparently presocial, "accidental," or somatic experiences of the body on the one hand, and clearly delineated theatrical dances on the other. (This book is also organized, to some extent, on this principle: theatrical dance per se becomes the focus only after more philosophical considerations on the nature and history of embodiment are given in the first half of the book.) Indeed, this is a second sense in which the term aesthetic continuum is crucial to this study: it denotes not only a scale of bodily experiences but also a scale operative within the aesthetic realm itself—a scale extending from clearly theatrical forms of choreography to forms of social dance.

Thus, while I shall begin by considering Schiller's important reflection on the social dance forms of his time, I do not engage in a cultural study of popular dance beyond the hypotheses I shall put forward later in this introduction. Similarly, in reading Ruskin's reaction to the raucous music hall in chapter 1, I do not assume that he is an authority on the popular cultural practice of the nineteenth century. I read him as an attempt to square an established, even rigidified, aesthetic ideology with the newly emerging popular cultural forms that challenge it. Finally, then, my concern is with the construction and legitimation of aesthetic ideologies rather than with an analysis of specific body cultures.

If we take Schiller as the historical and theoretical launching point of this book—as the visionary of a classical and classicist model of social harmony that emerges even as the romantic tradition comes along to challenge it—it is important to note ambiguities within his own formulation of the English dance. We can use his presentation to distinguish between two ideologies of the aesthetic's ability to effect closure and impose order on otherwise contingent social movements.

In Schiller's presentation there are two formulations of the dance that are crucial to my argument in this book. First is the presumed experience of the participants, who reconcile freedom and necessity, the desire for bodily movement and the need to observe a choreography. This I term "performative" or "integrative" totality. Here, totality is the production of the bodily movements of those participating and does not demand a reflective awareness of the totality produced. As I dance, I do not know totality; I perform and embody it. Indeed, to "know" the totality would be to abstract myself from the dance and break the very flow and order I experience.

At the same time, however, Schiller writes of being "a spectator in the gallery" and reproduces the vision as an aesthetic artifact or object, a "fitting image for the ideal" and a "perfectly appropriate symbol." At this level we have the second formulation, what I call the "mimetic" model of totality, in which a representation is sectioned off and made to stand for something else. The dancers function here as the symbol of a utopian social order. The observer knows the totality and knows the distinction between the idea of totality and its experience in the dance. Ideology operates at both of these levels—performative and mimetic—in distinct ways. In his book, the author presents two models of social order: performative and mimetic. The mimetic model involves an aesthetic ideology where artistic representation of a better life serves to blind the audience from the social realities they live in. This model serves as a sop for unrealized political action, where art becomes a sop for unrealized political action. The performative model, on the other hand, is one in which art does not simply misrepresent an existing social order but becomes the realm in which new social orders are produced and integrated.

The author discusses the equivocation in Schiller's letter between social dance (as experience) and dance as an aesthetic spectacle, which marks a degradation of the ideological and a falling away from the power of full integration. Schiller's presentation is already a transitional moment where the distinction between dance as a social divertissement (performative or integrative) and dance as an aesthetic spectacle (mimetic) becomes apparent.

The author emphasizes the distinction between a totality that is performed and a totality that is mimetically represented, which is crucial with respect to the politics of social choreography. Marcuse's notion of "affirmative" art is helpful in understanding the mimetic form of aesthetic ideology, where a false "fitting image for the ideal" is conjured up to paper over the cracks of social disintegration. However, the performative ideology, which excludes the position of the viewer and relies on one's engagement in the dance, presents important new possibilities of aestheticization. What I am arguing—in effect—is that only an understanding of ideology as something performed is adequate to the forms of the aestheticization of politics that we encounter in the late bourgeois era. It is only when the possibility of an "ideal" performance in the everyday realm is projected, as a "choreography," that we confront the phenomenon of an "aestheticization of political life." Every social order has sought to represent itself aesthetically—one need only think of the origins of ballet in the baroque court—but in all such representations, power was constructed along the axis of inclusion and exclusion. Only certain figures were accorded representative power, as others looked on. Schiller inaugurates a certain fantasy of full integration—even as, paradoxically, he himself looks on from across the English channel.

Effectively, the mimetic conception of totality is self-negating in that the exclusion of the work of art—think of the distance from the gallery down to the dance floor—already delimits and contains the totality. The confusion of subject and object, necessity and freedom, and the like is undone by the observing subject's relation to the dance as object. In other words, aesthetic attempts to effect totality as artifact always disrupt that totality. By contrast, performative experiences of totality would be those that seek to privilege the aesthetic moment itself as either integral to, or constitutive of, the totality. The totality is experienced as spontaneous, free, and self-grounding: no clearer definition than this of ideology is possible, of course. But Schiller himself is not dancing: he presents as an aesthetic artifact and object of the gaze a moment of self-contained totality. The performative totality—as experience—is already mediated by the mimetic, even as it denies that moment of the outside observer. This is its form of ideological foreclosure.

The desire to harness the aesthetic impulse as an integrative social and political force is certainly not alien to the Schillerian tradition I have outlined here. In fascist spectacle, for example, the masses do not simply denote the collective, they are themselves an assemblage of that collective. Schiller's presentation of the English dance is transitional because it holds out the possibility of finding aesthetic forms of social order, while delimiting and containing that order in aesthetic form. Thus, it remains undecidable whether the boundary of art and reality has been blurred or reasserted. In crude terms, one might say that I am using Schiller's example in order to parse out the otherwise intertwined moments of production and representation operative in ideology. I would argue that the decay of a fully integrative ideology—the aesthetic as experience of the dance—is what allowed for the emergence of highly aesthetic dance forms by the end of the nineteenth century. In ballet, for example, technique could be perfected at the cost of inclusiveness. No one expected the virtuosi of ballet to serve as models for aesthetic and political integration: they were spectacle. In the words of Hans Brandenburg, an influential early-twentieth-century German dance critic representative of the second historical moment to be focused on here, "ballet blossomed in a period of European history when a one-sided bourgeois intellectualism had reached its apogee, while at the same time preparing the way for a materialistic reaction." All feeling for the body had died out, so the stage became a place to celebrate an ideal of what had been lost in reality. The bourgeois' tired organism sought to fascinate itself and whip up its atrophied instincts through an extreme physical exertion it was otherwise not capable of. In this sloppy presentation, typical of the romantic anticapitalism found in modern dance enthusiasts, the bourgeois figure enjoys the intellectual and spiritual elements of ballet as a spectacle. Subconsciously, the bourgeois identifies with a distorted body whose self-alienation has reached the level of an aesthetic achievement.

Brandenburg offered a "true and healthy Körperkultur" as an alternative to ballet. This presentation art has taken on a compensatory value—ideal rather than real—but Brandenburg's demand is not for a more "realistic" representation of the body. He requires an experience of the body that will counteract both an ideological and a physiological atrophy. This invocation of experience provides a correlative argument to the claim about the decay of integrative aesthetic ideology. The mode of integrative ideology did not disappear; it migrated to popular dance forms simplified for full participation and to the realm of a "body culture" that emphasized "authentic" physical experience over social mediation.

Dance is crucial for the manner in which it problematizes, in ways that prefigure the historical avant-garde, the notion of the "work of art." Discourses around dance in the nineteenth and early twentieth century express conjoined crises of the (im)possibility of bodily experience and the fate of the aesthetic artifact in a form that is dynamic and evanescent. Dance asks two questions: Can I still experience something? Can I produce an artifact? In other words, are we to think of the "work" of art as noun or verb, as artifact or activity?

If the work of art is thought in the everyday terms of "artifact," we risk losing sight of the integrative function of the aesthetic. That which has been enclosed and reified in an artifact is itself the finished product of a process rather than a dynamically cohering social force. To stress the productive or integrative nature of aesthetic work as a process or activity, however, is potentially to demote the work itself as artifact and to question our ability to stand back from, and reflect on, the totalizing (and totalitarian?) activity of dancing. Dance is a process of work that produces no work or artifact as residue. To a great extent, this is what endears it to certain symbolists as a model for a solipsistic aesthetic.

More specifically and polemically stated, a critical emphasis on dance as an aesthetic form of play reiterates and reinforces a certain tradition already found in Schiller. What is lost is any notion of work. In chapter 1, I will examine a strain of nineteenth-century "aesthetic socialism" that derived the aesthetic terminology for theorizing dance from the traditional distinction of the plastic and the musical arts. In terms of this distinction, prevailing readings of modernism have tended to read the nineteenth century through the prism of the musical—with all forms aspiring to the condition of music. By focusing in Chapter 1 on questions of work—specifically the work performed by the work of art—I seek to problematize this emphasis on the playful nature of dance. The category of social choreography allows us to study the work of art in two senses. First, how does choreography enact rather than simply reflect social order? What social work does it perform? Second, what is the significance of the reemergence of dance in the early part of the twentieth century for subsequent avant-garde attacks on the “work” of art as artifact? I shall trace in Chapter 1 the way in which a discourse on dance and a discourse on work became intertwined in the course of the nineteenth century; my aim here is simply to note how, with the celebration of dance within modernist aesthetics, the category of work gets written out. This erasure I take as symptomatic of a certain ideological reading of choreography that seeks to obscure the social and material origins of its own aesthetic endeavor.

On the one hand, a reemergent dance necessarily redefined the very conception of the work of art. It is not—in the sense elaborated by Hannah Arendt in The Human Condition—a “work” at all: it produces no object. In other words, we might say that dance reemerges as a central and paradigmatic aesthetic form at the very point where bourgeois aesthetic discourse begins to question both the nature of its own social relevance (its “work”) and of its own commodity status (its “works”). The reemergence of dance at the turn of the century—and the subsequent dance craze of 1910-11—prefigured some of the more radical avant-garde challenges to the institution of art. Whereas artists such as Marcel Duchamp would challenge the fetishization of the aesthetic artifact by offering up something apparently “subaesthetic,” however, the prevailing discourse around dance obscured the crisis of the “work” or artifact by insisting on the “transaesthetic” and synthetic value of the choreographic. For a moment, the crisis within bourgeois aesthetics—a crisis centered around the nature of aesthetic “work” and the “works” it produced—could be presented as the sublation of bourgeois aesthetics. “Work” would be precisely that which the “play” of the aesthetic must hide. It is precisely such a reading that Kermode sees being developed in his study Romantic Image. I seek, instead, to restore the radical moment of the challenge—“Is dance a work?”—before it was resubsumed by a codified modernist discourse. The very fact that dance does not produce a “work” or artifact to mark the fact that work had taken place particularly suited it to an aesthetic ideology of modernism that sought to obscure the materiality of work in its own productions. There is a fantasy of pure energy at play here that parallels a capitalist fantasy of pure profit, pure production. Dance became a preeminent aesthetic form during the modernist period not only because it exemplified those conditions of modernity famously identified by Baudelaire—the material and contingent—but because it equally effectively sublated them. In a fully rationalized world, labor would be performed as a form of spontaneous bodily dance that generates rather than expends energy. It is interesting to note how what I present here as an abstract paradigm shift—from play to labor—in the ideological function of choreography was, in fact, accompanied by mundane changes in the history of social and/or theatrical dance. Thus, for example, Belinda Quirey, a historian of forms of popular dance, has noted of the waltz—the nineteenth century's definitive contribution to social dance—that it "is basically a work rhythm. It was the first work rhythm that we ever accepted above the level of folk dance . . . Nor is Waltz specific to one single working action. There are dozens of working actions that can be done to it, but particularly anything that requires a good wallop on the first beat, and then a recovery period."¹⁷ A tendency that I note at the level of critical discourse—the movement from play to work as the defining paradigm—seems to announce itself first in new popular dance forms, and it is interesting to note this belaboring subtext to a social dance that was scandalous primarily for its erotic rather than its utilitarian overtones. Quirey calls the waltz the most important single change in dance as a form of social intercourse, claiming that it marks the definitive death of courtly dance as the hegemonic form and model of social choreography. It is, therefore, interesting to note how quickly after Schiller's celebration of a sociable English dance—still more closely tied to popular forms of country dance than was its continental counterparts—the assimilation of popular forms into fashionable dance began to introduce the moment of work, rather than play, into the performances of bourgeois self-aestheticization. In the early nineteenth century, romanticism's demands for a more "genuine" and expressive culture led, on the one hand, to the emergence of social dance forms that were altogether new and, on the other, to the final flowering of ballet in nineteenth-century France—the period of Fanny Elssler and Maria Taglioni and the writings of Gautier. Although the ethereality of romanticism's dance aesthetic, both in the ballroom and on stage, might seem diametrically opposed to such vivacious new social dances as the waltz, it can be credibly argued that a new emphasis on expression also made possible, in a certain sense, enthusiastic critical perceptions of the waltz as the expression of a transindividual, primal life force. The waltz seemed to represent the very essence of dance itself, the most intoxicating and energizing force of human movement.

Similarly, the second period of critical writing²⁸ Social Choreography that I have been citing in this chapter—the period immediately preceding World War I, reflected primarily in the work of prodigious German dance critics—coincided both with the dance craze of 1910-11, and, of course, with the debut of the Ballets Russes. To contemporary observers, the dance craze also seemed to presage the more visceral "craziness" of the war to follow. As a German critic of dance and body culture in general noted at the time: "The great dance epidemic that was merely suppressed by the war and broke out again all the more violently at war's end has something of that melancholy audaciousness that imbues all moribund epochs."¹ By way of example, Hans Brandenburg addressed directly the Schillerian inheritance in ways that might be useful for bridging the gap from Schiller to the twentieth century. Brandenburg offers an interesting analysis of the destructive inner dialectic of Schiller's aesthetic and social vision. Writing of the development of popular dance in the nineteenth century, he observes how "The round dance signaled the end of the art of dance, insofar as it might be said to have existed. At least as long as it had been performed only by a gifted few, even social dance had remained a spectacle. After the rococo, when a cohesive style had, as in ancient times or in the Renaissance, completely unified an era for the very last time, the epoch of literature, science, and technology set in; a bourgeois epoch in which all bodily imagination was banished by an increased emphasis on the intellect. Dance no longer sought to stand above the world and give it expression through the spectacle of movement; it became a form of general social entertainment." This observation is important and bears some examination.

Clearly there are the same two competing visions of totality here: one mimetic and external, reflecting on what it excludes, and the other performative and integrative, weaving a totality but producing no aesthetic object in which the totality itself can be represented or beheld. Even as a form of social choreography, Brandenburg argues, Renaissance and rococo dance understood that they were intended to be seen—that they were a spectacle for all but the "gifted few" who performed them. The social choreography was exemplary, so to speak.

Brandenburg further argues that a degeneration in dance technique has gone hand in hand with dance's popularization. In other words, he traces a trajectory that inverts Schiller. Whereas Schiller expresses a certain allegorical nostalgia for the experience of a perfectly choreographed society, by the early twentieth century Brandenburg is arguing the reverse: that such choreographed societies were always spectacles, and that the real problem is that the moment of reflection—the speculation made possible by the spectacle—has been lost, to be replaced by an "intellect" that neither stands apart nor participates.

Whereas Schiller traces the rise of an autonomous aesthetic and the aesthetic theorist's consequent distancing from any mundane or "performative" experience of unity, Brandenburg argues instead that all we have now is participation—"general social entertainment"—rather than aesthetic achievement. In political terms—terms that will recur throughout this book—I take this distinction as typical of the division drawn by Theodor Adorno between authoritarian and totalitarian fantasies.

Whereas ballet arose from a fantasy of absolute control (articulated as visibility, the opening up and splaying of the dancer's body for surveillance), Brandenburg now writes of a dance that envisions a social order in which such control is superfluous because each individual has an immediate, fundamental, grounding relation to the whole. The totality is participatory or, in my terms, performative: a "general social entertainment." Prefiguring Adorno's famous reflections on the culture industry, Brandenburg's writing (around the time of the dance craze) begins to articulate a theory of entertainment as a totalitarian culture industry. In this window from Schiller to Brandenburg we encounter the historical moment in which aesthetic experience was sundered from, yet nostalgic for, subjective and intrasubjective self-coincidence: the high point of the aesthetics of autonomy. In Brandenburg, we find a critique of the aesthetic prefigurations of social totalitarianism. Whether or not we accept the conclusion, what interests me here is that it was a reflection on dance that enabled—or even necessitated—this reflection. To me, the most compelling way of judging the political valence of a certain choreography, while taking account of its own aesthetic specificity, is, indeed, by way of an analogy with a social configuration. For example, the traditional balletic form of self-presentation, in which the body is splayed open to be visible on a flat plane, clearly reflects the system of feudal representation in the absolutist courts, where the gaze was to be monopolized by the kingly subject/object of power. Likewise, the fantasies of immanent physical redemption in much modern dance—or the notion that bodies communicate immediately to one another by way of kinesthesia—clearly suggests an analogy to a bio-politics that sees community as something physical and biological rather than political. A pervasive early-twentieth-century celebration of rhythm readily lent itself to irrational, vitalistic (and reactionary) notions of social unity, insofar as it posited an immediate passage from natural-biological rhythms to the social-aesthetic.

To call this system of political analogy "metaphorical," however, assumes the primacy of the social and political structure that is replicated in the aesthetic form. Is it not possible that political fantasies have, quite literally, been rehearsed in the aesthetic arena before taking concrete political form in the everyday sense? Without trivializing the political by arguing that a dance is just as "fascist" as, say, Nazi laws on racial hygiene, I do think it is possible to extrapolate an underpinning fantasy structure that would link the two phenomena. To speak of the "homologies" of these elements of fantasy, however, is to speak in the language of fantasy itself, which serves to reify and quarantine as autonomous components the related and differentiated levels of the power structure it serves.

And precisely because the underpinning structure is a fantasy, it relies not only on political calculations but also on certain aesthetic norms for its narrative coherence. Fantasies only work as political and ideological forces if they have an aesthetic coherence and appeal. This aesthetic component is primary rather than secondary. Thus, when I use the term "totalitarian" with regard to an aesthetic event, I refer neither to the politics of the artist, nor to any favor lavished on such art by a regime. Nor, however, do I refer solely to the operation of a fantasy of wholeness, completion, and closure (we find this in ballet also, obviously). Totality itself need not be totalitarian. I refer instead to an aesthetic that derives its force from imagining that closure as something immanent, emanating from within: that is, from within the body of the dancer, or from within the very logic of the dance itself. As such, this totalitarian aesthetic performance does not derive from a prior totalitarian politics but rather shares with that politics a certain fantasy structure—a belief in immanent, rather than socially (or even aesthetically) mediated, totality. This difference is crucial. Schiller marks the transition from an imagined experiential social integration to a realization that this can only be a mere aesthetic representation in the bourgeois age. In short, Schiller marks a transition from totality as a political project to totality as an aesthetic project. Not the least of his ideological moves is to locate the "perfectly appropriate symbol" in England, thus marking his own distance from it while implying that the more liberal political structures of England may allow for a realization of this aesthetic ideal in the public realm.

Brandenburg writes a century later, in a time of the resurgence of both popular dance in a new dance craze that brought many new steps from America and Latin America, and of ballet with the Ballets Russes. His observations, I would argue, trace a shift toward a new totalitarian aesthetic—one from which there is no escape and in which there is no restraint because the dance is all there is.

In a nutshell, Schiller uses dance to mark the nostalgia of bourgeois aesthetics for an ideal closure and self-coincidence, whereas Brandenburg's nostalgia is for bourgeois aesthetic values and competencies that might resist and set limits to an all-embracing "diversion," a totalitarian craze for dance.

Jürgen Habermas, in his study The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere, quotes Alewyn to the effect that "the bourgeois is distinguished from the courtly mentality by the fact that in the bourgeois home even the ballroom is still homey, whereas in the palace even the living quarters are still festive" (10). We are dealing here with the social and aesthetic transformations that are part and parcel of a shift from a feudal public sphere of visibility and representation to a bourgeois public sphere of both intimacy and coercive integration that shuns the very position of observer that Schiller adopted.

In the bourgeois period, according to Brandenburg's presentation, there is no longer an audience able to constitute the dance as an aesthetic object. But at the same time, there is no longer an immediate physical experience of the dance—it has been ruptured by the intellect. An analysis of social dance at this time of transition brings greater complexity and historical context to this theoretical argument.

Quirey's assertion that "in the Romantic Revolution something very sad happened to western man. He began to lose his choreographic identity" (74) suggests that the shift in the operation of the public sphere around the beginning of the nineteenth century also needs to be thought of in specifically gendered terms. The "representative" public function of the male disappears, she argues. This had to do with the new fashion for a more ethereal dancing on toes—and, indeed, a more general shift in posture and gait at the time—which was felt to be unmanly but indicative of the "grace" of dance. As Quirey notes: "The technique, high on the toes and with very soft arm movements, favoured the women's dancing from the start. Add to this the lamentable characters a man had to play, and the result is predictable. Ballet, and dancing in general, became thought of as effeminate" (76).

On the one hand, then, we have the theoretical historian Habermas arguing for a broad shift away from a "representative" to a more deliberative bourgeois public sphere, and on the other the disappearance from the ballroom of masculine self-representation. What results, in effect, is a form of division of labor. Women can continue to "represent" only because the representative public sphere that demands such acts of self-representation has been surpassed—and enclosed in an aesthetic realm—in the bourgeois era. In his Tanzbuch of 1924, the critic Hans W. Fischer—whom I cited earlier and to whom I shall return in the final chapter of this book—is characteristic of contemporary critical appraisals when he argues, “wherever dance functioned as a direct expression of life, man always played a full, and sometimes even a leading, role: as suitor, priest, or warrior. He therefore maintains his role even in social dance, which remains, after all, essentially a form of courtship. Only as dance shifted function and became spectacle did a change take place in this regard.”** Once social power and its physical embodiment—the king’s famous two bodies—have been separated out, the representative public sphere cannot function. So-called representation becomes little more than ornament or display—women’s work. The men, and their power, have disappeared into the cabinet offices. The only form in which masculine power remains is in its eroticization in the waltz. In other words, the display of erotic attraction in the waltz projects the so-called representative public sphere onto the realm of bourgeois intimacy.

What Quirey presents from a dance historical perspective as the sidelining of men can at the same time be taken as a denigration of the ideal of social choreography in general and its delegation to a subaesthetic, popular, “feminine” realm. From the perspective of the Schillerian ideal of social choreography, what this effectively means is that the ideal of harmonious interaction has been retained in the form of an aestheticized social practice, but only at the cost of the trivialization of his concept of “play.” The specific dance form of the waltz itself, meanwhile, injects into this realm of emasculated play a note of hard labor. It is as if the ideological work of the women was to sustain the fantasy of Schiller’s ideal—even as the male society deserts it.

And yet, to the contrary, we need to remember that the real scandal of the waltz lay in its eroticism: in the fact that men and women paired off exclusively and in immediate physical proximity in public space. This apparent contradiction—men abandon dance to the women, yet are themselves to be found dancing more lustily than ever—is no contradiction at all. The waltz was scandalous precisely because it no longer rehearsed new possibilities of social order—in the manner of social choreography—but served merely to demonstrate the schism between public and private and the dual or split function of men in each. In the words, once again, of Hans Brandenburg: with the waltz, “democracy, the bourgeoisie, emotion carried off the victory ... The waltz was able to make available on an unprecedented scale the sheer joy of dancing, unleashing a veritable ecstasy of dance, an international mass psychosis, simply because its rhythm contains an impulse toward movement the likes of which had never before been experienced. It contained the rhythmic formula for all the pleasures of the dance.”*° Brandenburg sees the waltz not as one dance among others but as the unleashing of the very essence of the choreographic. Social choreography no longer functions as an interaction in which harmonious order might be envisaged and rehearsed, but as a communing with a putatively primal force or rhythm. Although I will not focus on popular dance in this book, I think we can clearly see—not only in the waltz, but also in the critical reflections it prompted—the emergence of a philosophical and sociological vitalism that would grow in ideological appeal during the historical period covered by this study. In tracing the shift from Schiller’s enthusiasm for dance at the end of the eighteenth century to Ellis’s rueful assessment of it at the beginning of the twentieth, we need, finally, to distinguish not only between performance and spectacle but also between popular and high culture. Schiller’s hopes were for an emerging form of explicitly social choreography, while Ellis bemoaned the decline of an art form. Brandenburg's observations highlight the aesthetic impoverishment of dance as a cultural achievement at precisely the point where it is expected to choreograph a new social order.

The dance craze of 1910-11, which coincided with the success of the Ballets Russes, seemed to simplify steps and emphasize rhythm. The ballet contributed to the interest in social dance during the craze, but the technical skills of the ballet compensated for the aesthetic impoverishment of ballroom dance. The polarization of the aesthetic continuum - prodigious Russian leaps on one hand and collective shuffling of feet on the other - marks a historical juncture that necessitated reassessing established notions of both personal and aesthetic autonomy.

The social techne fetishized as technique on one hand and operating as a barely aesthetic social technology on the other led to a paring down of aesthetic expectation. The expansion of a social choreography during the dance craze of 1910-11 will require a more basic consideration of walking as the brute material of choreography. The study will expand on the problem of walking and stumbling, and how a tradition of writing about walking, gait, and posture romanticized leisurely promenades while theorizing its own motive force as something vibrant but consistently threatened with collapse. Contrary to a tradition of modern dance theory that seeks to make our most "natural" movements the basis of an aesthetic, it will be necessary to examine how thoroughly "cultural" even so simple a motion as walking can be. As I show in Chapter 2, dance might be seen as the culmination of an Enlightenment pedagogical project that extended from the minimal and functional (the simple act of walking, for example) through the expressive (a concern with the codification of gesture) to the aesthetic realm itself as a theater for the transfiguration of bodies. By insisting on reading dance along this aesthetic continuum of bodily articulation, I resist a reading that takes for granted the meta-physical aspirations so often identified with dance as a form in which time and space, body and soul, seamlessly interpenetrate.

While acknowledging the importance and prevalence of the vitalist discourse on rhythm, I will stress throughout this book, in polemical fashion, those moments in both dance and social comportment that threatened a break in rhythm: graceless actions that bring us back to earth. Here I will consider a history of gesture and look at instances of stumbling—feelings of bodily unease that suggest the noxious effect of modernity's rhythms. By no means does this work aspire to offer a history of dance; rather, it examines the solutions that social choreography—as the performance of social and aesthetic order, as the articulation, indeed, of the orderly relation of the aesthetic to the social—offered to certain pressing questions within cultural modernity.

The Body of Marsyas

Dance historians have generally regarded the nineteenth century as a low point in the development of dance as a serious aesthetic form in Western Europe. It is assumed that the balletic tradition, originally developed in Italy and then transported to the French court, effectively disappeared into Russian exile where it was nurtured under the anachronistic absolutism of courtly and state protection. Meanwhile, in Western Europe—after the period of high romanticism when the ballerinas Taglioni and Elssler were feted by the literary and artistic world—dance was reduced to the status of divertissement, or popularized and vulgarized in the music hall. However one might tinker with this broad historical account, it nevertheless seems undeniable that the post-romantic period did, indeed, see a decline in dance's prestige and in the quality of aesthetic reflection accorded it—that is, until Mallarmé took up the critical tradition kept alive in the mid-century by Gautier and made dance a central trope for the poetic endeavor.

In this chapter I will begin by outlining what I take to be the stakes of a broad shift from tropes of play to tropes of harmonious social labor in figurations of dance, before arguing that this shift mirrors a broader social rationalization for which dance provided a perfect aesthetic and ideological vehicle. The figures I cover here are essentially literary intellectuals, and thus this chapter will offer little of immediate import to the historian of dance. In order to recontextualize the institutional and aesthetic decay of dance in Western Europe, I demonstrate that the idea of dance nevertheless carried a particular charge for social and aesthetic theorists of the period. Instead of questioning the accepted dance historical narrative of nineteenth-century decline on empirical grounds, I wish to recast the question in the broader terms of social choreography. 

What structures of social experience were being theorized or projected in an almost subterranean discourse on choreography, even as dance itself seemed to languish as a high cultural form? I would argue that there was a migration of cultural interest in dance away from the “high” cultural forms toward the newly emerging forms of public amusement and mass entertainment, on the one hand, and toward an emerging discourse of anthropology on the other. The idea of choreography retained its importance, I will argue, by virtue of a fundamental shift in its significance. In brief, my thesis here is that the nineteenth century saw a shift in writings on dance from a Schillerian concern with “play” as the (pre)condition of human freedom to reflections on “work” or “labor” as (respectively) the realization or the alienation of embodied human potential. By the end of the century, the ideal of choreographed labor had become an important component both in social modernization and in the aestheticization of social and political thought.

I argue that by the late nineteenth century, reflections on dance centered around the question of work in two important ways. First, dance was invoked as a way of thinking about the kinds of work, both material production and ideological reproduction, necessary to the production of a cohesive social order. Meanwhile, in the social sciences of the time, increasingly complex Western societies began to confront “primitive” and supposedly “integrated” social orders through the prism of anthropology. Whereas moral judgments of “primitive” societies led to condemnations of uncivilized savagery, a focus on dance allowed for viewing such societies in terms of their ritual enactment of a social cohesion that was singularly missing from the rationalized, and increasingly mediatized, West. As industrial society fractured across class lines and the growing political hegemony of the nation-state made any internal fissure seem dangerous to the welfare of the commonwealth, it seemed that the production of social cohesion had become increasingly hard work. Dance would serve to figure a kind of work—again, both material and ideological—that might actually be pleasurable.

In a second sense, however—as an aesthetic phenomenon—dance also served to foreground the problematic nature of the idea of work when applied to the arts. What work does dance produce? Is dance useless—or, more charitably, “disinterested”—because it produces no object, or is the absence of an excess or residue that might be characterized as the “object” of the dance rather the realization of an aesthetic ideal of self-immanence, as the symbolists hoped? In short, is dance more, or less, legitimate as a form of art because it produces no object? I wish to argue that these questions presaged debates within the twentieth-century avant-garde concerning the problematic nature of the (fetishized) art object. I wish to argue also, however, that these two parallel debates in fact intersected in interesting ways in a tradition of what I call “aesthetic socialism.” The figures making up this tradition—as presented in this chapter, primarily the literary sages of nineteenth-century Britain—envisaged a social choreography that cannot simply be conflated with the forms of aestheticized politics produced in Europe in the first half of the twentieth century. Although by the end of the nineteenth century dance had been eclipsed both as a respectable aesthetic form and as a figure for democratic social order, it nevertheless reemerged in various compromised, “eurhythmic”—and, indeed, eugenic—forms. By the end of the nineteenth century, strikingly contemporaneous with the emergence of anthropology as a defined and respected discourse, there emerged a new, conservative strain of thinking about social choreography across Europe. Inspired by a Schillerian vision, this stream of thought nevertheless took quite antiliberal forms. Thus, for example, Herbert Spencer in an article from 1895 would cite dance in support of a hierarchical and vertical social order quite different from the horizontal interlacings of Schiller's "English dance." Referring to "those savages who have no permanent chiefs or rudimentary kings," Spencer notes that such societies generally lack any professionalized or theatrical conception of performance—"among them these incipient professional actions are scarcely to be traced."

Spencer's linkage of dance to the process of social distinction and differentiation, or to what we might, in technical terms, refer to as rationalization, perhaps indicates an answer to the demise of "democratic" social dance as a cohesive social trope. The social order implicit in Schillerian dance was no longer relevant to a century in which modernization would turn on the emergence of technology and the rational operation of a technological rather than simplistically "democratic" order. Spencer is concerned with the absence, in savage societies, of any theatrical dance. The social differentiation necessary to establishing a class of dancers—necessary, one might say, to the institutionalization of the aesthetic—is lacking, thereby serving as a signal of a society's backwardness.

Thus, we might argue that from Spencer's perspective, the reappearance of dance in the early twentieth century as a highly specialized and professionalized phenomenon—in the form of the Ballets Russes—reflects a process of discursive rationalization that both isolates the aesthetic and deploys social and performative distinctions to reconfigure social order. Although my focus in this chapter is on a tradition of British thought running from Carlyle through Ruskin and Morris to Wilde, the logic of the argument turns on a theoretical distinction between the categories of work and of labor that can most usefully be constructed retroactively.

Although I focus here on questions of cultural politics in Britain, I will begin by briefly sketching out the social import of dance in anthropological and sociological writings in Europe to highlight a broader choreographic shift from play to work. A wide variety of late-nineteenth-century labor theorists turned to the example of dance in their writings to explicate their notions of a natural labor that might harness and regenerate labor power rather than simply use it up. In brief, they sought to harness the energy and enthusiasm that went into the "playful" performance of dance—particularly in those primitive cultures that were becoming the objects of anthropological investigation in the age of imperialism—to the performance of more legitimate social and economic labor. In the energies both consumed and produced in the enthusiasm of dance, they saw a sublime "beyond"—a regeneration of entropic social forces through a vitalistic labor power that passes through and uses the individual. Dance—which for Schiller troped a utopian yet historical possibility, a "sublation of time in time"—now figured instead the anthropological condition of labor. 

According to Rabinbach, from the middle of the nineteenth century through, arguably, the end of the twentieth, "the metaphor of the human motor translated revolutionary scientific discoveries about physical nature into a new vision of social modernity." "The laboring body," he argues, "was thus interpreted as the site of conversion, or exchange, between nature and society—the medium through which the forces of nature are transformed into the forces that propel society" (2-3). By tracing a troubling move from the Helmholtzian optimism of the 1850s—which posited the ultimate conservation of all energies—through to Clausius's discovery of the laws of entropy, Rabinbach aims to demonstrate how entropy, figured as fatigue, shaped social revolutionary thinking in the latter nineteenth century by taking the form of a materialist idealism or, as he calls it, a "transcendental materialism" (4). During this same period—the 1850s—we see the emergence in Marx's writings of an abstract category of "labor power" as opposed to simple manufacture. Tracing these shifts as constitutive of modernity, Rabinbach contrasts them with an eighteenth-century Enlightenment form of materialism:

The old mechanical materialism of the eighteenth century, as Engels never tired of pointing out, was based on the principle that there had to be something beyond matter to explain its movement . . . With the doctrine of energy, finally, there was nothing beyond matter to explain its motion, no homunculus beneath the table. There was only matter in motion, with energy claiming true universality as the reservoir of perpetual motion of the universe, the source of its labor power. The old dualism of spirit and matter was overcome by a transcendental materialism with its own monadic conception of reality—the unity of matter and energy—as energumen. (289-90)

I wish to argue that this search for the energumen was also central to discourses of social choreography in the nineteenth century and would culminate in a discourse of what I will call the "physiological sublime." Rather than tracing the transcendentalism of symbolist and postsymbolist writings on dance to purely aesthetic precedents, I believe that—with reference to Rabinbach's notion of "transcendental materialism"—we can see this transcendental imperative in the context of a broader late-nineteenth-century search for the origins of social energies.

What I propose, then, is an analysis of the resolution of matter and spirit not in an aestheticized spirituality, which is the most common frame of reference for thinking about the relation of dance to literature, but in a materiality redefined through aestheticism. Aesthetic discourse provides a frame for thinking about social phenomena, no less than those phenomena shape our thinking about the aesthetic.

It would seem undeniable that the growth of an anthropological interest in dance at the end of the nineteenth century was related to concerns about the limits of human labor and its status as a component of human nature. In this respect, as in so many others, dance acquired a rather aporetic position because it seemed to indicate the existence of an urge or instinct toward activity among primitive peoples when the working hypothesis of most anthropological labor theorists was the natural idleness or inertia in man. In The Human Motor, Rabinbach summarizes this puzzle nicely in his treatment of an essay by the social theorist M. G. Ferrero, who collaborated with his father-in-law, Cesare Lombroso, on groundbreaking works of criminology. "How," Rabinbach asks, basing himself on Ferrero's observations, "could the 'inertia' so frequently observed among those savage peoples be 'natural' given their readiness to self-exertion and energy in dance?" (174). We shall encounter this philosophical and anthropological confrontation with the problem of "inertia" later in this chapter, where it serves as the crucial counterterm to Ruskin's very definition of art: ars—as Ruskin frames it—is the very opposite of cultural and bodily inertia.

Before we even reconstruct Ruskin's aesthetic, however, Rabinbach's analysis serves to remind us that aesthetic questions as to the possibility of a natural culture (such as Schiller posits through dance) were directly implicated in a broader project of political economy that sought to locate the origins of labor power. I wish to argue that this influence of political economy on aesthetic theory was, however, a two-way street. The very terms and taxonomies of political economy, as we shall see, were in part structured by categories derived from the discourse of idealist aesthetic theory.

For the anthropologists of this time, dance was in some ways analogous to the incest taboo in that it constituted a cultural and yet universally occurring phenomenon. With regard to the puzzle of dance as a naturally occurring cultural form, Rabinbach argues that Ferrero and others "found the answer not in the utility nor purposefulness of work, but in the natural rhythms of the body" (174). Anthropological research into the choreography of "primitives" fed into concerns about labor insofar as it sought to demonstrate, in vitalistic fashion, the existence of a human instinct toward activity, exemplified by dance.

In Ferrero's argument, for example, dance potentially served to refute a basic assumption that "the human spirit tends by nature to inertia." In other words, the natural-cultural phenomenon of dance promised to reverse a growing cultural pessimism at the fin de siècle that linked physical and social entropy. Dance was an activity that produced a greater social energy than it consumed: it was potentially self-regenerative, it seemed.

Even the hugely influential German labor theorist Karl Biicher—who otherwise took issue with Ferrero in the study Arbeit und Rhythmus, which went into many editions—concedes that "nevertheless, one thing is certainly valuable in the work of this Italian scholar . . . the premising of his study on an activity that is not a form of work, but to which man in the state of nature dedicates himself with great gusto and diligence: dance."* This instinct, however, was to be thought physiologically rather than psychologically; and, indeed, one of the concerns raised by the idea of dance as a spontaneous activity was the bypassing of free human will that this suggested. As Biicher notes with regard to Ferrero: "Of all the elements that Ferrero deems important in native dances, there is only one that meets my criteria: its automatic character" (21).° Dance was of interest because it promised—or threatened—a human laboring subject deprived of will. In other words, if thinkers and artists on the Left criticized alienated labor as unfree, anthropological research at the same time suggested that dance—which had been used to figure free, organic activity—was, in fact, unfree because it involved no activity of will. This unfreedom, however, has been repositioned in this discourse on dance as a freedom that exceeds the limited self-determination of the individual subject. 

Such discourse was of a piece at this time with the philosophical redefinition of “will” that moved away from a rational voluntarism and toward a more irrational “life force” that man did not control but that coursed through man and all of nature. Politically it is highly ambiguous, because it is predicated neither on a liberal subject-centered conception of freedom nor on a materialist object-oriented “wordly” calculation of objective possibility. Romantic, organicist notions of the dance notwithstanding, it is clear that an entirely different intellectual tradition at the end of the nineteenth century was articulating through dance a new “automatic” concept of human labor power. Thus, when Bücher disagrees with the established wisdom of his time that holds that “work refers only to those movements oriented toward a useful goal that lies beyond the movement itself; all movements whose purpose lies in the movement itself, however, are not work” (1), he effectively grafts—via dance—the traditional Kantian Unzweckm-Jsigkeit of the aesthetic onto labor. Labor now functions as a self-legitimating natural human function. It is through dance that the purposive, rational, object-oriented activity of work is aestheticized and debased as a vitalistic and self-enclosing labor.

The antivoluntaristic aspect of this vitalistic “dance labor” lies in its rapprochement of physiology and mechanism. Thus, for example, Charcot’s collaborator, Féré, who was also interested in questions of criminality and social disorder, argues that “the pleasure taken in rhythm . . . derives from the bodily activities resulting from it; experience effectively demonstrates that a rhythm manifesting order in both time and space facilitates the repetition of willed actions by rendering them in some sense automatic.”^ Physical pleasure, in other words, derives from the experience of automatization. Or, put another way, pleasure in the physical as such is predicated on the mechanization of the physical and the denigration of the willing subject. This abdication of the will, however, should not be seen as a simple “fall” into the physical, for through the activity of rhythm the body acquires an altogether different value, reformulating consciousness: “All these agreeable stimuli coincide with an awareness of an enhanced capacity for action that is, in fact, very real” (21-22).^ In other words, consciousness does form a part of rhythmic bodily pleasure, but it is consciousness of a beyond or excess, of a capacité. Consciousness, we might say—in aesthetic terms—is being reformulated in terms of the sublime, as the consciousness of something yet to be realized. To this extent, the sociologists and anthropologists I present briefly here were realizing in the realm of social theories of labor an essentially romantic concept of sublime consciousness. The apparent distinction between romantic and technocratic models of postliberal “freedom” is, indeed, only apparent. What we see emerging here in and through anthropological writings on dance are the ideological underpinnings of a romantic anti-capitalism characteristic of the writings of many modern dance pioneers both in Europe and in the United States. For Ferrero, primitive dance opens up the possibility of an immanent will manifested contemporaneously with the actions it provokes: “In productive labor, the stimulus to action is willed, whereas in primitive sports it is practically automatic” (333). 'In terms of Rabinbach’s model of the perpetuum mobile, even “will” is now construed as an instance external to the energies unleashed in labor and dance: while it can set such motions in motion, it challenges their autonomy and retards them. Most striking, then, are the implications Ferrero draws for basing a theory of work on an observation of rhythm. He describes the operation of will in labor as follows: “Almost every movement must, therefore, be preceded by an intellectual act that directs the action of the will providing the impetus for that movement. It is true that in modern industry, the simplicity and repetitiveness of the actions performed by each worker means that a certain degree of automatism is introduced into skilled labor” (333)." Paradoxically, “civilization”—through the practice of division of labor and task specialization—returns at the virtual point to the condition of dance. Automatism is both origin and telos of activity and is typified by primitive dance and advanced capitalist labor. It is here that the dance trope comes into its own. The transition from primitive sport to civilized labor is achieved by virtue of rhythm, as Ferrero explains: “The angry man, who pummels his fists or stamps his feet furiously, augments his anger by these very actions; and this increased rage in turn renders his gestures more extreme and violent. There is a mutual action and reaction ... The same is true of the dancer . . . once the first movements of the dance have been completed, they serve to animate the movements that follow” (333-34)." The dancer comes to represent the possibility of a self-sustaining energy, exciting itself through a reading and reiteration of its own rhythm. The first steps of the dance spur a recognition of rhythm and an awareness in the dancer of a capacity for sustaining activity beyond the apparent limits of his body. Dance produces the energy that reproduces it in turn. This experience of a physical potentiality linked to “enthusiasm” as a form of anticipatory historical sense is, finally, what I call the “physiological sublime”: the body encoding in movement a consciousness of its own unexplored capacity. The pleasure derived from the rhythms of dance is, after all, ascribable to consciousness; in Féré’s words, “the increased potential produced by rhythmic repetition of movements explains, in large part, the pleasure of dancing” (50).’* Seeking to reconnect the central concerns of this anthropological and sociological discourse with the cultural politics of the period, one cannot help but be struck by the congruence of Féré’s observations with certain curious, idiosyncratic distinctions insisted on by Ruskin, such as when, in Praeterita, he contrasts “right” dancing, which is silent in the placement of the foot, to “the modern artificial ideal” of stamping or tapping with the foot." In this latter noisy dance we see the body generate its own “enthusiasm,” generating an awareness of rhythm that will sustain it. If Féré and Ruskin write in different registers within different national traditions and draw different conclusions, their writings nevertheless seem to organize themselves around a shared set of categories. In what follows I seek to reconstruct in a rigorous, semiotically oriented way the ideological positions opened up by reflections on dance in the nineteenth century “aesthetic socialist” tradition. While dance served ideologically as the exemplar for harmonious social interaction in the Schillerian tradition imported into Britain by Carlyle, by the end of the century the choreographic social utopia would become little more than an aestheticization of labor. Aesthetic debate about dance in the nineteenth century is simultaneously a reflection on the aporias of democratic social order and the limits and preconditions of capitalist economy. For its subsequent twentieth-century champions, the kinaesthetic potential of dance—its contagious communication of motion from one body to another—promised a form of immanent democracy in which communication passed throughout the broader body politic without recourse to language. But by this very token, such visions of the dance of democracy reverted to a vitalistic celebration of energy entirely consonant with an ideology of undifferentiated labor. In other words, the explosion of non-balletic modern dance rejects an authoritarian social and aesthetic configuration only by confusing all objectification—be it in language or in aesthetic artifact—with alienation and reification.

Functioning for Schiller as a trope of natural order in which the rules of the dance correspond to the physical will of the dancers, by the end of the century dance articulates instead a recognition of the potentially totalitarian outcome of any facile conciliation of necessity and will. My original idea for this chapter was to trace Schiller’s ideal of English social dance through a tradition of what I call aesthetic socialism in Britain itself. Thus, beginning with Carlyle—Schiller’s great champion and translator in Britain—I had imagined tracing the figure of dance through the work of Ruskin and assessing its bifurcation in the work of Wilde and Morris, two figures deeply, though differently, influenced by Ruskinian thought.

I was immediately struck, however, by the almost complete absence of reflections on dance in the work of Morris. Where else were we likely to find happy, bucolic morris-dancing workers if not in Morris himself, who has so frequently been presented as an anachronistic, artisanal semi-rustic figure in the age of mass industrialization? This first setback frames the study here. What antipathy exists between handicraft and footwork? What is there in Morris’s commitment to the concrete aesthetic artifact that resists an aesthetic performance otherwise so apparently suited to his ideals of human joy in labor?

Certainly, one does find examples of utopian dance in the nineteenth-century aesthetic socialist tradition, most notably in the organization of social entertainment of the Owenite working communities.¹⁰ But in such instances, the socializing powers of dance derive, almost without exception, from its troping of labor. Looking forward to the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, I will argue that it is precisely this shift from the paradigm of play to the paradigm of work that made possible dance’s extraordinary aesthetic renaissance in the writings of Mallarmé and in the performances of the Ballets Russes. Dance challenged traditional notions of the work of art by failing to produce an enduring artifact. It also fed into a broader social concern with the social choreographing of time and space. As dance came to figure the idealized harmony of bodies at work, the world of Taylorite time and motion studies no longer seemed so remote from the aesthetic terminology of plastic and musical arts. Even as the ballet developed into the most prodigious and ostentatious form of aesthetic spectacle in the early part of the twentieth century, a Europe-wide anthropological discourse around dance and labor paradoxically linked the aesthetic and the social organizations of time and motion. 

Rudolf Laban's late writings on energy are, perhaps, the most notable hybrid production of these linked discourses of aesthetic and social rationalization. Social Choreography

Bearing in mind the congruence of the organizing principle of Féré's analysis with that passage from Ruskin's Praeterita, it is indeed remarkable to note how closely a set of aesthetic criteria derived from classical precedent and encoded in the traditional distinction between "musical" and "plastic" arts fit the new social and economic conditions of the nineteenth century. In a nutshell, a long-established tradition of aesthetic theory held that "plastic" arts were those that worked in space, whereas "musical" arts operated in the medium of time. Effectively, terminologies derived from the debate in aesthetics—and articulated around the scandalous form of dance—provide a framework for thinking about the development of labor and capitalism throughout the nineteenth and into the twentieth century: this is characteristic of aesthetic socialism.

On the few occasions where dance is addressed directly in this tradition of thought it figures either as a utopian model of social order and nonalienated production or as a troubling premonition of the shift from artisanal to "energetic" models of labor; in other words, as the manifestation of an abstract, alienating, yet anthropologically grounded Arbeitskraft. Because dance confounds most of these criteria—it is a "plastic" art that nevertheless works in and through time—it is hardly surprising that it allowed figures such as Ruskin, for whom social and aesthetic reflection are never far apart, to think through political questions in an aesthetic framework.

Dance, so clearly a challenge to the simple dichotomy of plastic and musical arts, lends itself to the synthetic study of "time and motion," and for this reason by the end of the nineteenth century it is encountered more frequently in discourses on work than in discourses on Schillerian play. The question, then, is whether dance is to be thought of as a liberation of productive forces from an investment in the products that stockpile and commodify labor power for purposes of exchange or as the perpetuum mobile regenerating productive forces. Is it alien to, or creative of, an ideal of labor? And need these two possibilities—the utopian and the technocratic, let us call them—necessarily exclude each other?

By the end of this chapter I will come to speak of questions of physiology, and I should preface my consideration now with some elaboration of what I take to be the materialism of my methodology. Clearly, to treat of questions of labor and capital through the prism of aesthetic production rather than analyzing aesthetic production itself merely as one subspecies of production would seem to run counter to a materialist analysis as we commonly understand it. My claim, however, is that it was precisely the nature of materiality that was being contested in the discourse traced here, and that simply to assume the primacy of "matter" to those discourses is to think materiality in an undialectical way. In brief, I will argue that the discursive formulation of materiality in the nineteenth century was heavily influenced by aesthetic terminologies inherited from the eighteenth century and that the aesthetic cannot, therefore, be thought of merely as a secondary discourse acting on or staging an already preestablished, preaesthetic materiality. More than this, I will argue that precisely those discourses which sought to abstract a concept of materiality from its specific aesthetic instantiations ultimately effected the most fundamental "aestheticization" of matter. Specifically, I am thinking of the discourses of vitalism—often identified in the twentieth century with Bergson, but developed as a scientific hypothesis throughout the nineteenth century—but also of the category of labor as it figures in certain strains of Marxist analysis. In his study "Man and Work: Literature and Culture in Industrial Society" David Meakin argues for two broad traditions of thought with regard to aesthetics and work: the artisanal/artificial and the playful/organic. In the twentieth century, Huizinga would recast the same dichotomy in terms of the plastic and musical arts, noting "the seeming absence of the play-quality in one [plastic] as compared with its pronounced presence in the other [musical]." I wish to argue, however, that the privileging of "work" by the first tradition clearly does not necessarily privilege what Meakin calls an " 'artificial' world of things." On the contrary, it seeks to legitimate this world of things on the basis of its origination in a "natural" human propensity—a natural rhythm.

Within the tradition of what I loosely term aesthetic socialism, an interest in the varying definitional possibilities surrounding the apparently simple notion of work led to fundamental schisms. What does it mean for Havelock Ellis—a habitué, in other words, of "aestheticist" as well as "socialist" circles—to write a late work titled "The Dance of Life," in which he asks himself "whether . . . a completed art ceases to be art" (65)? What antipathy exists between the idea of aesthetic completion and artistic value? How are we to interpret this displacement of the object of aesthetic production? Does it derive from a purely aesthetic tradition—a radicalization of Kantian "disinterest" to the point where the aesthetic pleasure no longer places any value on the actual existence of the object from which it putatively derives pleasure? Or does it reflect, instead, a broader social concern with the phenomenon of labor in general?

We need to ask ourselves, also, what it means for Morris—usually so indifferent to the musical in his overwhelming preference for the plastic arts—to be writing work chants. How does his model of nonalienated labor relate to the self-objectification and distancing involved in any artisanal act of making or poesis? In this respect, his work is pivotal historically as well as to my argument here in this chapter. It is poised between a critique of alienation at one stage of capitalism and a recognition of the even greater dangers presented by the dwindling possibilities for (alienating) self-objectification (and, therefore, consciousness) once individual work has been reduced to abstract labor power.

Building on an analysis of the writings of John Ruskin now, I shall begin to trace the development of a discourse on popular culture and social choreography. My approach to the question of popular culture—and dance's fall from aesthetic favor in the nineteenth century, its descent into the realm of the music hall—is necessarily philosophical rather than historical in the strictest sense. For popular culture posed to critics such as Ruskin not simply a social and moral challenge but also an aesthetic and philosophical one. In contrast to the cohering cultural value of edifying works of high art, the realm of popular culture is an attempt to think about the opposite of the aesthetic work of the Muses: an acritical nonreflective amusia. Amusement, in Ruskin, stands for the loss of critical potential in art. Rather than thinking of amusement as the domain of an aesthetic experience that exists parallel to but beneath the domain of high culture, we need to think of it as a cultural condition in its own right, as the name for a certain cultural experience. Culture and amusement are, for Ruskin, parallel cultural epistemologies rather than terms to be defined hierarchically in relation to each other.

Thus, rather than bemoaning the decline of dance in the nineteenth century, we need to ask ourselves what possibilities of social choreography were being explored in this netherworld of nonreflective “amusement,” as Ruskin frames it. Ruskin himself vehemently opposed the depredations of this new mass culture, but he recognized clearly the contours of its value system. The trivialization and vulgarization of dance in the nineteenth century should be observed not simply from an evaluative point of view as a decline in standards but rather modally as a shift in function.

In this way, the state of amusement—amusia, the loss of a critical space of leisurely reflection—is not countered by the rediscovery of dance by “serious” artists in the late nineteenth century but rather pursued by those same writers. When considering Mallarmé’s famous celebration of the innovative modern dance of the American Loie Fuller—where he takes her complete disappearance into the lights and veils that characterized her dance as a model for his own aesthetic—we need to recall that she was, after all, a music hall turn.

We need to think about the relationship of these two senses of “amusement” —as both a postcritical cultural condition (either feared or celebrated) and as a specific emerging field of cultural practice. By looking at cultural writings that seemed to have already located a place for “amusement” within a fully articulated aesthetic, I wish to show how new forms of popular culture did not emerge entirely independent of prevailing high cultural paradigms.

The need to confront the aesthetic realities of a new culture of “amusement” scrambled the traditional binary of “musical” and “plastic” arts derived from eighteenth-century aesthetic theory and from classical precedent. With the appearance of mass cultural phenomena on the horizon of the high cultural critics, the “musical” now posited its own negation from within itself rather than simply opposing itself to an already existing, external negation (“the plastic”). Suddenly, the simple opposition of terms—“musical” and “plastic” —is semiotically complicated by the inclusion of a new negative term: that is, “amusement” as the internal rather than external negation of the musical.

We read in letter 83 of Ruskin's Fors Clavigera, for example, that “the modern ‘amusement’ has practically established itself as equivalent to the Greek (29: 262). In making this claim, Ruskin refers to the necessity of distinguishing between two forms of negation: x to the power of ° and x to the power of ~. Negation can be thought of either as the absence of the positive terms or as the positive rejection of that term; as the absence of culture, to take our present example, or as the presence of the anticultural. Ruskin’s distinction allows us to reformulate the simple binary of the “musical” and “plastic” arts semiotically in an exemplary Greimasian manner.'* By chiasmatically mapping the two opposing terms of traditional aesthetic theory—“musical” and “plastic” arts— and their respective internal negations, we arrive at the following ‘amusia formulation:

These four logical positions allow us to begin mapping various responses to dance as a cultural form in nineteenth-century aesthetic socialist thought. I propose that we use this frame as a way, now, of thinking about the cultural scene in the nineteenth century with respect to social choreography as it rehearsed the problem of the social energumen. What we need to find are the terms that reconcile the oppositions at each side of the semiotic rec- tangle. As we turn now to Ruskin, we shall see how an emerging social choreography becomes a crucial component to any such conceptual reconciliation.

“There being scarcely a word in Greek social philosophy which has not reference to musical law; and scarcely a word in Greek musical science which has not understood reference to social law,” (29: 261) Ruskin’s pronouncements on music, rhythm, and dance need not be read metaphorically in order to extract their social and political import. It is interesting to note that except for the early “Essay on Painting and Music” of 1838, Ruskin’s critical interest in music dates from around 1860—that is, from the period of the completion of the Modern Painters project—which is also the period of his turn away from aesthetic concerns in the limited sense toward a consideration of broader social questions.

From the perspective of music criticism, one would be tempted to concur with the author of the essay “John Ruskin and Music,” who argues that “Ruskin remained essentially deaf to the vitality of purely musical expression, unwilling to admit any independent significance of musical form, and insistent that there is no intellectual content whatsoever in music apart from its association with verbal text.” I wish to argue, however, that the simultaneous development of a critical interest in music and in social issues permits us to read Ruskin’s amateurish musicology as directly sociological critique.

Ruskin’s reassessment of aesthetic forms is based not on the respective relations to time and space that underpinned the traditional division of musical and plastic arts; instead, Ruskin distinguishes between the arts in terms of their respective cognitive functions. What we need to ask is whether the scandal of dance within the traditional configuration—as an art form that is both plastic and musical—is replicated in this new cognitive structure. Does dance present any sort of epistemological scandal in Ruskin’s new system? It is in attempting to answer this question that we happen on Ruskin’s “Greimasian” distinctions.

Building on this distinction, Ruskin will argue that science deals with knowledge(s), corresponding to the Greek pursuit of episteme. To this extent it is contemplative and indifferent to the nature of its object (ideal or substantial): it dispels the condition of agnoia. Art, meanwhile, busies itself with techne: that is, it is a technical study aimed at dispelling the condition of artless atechnia. Literature, in turn, is concerned with nous—with the development of wit. Ruskin differentiates from within the category of cultural “work” according to the nature of the worked material (art is substantial, literature insubstantial), and while he insists that his own expertise lies in the realm of art, his insistence that “the object of University teaching is to form your conceptions;—not to acquaint you with arts, nor sciences” (22: 135) means that his vision of the university's mandate is, in his own terms, “literary.”¹⁰ His approach is Platonic insofar as it retains a notion of poesis and artifice, but now the self-subsistent alterity of the object as artifact has been abandoned. The “product” of education is a form rather than a thing. In shaping conceptions, the university serves to form the ability to form: it produces subjects not objects; it creates, in Ruskin’s all-too-easily trivialized terms, “a gentleman and a scholar” (20:18). Techne, nous, and episteme can be used wisely or foolishly, Ruskin argues, producing what he acknowledges to be the apparently paradoxical possibility of a “foolish wisdom”: “Logie, (wisdom) I say, is the virtue, opto. (folly) is the vice of all the three faculties of art, science, and literature. There is for each of them a negative and a positive side, as well as a zero” (22:130).

It is at this point in the lecture that the example of dance serves to illustrate Ruskin’s point in a highly suggestive manner. Elaborating on his distinction between two forms of negation in each of the faculties—the mere absence (or zero power) of Logie, on the one hand, and the positive presence of opto on the other—Ruskin offers examples from two different fields: dance and sport. The difference of the two examples is telling and, though anecdotal, goes some way to explaining the devaluing of dance in the Victorian writers whom I treat here. Both examples are, strictly speaking, “technical” insofar as they pertain to higher or lower art forms. Furthermore, if we recall that Carlyle’s translation customarily rendered Schiller’s Spiel (“play”) as “sport,” the relevance of Ruskin’s intervention to the questions being considered here should be immediately apparent.

An example of sporting Logi would be the cooperation of a rowing crew, Ruskin argues. The social importance of such technical “wisdom” is clear from his description of proficient rowing, which consists not only in the physical capacity for an action but also “implies the practice of those actions under a resolved discipline of the body, involving regulation of the passions. It signifies submission to authority, and amicable concurrence with the humours, of other persons”; this is its “moral rightness” (22:132). The rhythm of the rowing eight (and this concept of rhythm will be the conduit whereby dance enters discussions of poetics and poesis in the broader sense for the aesthetic socialist tradition) suggests an immanent bodily social order that bypasses the mediations of language. My body flows naturally according to its own impulses and flows in harmony with others—in harmony, that is, with something greater that flows through all of us. It is, in essence, a replaying of the Schillerian trope. What is more interesting, however, is Ruskin’s inability to imagine the negation of this technical sophia: a lack of sophia in rowing is figured merely as incompetence, as atechnia. The folly of rowing, Ruskin writes, moving on to consider his example in its negative terms, "consisted mainly in not being able to row" (20: 133). Considered as techne, the negation of cooperative rowing would be an inability to row, a lack of technique or atechnia. In the consideration of rowing, rowing® and rowing" are effectively conflated: the negation of rowing and the technical inability to row are one and the same. In this example, folly and immorality are merely the correlates of inability and ineptitude. This is not true of the example drawn from dance, however. Here, on the contrary, the "zero" [dancing®] is collapsed into the negativity [dancing-]. Dance, for Ruskin, will serve to figure the troubling pos- sibility of a proficiency in evil, a prodigious folly, a foolish wisdom. He wastes little time on the sophia of dance, and moves on to describe an evening at the "Gaiety Theatre" in which "the supposed scene of the dance was Hell . . . and its performance consisted in the expression of every kind of evil passion, in frantic excess" (22: 133). This performance, far from being an example of atechnia, forces Ruskin to concede that "the skill they possessed could not have been acquired but by great patience and resolute self-denial" (22: 134). Whereas he conceives of the moria of rowing only as a zero or absence of skill, he conceives of the zero of dance only as a moria: "this folly of dancing does not consist in not being able to dance, but in dancing well with evil purpose; and the better the dancing, the worse the result" (22: 133). Dance, it would seem—and this point needs to be stressed—marks the possibility of a proficiency in evil, the point at which the zero becomes the negation of sophia. Dance unleashes the negative potential of a certain "technol- ogy" in Ruskin's writing. In the dance of the music hall, Ruskin imag- ines the dangerous collaboration of aesthetic competence and moral depravity. It is well known that Ruskin was, in fact, a lover of dance, and by no means are all of his pronouncements on dance so negative. However, this positive negativity, this fear of a proficiency in evil, always lurks below the surface. The merely technical distinction of "musical" and "plastic" arts is generally displaced in his writing by a cultural dis- 56 Social Choreography tinction between "musical" arts and the degraded condition of "a- musement." While dance is by no means ontologically compromised, it is nevertheless in the realm of dance and music that Ruskin most fre- quently offers a historical analysis of the conditions of (im)possibility of an authentic culture under high capitalism. At several points in his work Ruskin conceives of evil dancers of great technique—as, for ex- ample, in letter 9 of Time and Tide where he cites the example of the can-can: It is many years since I have seen such perfect dancing, as far as finish and accuracy of art and fullness of animal power and fire are concerned. Nothing could be better done, in its own evil way; the object of the dance throughout being to express, in every gesture, the wildest fury of insolence and vicious passions possible to human creatures. So that you see, though, for the present, we find ourselves utterly incapable of a rapture of gladness or thanksgiving, the dance which is presented as characteristic of modern civilization is still rapturous enough—but it is with rapture of blasphemy. (17: 358) In the letter of Time and Tide that follows letter 9, Ruskin will compare this "Chain of the Devil, and CanCan of Hell" with "the expression of true and holy gladness [that] was in old time statedly offered up by men for a part of worship to God their Father" (17: 359). 

Absurd though the leap may seem, Ruskin moves from the consideration of the can-can in letter 9 to a consideration in letter 10 of “The Meaning, and Actual Operation of Satanic or Demoniacal influence.” In other words, the reflections on the techniques of evil, exemplified by dancing, feed directly into a consideration of a radical or positive evil; an evil, that is, that does not consist merely in a “zero,” an inability to row, but in a moria or folly that manifests itself as competence. If we are surprised by Ruskin’s vehemence, he assures us: “Do not think I am speaking metaphorically or rhetorically, or with any other than literal and earnest meaning of words” (17: 362). It is as if the attack on the false competence of dance needed to be underpinned by an implicit attack on the operation of metaphor and a strategic entrenchment in the “literal and earnest meaning of words.” Ruskin’s two examples—the rowing crew and the can-can—obviously raise questions of the gendering of his cultural critique. Whereas masculinity occupies the “axis of incompetence,” so to speak (the rowers do not row perniciously but rather merely fail to row effectively), femininity is aligned with the “axis of immorality”—that is, symmetrically opposed to their male rowing counterparts, they dance proficiently even when they dance with evil intent. It is the exactitude of the frenzy of the can-can that so horrifies Ruskin—not a simple reversion to savage, untrammeled passions, but the harnessing of those passions to a new principle of order. In short, he sees in the French dancers—and the national codings of his examples are always as interesting as the question of gender—the first chorus line. Striking in Ruskin’s presentation of the can-can of hell is the explicit way in which it references the emergence of a culture of mass reproduction. To this extent it is a direct precursor of debates in Weimar Germany (to be treated in the final chapter) regarding the Tiller Girls as definitive cultural icons of modernity. The linkage of the can-can to the emerging culture of mass reproduction at the time becomes clear in another of Ruskin’s tirades. While the greatest works of Tintoretto, he writes, “hang in moist rags from the roof they had adorned, the shops of the Rue Rivoli at Paris were, in obedience to a steadily-increasing public Demand, beginning to show a steadily-increasing Supply of elaborately finished and coloured lithographs, representing the modern dances of delight, among which the cancan has since taken a distinguished place” (17: 133). Clearly, then, Ruskin critiques the can-can not as the eruption of some precivilized, anarchic force but as the harnessing of such forces to the most modern modes of (re)production. The problem is not the irrational or immoral per se but rather its industrialization, as exemplified by the saucy French lithographs of the Rue Rivoli. Ruskin goes on—in a mode one might call ironic, if it were not Ruskin—to argue that because “the labour employed on the stone of one of these lithographs is very much more than Tintoret was in the habit of giving to a picture of average size,” the labor theory of value fully validates a preference for dirty lithographs over Tintoretto. In letter 9 of Time and Tide, which explicitly contrasts “The Use of Music and Dancing under the Jewish Theocracy, compared with their Use by the Modern French” (again, not so subtly locating the evil of mass reproduction on the continent), Ruskin is clearly suggesting that mass consumption has now taken on the mantle of a modern religion. The dancing girls are not anomalous, but entirely in sync with new mass cultural formations. The mass commodification represented by the Parisian lithographs should not be thought of simply in terms of Ruskin’s preference of high over low or auratic over popular art forms. The question is, instead, one of the status of the artifact as a repository of labor, as a moment of rest in which productive energies have been gathered. By reducing the object to a commodity—and here Ruskin presages Morris in a rather more sophisticated manner—mass reproduction resubjects a moment of rest (the object as the static reification of energy) to the iron laws of economic motion.

To take a simple example, we can cite Ruskin's use of dance as a means to distinguish between "wages" in the economic and aesthetic realms. In letter 9 of Time and Tide, he draws a fundamental distinction between biblical dance as the dance of thanksgiving and the degenerate status of dance under the conditions of wage labor and the culture industry. Taking Miriam's dance of thanksgiving on the Israelites' deliverance from Egypt as a holy and legitimate "expression of passionate triumph and thankfulness" (17: 352), Ruskin links it to "the rejoicing in the repentance from, and remission of, sins, expressed by means of music and dancing, namely, in the rapturous dancing of David before the returning ark" (17: 354). He then contrasts this—along with other biblical examples of thanksgiving and praise—to the drunken harvest festival of contemporary Swiss peasants in order to note how "your modern religion . . . has reduced the song and dance of ancient virginal thanksgiving to the howlings and staggerings of men betraying, in intoxication, a nature sunk more than half-way towards the beasts" (17: 357).

In trying to extract some measure of good from the drunken objects of his scorn, however, Ruskin observes of the drunken dances of working people that even here we ought to be "thankful that some remnant of delight is still taken in dance-music. It is the last protest of the human spirit, in the poor fallen creatures, against the reign of the absolute Devil, Pandaemonium with Mammon on the throne instead of Lucifer" (28: 404). Theatrical dance, in the form of the can-can, marks the commercialization of Dionysian protest. Intoxication is no longer the "wages" of labor but the very labor in which the emerging culture industry must engage. Ruskin's religious terminology simply replaces Lucifer with Mammon.

Thus far, Ruskin may seem to be offering a simple critique of cultural decay, but in fact, he will argue "we are not, throughout Europe, wholly thus. There are such things, yet, as rapturous song and dance among us" (17: 357). But where is such rapturous dance to be found? It is "not indicative, by any means, of joy over repentant sinners" (17: 357); indeed, like the festivities in Switzerland, it marks an "utter failure of joy; the paralysis and helplessness of a vice in which there is neither pleasure nor art" (17: 357)—the can-can. Paradoxically, Ruskin sees in the worst debasement of joy, in the can-can, a modern analogy for biblical thanksgiving. This paradoxical and disturbing configuration disrupts Ruskin's ethical and aesthetic categories; for the fundamental distinction of religious thanksgiving and joyless profit is from the very outset compromised. Although Ruskin cannot admit it, under the conditions of the culture industry, dance is revealed for the economic exchange it was even in its biblical form of thanksgiving. In a perverse sense—one produced only by reading Ruskin against the grain—the can-can reveals a fundamental truth about Miriam. In effect, aesthetic socialist critiques of capitalism cannot dissociate themselves from notions of profit and production: aesthetic pleasure will itself be figured as an alternative to, but structurally modeled on, profit. As Ruskin observes in letter 5 of Time and Tide, “ ‘wages’ in the full sense don’t mean ‘pay’ merely, but the reward, whatever it may be, of pleasure as well as profit” (17: 334). The spontaneous “joy” of a Schillerian dance was always already a payoff, and with the emergence of anthropological studies of dance at the end of the century precisely this nexus of exchange would be examined. In the cultural realm, moreover, we will encounter by the end of the century a figure of biblical dance whose very different “expression of passionate triumph and thankfulness” brings together the very possibilities of dance that Ruskin wants to separate: Salome. Even as it locates the conditions for the degeneration of dance historically, Ruskin’s writing seems to operate under the fear that dance might, in fact, body forth the possibility of an ontological or radical evil.

Beginning to fill in the gaps of our Greimasian schema, we might posit the following possibilities for supplying the complex term (which mediates the “musical” and the “plastic”) and the neutral term (which mediates formlessness and amusement):

Social Choreography

Clearly, if musing about the Muses in the nineteenth century challenges traditional conceptions of what “work” is, it provides no less of a challenge to the concept of leisure. For some, in the nineteenth century, the vitality and movement of dance hold out the teleological promise of a historical and social “beyond,” while the utopian moment itself is to be thought of as a coming to rest, an end of history. For others, meanwhile, the utopian is the movement itself, the irrepressible human spirit or transcendental vital and historical force that must sweep away all that stands still. This crucial distinction is replicated in a parallel distinction between those for whom the static, objective quality of the aesthetic artifact represents the moment of rest (the moment in which I confront and contemplate my own subjective activity in an object at rest) and those for whom the existence of an object as the product of labor is extraneous to the joy of the activity of labor itself. Accordingly, “rest” can be thought of either as a utopian condition or as a failure of the historical energumen, as a condition of mere idleness. Judgments of dance will be indicative of social and political positions on questions of labor and “idleness” (or—as it will be reformulated only toward the end of the nineteenth century—unemployment). Questions of play inherited from Schiller—and via Schiller from the aesthetic debates of the eighteenth century—were given a specifically social slant in this British debate and linked to social issues of labor, employment, unemployment, and wages. The aesthetic socialists essentially derived from traditional philosophical and aesthetic notions of “idleness” an imperfect taxonomy for understanding the functioning of high capitalism in an age of overproduction. In a period of industrial competition and growth, the classical Greek ideal of shkole, or leisure, as the condition of the “gentleman and scholar” coexisted precariously with a more Latinate (degenerate) concept of otium, or idleness and unemployment. To speak more clearly, the man of leisure coexists with the unemployed and the concept of what we might call “in action” becomes highly problematic. In an age in which otium, or idleness, becomes not only the privilege of aristocratic freedom but also the curse of the lumpenproletariat, the classical privilege accorded the term certainly cannot go unchallenged. Reframing the problem in terms of stasis and motion, however—that is, in aesthetic terms—allows the nineteenth-century cultural critic an antidote to empirical fears of social and cultural malaise. In this context Ruskin’s translation of the opposing terms techne and atechnia by the Latin terms ars and inertia is particularly important. Motion, in Ruskin’s translation, is crucial to his conception of art, if not literature. Ruskin’s is not, ultimately, a cultural ideal of rest and repose; the task of art (as it comes to the help of literature) is to set bodies in motion. The function of ars is to counter the historical and physiological condition of inertia. The flexibility of the body and the movement of history are linked through Ruskin’s concept of art. Nevertheless, due to the conflation of ars and techne in Ruskin’s work, his aesthetic offers little resistance to merely “technological” or “technocratic” conceptions of social order. For this reason, at crucial points atechnia—that is, inertia—can acquire a value of resistance to technocratic order. The ambiguity of dance—an art form one might otherwise have thought of as entirely commensurate with Ruskin's "dynamic" conception of ars—is that it lays bare the disturbingly technological possibilities inherent in any such conception. Ruskin's insistence on the opposition of ars and inertia was not, indeed, something that would be passed on without question to the aesthetic socialist tradition. As one critic notes, for example, "Morris was opposed to the 'hurried and anxious' pleasures which seemed to be a side-product of the degradation of work in his own society. Hence his call for 'an epoch of rest,' to borrow from the subtitle of his novel."™ For Morris, it is the condition of hurried consumption that is to be avoided, and his privileging of the category of "rest" has repercussions for his concept of social order. Moreover, the privileging of rest derives from—or, perhaps, explains—the importance he places on work. In reconstructing an aesthetic socialist tradition, the key distinction to bear in mind is between the joy taken in labor—a moralizing position taken by Carlyle, Schiller's great champion in Britain—and the joy taken in the object of labor—as exemplified by Morris's artisanal ideals. This distinction goes to the very heart of the opposition between labor and work.

Without rehearsing in full the terms of Hannah Arendt's study The Human Condition on the basis of the fundamental categories of "work," "labor," and "activity," some schematic elaboration of the work-labor distinction might be helpful before moving on to Morris. Stated crudely, for Arendt "labor is the activity which corresponds to the biological The Body of Marsyas 63 process of the human body, whose spontaneous growth, metabolism, and eventual decay are bound to the vital necessities produced and fed into the life process by labor. The human condition of labor is life itself."** In other words, although labor seems to represent man's submission to the necessity of toil, it also expresses and articulates biological human needs. Labor does not produce an excess: it consumes as it produces and is, to this extent, "energistic." It is its own natural economy. Furthermore, labor lacks that minimum of self-alienation necessary to ground consciousness in the instrumental awareness of a distinction of subject and object.** Because labor produces no object, it does not allow for the subject's confrontation with, and reflection on, his own activity in objective form. It is not yet objectified, as work will be: it produces no object in which man might confront his activity in an external form that would allow him to consciously posit himself as a subject. Labor is "unalienated" because the performance of labor does not yet demand a self-conscious human subject: but, by the same token, it is animalistic because the absence of an object denies man the possibility of becoming a subject in contradistinction to that object. To this extent, it effectively falls below the threshold of consciousness in a cycle of mere energy. Because the subject is not split it is not yet truly a subject, in labor, for it cannot know itself beyond its physical needs.

In "work," the objectifying split—or "alienation" in the technical rather than political or economic sense—of the subject comes about. I can now know myself and my actions through the objects I produce—that is, through objects "alien" to me yet nevertheless embodying my labor. Arendt polemically resists the degradation of the notion of work, in which the existence of the artifact grounds a system of values and posits man in a material world, to a notion of labor, in which value is of the nature of an energy and the alienating/objectifying moment of consciousness embodied by the object has been removed. Such a degra- dation, she argues, paves the way for an essentially atavistic and value- less Lebensphilosophie in which a “glorification of the sheer dynamism of the life process excluded that minimum of initiative present in those activities which, like laboring and begetting, are urged upon man by necessity” (117). Arendt clearly outlines the importance of “the work of our hands, as distinguished from the labor of our bodies—homo faber who makes and literally ‘works upon’ as distinguished from the animal laborans which 64 Social Choreography labors and ‘mixes with’... ” (136). The instrumentality of manufacture retains the subject-object relation in a way that a physical activity that “mixes with” would not. As Arendt puts it, “the ideals of homo faber, the fabricator of the world, which are permanence, stability, and durability, have been sacrificed to abundance, the ideal of the animal laborans . . . and we have changed work into laboring” (126).

What I would suggest with respect to dance is that while, as play, it figures as an alternative to the ideology of work, in terms of the dyad of work and labor it constantly threatens a return to the condition of undifferentiated and nondifferentiating labor. Holding up dance as an unalienated playful alternative to the object-oriented, fetishistic activity of alienated “work” under capitalism risks celebrating instead a biologized notion of activity, “labor,” that is even more uncritically subjugated to the dictates of capitalism. By putting the entire body in motion, dance figures a movement beyond the manufactural and opens up the possibility of a totalizing—if not, indeed, totalitarian—model of social order.

Whereas manufacture relies on the hand—the literal organ of any act of (self-)positing—the dance serves merely to put the body in motion, allowing for no necessary objective break from which a consciousness of worldly subjectivity could emerge. (This, indeed, has been the reason for its celebration in the writings of the symbolists and aestheticists, whose work sought to overcome the alienated conditions of capitalist production.)

What dance as aesthetic form, and as object of aesthetic reflection, unmasks is the seamless labor of bodily integration that will be necessary if the liberal vision of Schiller is to be realized. While the project of social choreography I outline here sought to intimate the possibility of a utopian move beyond alienated work, it in fact fell below the threshold of objectification necessary to ground a social praxis. Dance, thus, potentially figures a condition of capitalist totalitarianism: Ruskin’s critique of “amusement” is, in this sense, uncannily prescient of a condition perhaps best analyzed in the twentieth century in Horkheimer and Adorno’s Dialectic of Enlightenment.

In the 1884 essay “Art and Labour,” Morris defines his terms in a way that helps us understand the omission of music and dance from his particular brand of aesthetic socialism. Labor he defines as “the labour that produces things, the labour of the classes called the working classes . . . of the marker of things.” For Morris, labor is inextricably linked to the “making of things” and to self-objectification in those things (i.e., in Arendt’s terms it is work). His insistence on work in Arendt’s sense (as “manufacture” invested in objects) opposes the vitalism of an increasingly hegemonic concept of labor thought of as abstract potentiality (or Arbeitskraft). Work is important because it includes the possibility of contemplation and rest. Morris's concept of work is Aristotelian, finding its origin and telos in rest. Morris defines art as "beauty produced by the labor of man, both mental and bodily, the expression of the interest man takes in the life of man upon the earth with all its surroundings, in other words, the human pleasure of life" (94). While he refers to "labor without which art could not exist" (95), it is clear that Morris's ideal of art also approximates Arendt's category of "action" as an agonistic process. Beauty is found in both the product of labor and the activity of labor itself, but it is only the existence of the object that allows for a retroactive enjoyment of the labor that went into its production.

Morris persistently stresses work over labor, and while his polemic seems to depend on a utopian conception of the possibilities of non-alienated labor (a form of Hegelian Marxism, we may say, in retrospect), this conception is always oriented toward the production of the object. For all the stress laid on unalienated labor, Morris is, ultimately, more interested in the modes of social exchange made possible through the medium of the object.

This would naturally imply the relegation of music and dance to the secondary position of arts that produce no object and therefore ground no objective social order. The uselessness that might make them attractive to other strains of aestheticism implacably opposed to utilitarianism and commodification renders them uninteresting to Morris's paradoxically utilitarian aesthetic. His insistence, in the essay "The Lesser Arts," that "nothing can be a work of art which is not useful; that is to say, which does not minister to the body when well under command of the mind, or which does not amuse, soothe, or elevate the mind in a healthy state" (34), makes it clear that for Morris the determining distinction is between use and exchange, and that for all his opposition to utilitarian mass production, the category of "use" grounds his aesthetic.

Whereas a straightforward critique of the culture industry might identify "plastic amusement" with the production of culture commodities, Morris bravely seeks to insert an alternative term into that strategic position. Uncoupling amusement from lack of reflection, Morris acknowledges its importance (and the importance of the amusical) in a way that Ruskin—invested in a notion of art that by its very definition depends on movement to counter inertia—could not. Rest, for Morris, consists not of a possible critical reflection but of a form of enjoyment that cannot be reduced to consumption—an enjoyment in which the object perdures and is not used up. There is something of a quandary here: on the one hand, Morris wishes to stress the object rather than the process of production, but he does not wish to take the process of production wholly out of the realm of the aesthetic. “That thing which I understand by real art,” he writes elsewhere, “is the expression by man of his pleasure in labour.” The pleasure in labor is intrinsic to the aesthetic value of the object produced. Labor is, then, “expressive” and as such a concern of any aesthetic socialism, but Morris’s logic is tortuous and retroactive; “I do not believe,” he writes of the worker, “he can be happy in his labour without expressing that happiness” (530). This is the sense in which pleasure is retroconstructed. The work is the expression of a joy that does not precede it. The product is not simply a product of joy: it retroactively produces (through expression) the joy that produced it. The existence of the joy is secondary to its expression (“I do not believe he can be happy in his labour without expressing that happiness”). The work (of art) creates the thing—happiness—that it expresses. The representation creates its own object, so that the expression of joy is displaced by the joy of expression.

The logic of catachresis that I examined in the introduction again pertains here—the rhetorical expression, in fact, creates its own object. This structuring logic of what Morris will term “hope” in work is not, ultimately, that of futurity but of anteriority; it is the hope of a nostalgic contemplation. Pleasure is a retroconstruction. The object that will subsequently legitimate an individual’s work by allowing for his contemplation of that work in objective (indeed, alien) form, figures during the process of work as “hope.” In “Useful Work versus Useless Toil” Morris defines his concept of hope as follows: “It is threefold, I think—hope of rest, hope of product, hope of pleasure in the work itself; and hope of these also in some abundance and of good quality; rest enough and good enough to be worth having; product worth having by one who is neither a fool nor an ascetic; pleasure enough for all of us to be conscious of it while we are at work; not a mere habit, the loss of which we shall feel as a fidgety man feels the loss of the string he fidgets with” (176).

Paradoxically, the ideal of the subject actualizing itself in work can be located only in two moments: in the “hope” that in fact ruptures the very concept of the “actual” in labor by introducing a temporal futurity; and in the object that must by definition confront the worker in its alterity. The working subject will experience itself only through hope or through the object—that is, through the moments that sunder its self-enclosed subjectivity by subjecting it to either a spatial or a temporal logic of deferral. At the same time as Morris posits the possibility of nonalienated labor he seems to fear its implications, its potential surrender of the critical moment that Ruskin saw as essential to the subject. Morris’s “hope of rest” might be said to derive directly from the classical tradition where the moment of rest is fundamental to the function of music as an accompaniment to the leisure, or shkole, of the gentleman. In the aesthetic socialist tradition, the generic aesthetic questions of space and time and their deployment in various forms of art are projected outside the limits of the work of art itself to form the basis of a reflection on hope and enthusiasm as affective modes that question the work of art’s separation from social and historical efficacy. This “ethical turn” in aesthetic socialism is not simply an attempt to insert works of art into preestablished moral norms but rather an attempt to derive those norms from the very terminology of the aesthetic itself. Thus, for instance, the temporality that informs the “musical” arts is rethought in terms of a relation to historicity—utopian “hope”— rather than as a structure cut off from history.

With specific regard to the questions of work and leisure treated here, we can also note how Ruskin builds on Greek precedent to consider how music not only practices and induces leisure, but can also have its “enthusiastic” modes." Aristotle, for example, writes of "the power which the songs of Olympus exercise: for beyond question they inspire enthusiasm, and enthusiasm is an emotion of the character of the soul." This "enthusiasm" is important, for it is anticipatory in a way that music, by Aristotle's definition, should not normally be. Unlike Morris's hope—which, as "hope of rest" is, finally, grounded in atemporal repose—enthusiasm potentially scrambles the temporal flow, introducing a form of syncopation into the performance of our daily tasks.

In Aristotle's model, the privileging of rest derives from the fact that it "gives pleasure and happiness and enjoyment of life, which are experienced, not by the busy men, but by those who have leisure. For he who is occupied has in view some end which he has not attained" (1338). What Aristotle does here with the category of "enthusiasm" is to introduce a double temporal scheme, to posit a split and deferral at the very heart of the musical. The logic seemingly replicates that which we have just encountered in Morris: the untrammeled subject will be posited either as the state to which "hope" or "enthusiasm" aspires; or, retroactively, as the putative subject of the pleasure that labor, or music, inspired. The teleological moment of repose, however, is missing—this is an anticipation that has no particular object. Enthusiasm denotes both an irrational exuberance and an orientation toward some imagined—sublime—goal rather than toward some given material and historical end.

The philosophical question of "enthusiasm" as a mode of cognition is related, I would suggest, to the question of the sublime. The Body of Marsyas 69 Enthusiasm is a feeling that cannot express itself, or as Lyotard will write in his consideration of Kant: "Enthusiasm is a modality of the feeling of the sublime. The imagination tries to supply a direct, sensible presentation for an idea of reason. . . It does not succeed and it thereby feels its impotence, but at the same time it discovers its destination, which is to bring itself into harmony with the Ideas of reason through an appropriate presentation. The result of this obstructed relation is that instead of experiencing a feeling for the object, we experience, on the occasion of that object, a feeling 'for the Idea of humanity in our subject' . . . The sublime is best determined by the indeterminate, by the Formlosigkeit."' Ruskin's awareness of an inability of expression posits, in Lyotard's terms, the possibility of "an appropriate presentation. "If enthusiasm is a 'mode of feeling,' I wish to argue that the aesthetic socialists I treat here work on the body as a medium of feeling and use it as a figure for what Lyotard characterizes as historically unrepresentable. The question then will be: How is the sublime both experienced and figured as 'enthusiasm'? What physical sensation does it produce as the frisson of history that vibrates through bodies?

Ruskin is quite explicitly suspicious of 'enthusiastic' modes of music, which he links with lawlessness, liberality, and licentiousness; as, for example, in the following passage from Fors Clavigera on the pedagogical value of music: 'Make them [music and dancing] licentious; let Mr John Stuart Mill have the dis-ordering of them, so that 'no one shall be guided, or governed, or directed in the way they should go'—and they sink to lower and lower depth—till the dance becomes Death's—and the music—a shriek of death by strychnine. But let Miriam and David, and the Virgins of Israel, have the ordering of them, and the music becomes at last the Eternal choir, and the Dance, the Karol-dance of Christmas evermore' (28: 405-6). Ruskin's imagery may be lurid, but the danger of liberal dissolution in such musical excitement could hardly be clearer.

Music is to follow the logical meter of language. In the very early 'Essay on the Relative Dignity of the Studies of Painting and Music and the Advantages to be Derived from Their Pursuit,' however, he does make an exception for military music, which 'excites the passions strongly, wonderfully' in order to 'produce a strong excitement and bracing up of the whole body' (1: 274). That the excitement produced by military music—its 'vibrations,' as Ruskin puts it—effects a 'bracing up of the whole body' suggests some anxiety about the limits and borders of a body that might require such a 'bracing.' In the case of this early essay, though, excitement creates the intensely physical effect of a defined and delimited—embodied—subject. It effects a 'bracing' rather than an irrational 'enthusiastic' dissolution.

What I want now to suggest is that both in the 'enthusiastic' musical modes and in the anthropological and sociological writings with which I opened this chapter, the possibility of a physiological sublime is being explored as a mode of self-perpetuating social choreography. This so- cial vision is linked to the rise of vitalistic Lebensphilosophie, whose forms it rehearses in the aesthetic realm. Although the sublime would normally be that which man imagines beyond specific historical em- bodiment, I am arguing that the body itself increasingly comes to figure that historically unfigurable possibility. By invoking a notion of 'the physiological sublime' I wish to suggest the removal of all limit and definition from the subject to the degree where man is subsumed not by his ideal humanity but by the vital, muscular energies and 'vibrations' that pass through him.

How is this possibility experienced and/or contained in the writers on music and dance examined heretofore? Notably, it is in the earliest writings that Ruskin retains his suscep- tibility to 'enthusiasm.' Notable also is the way that it is invoked only at the point he feels all utopian enthusiasm abandoning him—as, for example, in a letter of 1847 when he confesses that 'enthusiasm is, in me, fast passing away,' but nevertheless compares himself to those 'men who really have genuine feeling, but do not know how to express it, and, with regard to myself, I admit the charge of enthusiasm at once, but my intended position—I know not if tenable or not—is that there is a certain kind and degree of enthusiasm which alone is cognizant of all truth and which, though it may sometimes mistake its own creations for reality, yet will miss no reality, while the unenthusiastic regard actu- ally misses, and comes short of, the truth' (36: 80)."______ In this instance, Ruskin specifically refers to "the mode of sight of enthusiasm" (emphasis mine), but the citation from the essay on music from the same period suggests that the "excitement" that music can invoke partakes of a similar logic. Clearly, the question of enthusiasm and excitement is linked to a sublime inability to express that is nevertheless belied by a "genuine feeling." Rather than stressing the limits of discourse, Ruskin seems to use music to celebrate the physical sensation and presentiment of the sublime.

We need also to note a double temporal frame: for while enthusiasm anticipates, it seems to reveal its secret only in its passage, as it leaves the writer exhausted. Kant's similar insistence that the experience of the sublime is "a vibration" throws us back to Ruskin's "bracing" music. Whereas Lyotard insisted on the possibility of "an appropriate presentation" of historical possibility only as the virtual and deferred point of imagination's striving, the images of bracing up in Ruskin posit a "presentation"—an embodiment—of sublime enthusiasm in the here and now.

Indeed—and this is crucial to my argument in this book—Ruskin is concerned less with the presentation of an ideological sublime than with its experience, embodiment, and production. Ideology operates here as performative. The experience of the sublime that explodes the limits of the contingent historical subject, awakening in him a sense of his own humanity—an experience that supposedly beggars any figuration—is itself figured by Ruskin as the "bracing up" of a body. What is being posited in "enthusiastic music" is a specifically physiological experience of the sublime.

This is the possibility of a social and bodily energumen that is something we also encountered in the "energetics" of the late-nineteenth-century social theorists considered earlier. What remains for us now is to consider the aesthetic possibilities offered by such a mode of figuration and the ways in which it might round out our Greimasian presentation of the nineteenth-century cultural debate surrounding dance.

Let us begin by confronting the remaining lacuna in our Greimasian construction—the mediation of the musical and the formless. The musical enthusiasm seems of little use here because its effect is the production and binding of a body in the experience of a "bracing up." Nevertheless, it is my contention that in the work of Ruskin and on through Wilde we can trace a metaphorical resolution of this dichotomy of music and formlessness.

If, as we have seen, Ruskin's reflections on music—and, by extension, on dance—are to be understood in the context of the taxonomy of "musical" and "plastic" arts, we need also to note the operation of distinctions within his discussion of music. The most striking of these is a distinction figured through the mythical competition of Marsyas and Apollo, which is best glossed in the letter from a professional classicist Ruskin quotes in letter 83 of Fors Clavigera, where the opposition is defined as follows: "The competition was, then, in the first place, between the music of summer [i.e., Apollo] and the music of winter [i.e., Marsyas], and in the second place, between the music of animate nature and that of water and wind. This explanation would also apply to the competition of the Muses and the Sirens, since the latter represented the music of the seashore, while the Muses were associated with Apollo" (29: 271). Ruskin will reconfigure the opposition of Apollo and Marsyas as a historical development, but we should note the opposition of Apollo-nian "animate" music and the disembodied and ostensibly inhuman music of "water and wind" represented by Marsyas. Marsyas seems to figure the disembodiment of music, and his own fate—the flaying he undergoes at the hands of Apollo on losing the competition—would support such a reading. Just as Marsyas disembodies music as the effect of "water and wind" so too shall he be disembodied by flaying at the hand of Apollo.

Ruskin's gloss on this mythological figure translates it into a historical consideration of the three orders of the Deities of music throughout the ages of Man,—the Muses, Apollo, and Dionysus,—each with their definite adversaries. The Muses, whose office is the teaching of sacred pleasures to childhood, have for adversaries the Sirens, who teach sinful pleasure; Apollo, who teaches intellectual, or historic, therefore worded music, to men of middle age, has for adversary Marsyas, who teaches the wordless music of the reeds and rivers; and, finally, Dionysus, who teaches the cheerful music which is to be the wine of old age, has for adversary the commercial pirate, who would sell the god for gain, and drink no wine but gold. (29: 272).

Clearly, then, any blanket invocation of "the musical" as a simple term opposing the "plastic" arts risks simplifying Ruskin's conception of music, which is, in fact, developmental. That the Muses should be accorded an essentially pedagogical role in Ruskin's reconstruction of myth is altogether consonant with his pronouncements elsewhere. In his mythopoetic presentation, the Muses are opposed by the Sirens, Apollo by Marsyas, and Dionysus by commercial pirates, one set of The Body of Marsyas 73 opposing terms following the other in historical sequence. Presented in this way, the "positive" escalation from the Muses through Apollo to Dionysus, is paralleled by the negative escalation from the Sirens through Marsyas to the commercialism of a piratical "a-musement."¹⁰ Ruskin's negative assessment of the Sirens is explicable from the perspective of his high Victorian moralism (and the gendering of cultural decay is all too familiar from examples cited earlier in this chapter); the opposition to commercialism, meanwhile, is entirely consonant with his refusal of the bourgeoning culture industry.

Less obvious, however, is the negative value placed on Marsyas. Ruskin comments further on this in a passage from Queen of the Air: "Thenceforward all the limiting or restraining modes of music belong to the Muses; but the passionate music is wind music, as in the Doric flute. Then, when this inspired music becomes degraded in its passion, it sinks into the pipe of Pan and the double pipe of Marsyas, and is then rejected by Athena" (19: 342-43). Marsyas represents the degradation of inspiration: the music of the winds is the music of inspiration in literal and banalized form—a pennywhistle. Far from "bracing up," such enthusiastic modes oppose any "limiting or restraining." Disembodiment, rather than figuring transubstantiation and a spiritual movement beyond the constraints and contingency of the body, represents instead the absence of limit or restraint.

Ruskin goes on to explicate the contest of Apollo and Marsyas in the following, highly significant, terms: "Then, the strife of Apollo and Marsyas represents the enduring contest between music in which the words and thought lead, and the lyre measures or melodizes them, (which Pindar means when he calls his hymns 'kings over the lyre,') and music in which the words are lost and the wind impulse leads—generally, therefore, between intellectual, and brutal, or meaningless music." Therefore, when Apollo prevails, he flays Marsyas, taking the limit and external bond of his shapes from him, which is death, without touching the mere muscular strength; yet shameful and dreadful in dissolution. (19: 343) The distinction, then, is between language that produces its own music (Apollo) and music that produces its own language (Marsyas)—be- tween rhythm as by-product and rhythm as origin.*? Although consis- tently a champion of more natural aesthetic forms, Ruskin must clearly 74 Social Choreography be distanced, here, from any form of nascent vitalism that would take the rhythms of nature as the substratum for social and political disc- course—that is, for an ideologically “naturalized” social choreography. What I wish to stress here, however, is the nature and appropriate- ness of Apollo’s response to Marsyas’s hubris.*! Ruskin effectively sug- gests that Apollo’s punishment mimics and completes Marsyas’s own project of dissolution: Marsyas’s formless wind music does not respect the forms and limits of things, and as a consequence Apollo removes all form and definition from Marsyas himself by removing his skin. The membrane defining and delimiting Marsyas’s body is removed and as a result he becomes pure energy, at one with the world into which he sends his music. Embodiment, then, is crucial to Ruskin’s conception of music precisely insofar as it delimits and regulates the realm of music. Marsyas represents the possibility of an enthusiasm that is quite the contrary of “bracing.” I am suggesting, however, that the “bracing” vibrations of military music and the flaying of Marsyas are not, in fact, opposed; for what each does is figure the body purely as body rather than as the represen- tation of a subject. Marsyas would be a body without identity—a law- less, limitless body—and as such a figure for living death: a living corpse, in fact. Marsyas’s appeal to Apollo—“Quid me mihi detrahis?” (Why do you peel me from myself?)—figures a destruction through revelation: the embodied subject is himself subjected to the disem- bodying aesthetic he represents, subjected to the energies that flow through him and destroy him. Marsyas would not figure Ruskin’s phi- listine condition of inertia but, on the contrary, the energy of ars taken to its self-negating conclusion—life itself, the palpitating organs and straining sinews of the flayed Marsyas, laid bare. This is a death by “liberation,” the liberation of the body from its limiting skin, of the social subject from all constraint. As Ruskin writes in letter 57 of Fors Clavigera: “Liberty, whether in the body, soul, or political estate of men, is only another word for Death, and the final issue of Death, putrefac- tion: the body, spirit and political estate being alike healthy only by their bonds and laws” (28: 402). One might say that Marsyas represents what Ruskin would call “lib- eral” music, and that Apollo represents the illiberal. In this instance, however, we might need to distinguish between two competing images of (dis)embodiment. Whereas the figure of Marsyas represents a social The Body of Marsyas 75 energumen reduced to its own very motive force, disembodied, the kind of “liberties” taken in the can-can lead instead to a form of pu- trefaction, a collapse of the body into its own “mephitic vapors” (28: 403). This contrast between two equally critical attitudes toward liberal modernity helps us differentiate between modes of cultural critique. Whereas the critique of putrefaction figures the fear of cultural and bodily dissolution and disintegration, Marsyas is, by contrast, a much more ambiguous figure—the very energy of disintegration itself that needs to be understood not simply as a (bodily and cultural) collapse but as the drive toward new and frightening mass cultural formations. If I have been invoking an aesthetic socialist tradition for which a consideration of Wilde would be necessary, I have offered no detailed presentation of where he might fit in that tradition. I might conclude this chapter, then, by reflecting on the fate of this Marsyas trope in his writing. In Wilde’s “The Decay of Lying” Marsyas is once again opposed to Apollo. “Surely,” the interlocutor Cyril exhorts his aesthetic friend, Vivian, who refuses to treat art in its social context, “you would acknowledge the temper of its age, the spirit of its time, the moral and social conditions that surround it and under whose influence it is produced.” To this Vivian produces the oft-quoted and invariably truncated response: Certainly not! Art never expresses anything but itself. This is the principle of my new aesthetics; and it is this, more than that vital connection between form and substance, on which Mr. Pater dwells, that makes basic the type of all the arts. Of course, nations and individuals, with that healthy natural vanity which is the secret of existence, are always under the impression that it is of them that the Muses are talking, always trying to find in the calm dignity of imaginative art some mirror of their own turbid passions, always forgetting that the singer of life is not Apollo but Marsyas.* Why is this passage surprising? We need to note first the gracious distancing from Pater, for whom music held a paradigmatic value among the arts. The passage is interesting in our context, however, for its identification of Marsyas with mimetic realism. For we have been in danger of confusing Platonic form and mimetic figure. My reading of Ruskin has been pushing Marsyas—with his formlessness—in the direction of the sublime, but here he comes back to earth with a realistic thud.** The question I wish to confront in conclusion is whether it is possible to reconcile these two roles of Marsyas—the mimetic and the sublime—in a notion of sublime figuration, thus producing the following constellation:

What I have been suggesting, in effect, is that we need to demystify the sublime in our readings of the nineteenth century both as an aesthetic possibility, Wilde's representationalism, and as a social project, the attempt to harness economically the "social energumen." Wilde's invocation of Marsyas—and the tradition of figurations of that figure in the writings of the Victorian sages—attunes us to the way in which questions of rhythm and energy that would come to dominate philosophical thought in the form of vitalism and Lebensphilosophie had already been worked through in aesthetic form as crucial problems of social choreography. In its subsequent reemergence as an aesthetic form, dance would come to reconfigure, through the materiality of the body, a debate about rhythms; rhythms of work, of life, of poetry. One senses the beginnings of new taxonomies in Wilde's writings, as for example in "The Decay of Lying," where he distinguishes (by simile) rhythm from music. "As one knows the poet by his fine music," Wilde writes, "so one can recognize the liar by his rich rhythmic utterance, The Body of Marsyas 77 and in neither case will the casual inspiration of the moment suffice. Here, as elsewhere, practice must precede perfection" (972). At one and the same time, Wilde seems to subscribe to a Paterian tradition that idealizes poetry as music and yet also to propose—by championing the rhythm of the lie rather than the music of poetry—an aesthetic practice not grounded on poesis. Notably, he rejects any notion of music or rhythm as instantaneous or spontaneous—it is always practiced and rehearsed. Could it be that dance, rather than figuring—as in the tradition of Yeats reconstructed by Kermode—the possibility of transubstantiation and transcendence, figures instead the biological materiality of rhythm distilled from the abstractions of musical form? Might dance be for Wilde the rhythmic form of the lie rather than, necessarily—as Kermode would have us believe—a performative, musical, revelation of truth?*4 In conclusion, then, what I am proposing is that the aesthetic socialist tradition running from Carlyle through Ruskin—and along different streams to Wilde and Morris—was persistently but only darkly aware of the problems inherent in the ideal of social choreography derived from Schillerian idealism. By the end of the century, Schiller's playful social totality will have been replaced by the totality of labor. Whereas, in the Kantian formulation, the sublime lies in the subject's recognition of a suprasensual subject operative within him, in Schiller that recognition of a beyond has been socialized: beyond the individual is the choreography of society in which he dances. In the physiological sublime the body does not figure the philosophical condition of the subject; it figures, instead, the end of the figure, the resubsuming of the body by the "enthusiasms" it generates. In the turns and reels of Schiller's "English dance" the ideal subject has revealed itself as labor power. The disembodied body of Marsyas is the medium for thinking about a social energumen that passes through physical bodies but cannot be reduced to them. At the same time as the subject is dissolved by its participation in that greater social energy, the experience of that dissolution can be figured as a raw muscularity from which the defining membrane of the skin has been removed. The sublime as the unfigurable finds a paradoxically appropriate figuration, and the body, rather than consciousness itself, becomes the seat of experience. Ideology has already passed beyond questions of mere representation to questions of performance, experience, and embodiment.

Stumbling and Legibility
GESTURE AND THE DIALECTIC OF TACT

... the most general of the senses. We could well see or hear with just one small part of the body, but in order not to be automata that can be destroyed or dismantled without even noticing it, we require the sense of touch in all parts of the body. [... la sensation la plus générale. Nous pouvions bien ne voir ou n’entendre, que par une petite portion de notre corps, mais il nous falloit du sentiment dans toutes les parties pour n’étre pas des automates, qu’on auroit démontés et détruits, sans que nous eussions pti nous en apergevoir.] —Chevalier de Jaucourt, "Le Tact," in Encyclopédie

Having suggested in previous chapters ways in which social choreography informed the project of nineteenth-century aesthetic socialism, I now wish to locate such social visions within a broader Enlightenment tradition of thinking about the relation of the physical body to the body politic. That is, here I will begin to examine the choreographic in its second dimension—as not only a disposition of bodies in social space but as a way of educating the individual body in its experience of itself and in its movement toward language as an expression of that experience. In terms of the "aesthetic continuum" outlined in the introduction, I will examine the threshold at which the aesthetic in the most fundamental sense (as sensory experience) passes over into "the aesthetic" in the more limited sense—as a socially endorsed framing of the sensual. Thus, I will address physical movements that would not ordinarily fall under the rubric of choreography in the more limited aesthetic sense in order to examine the way in which bodily experience prefigures and prepares for the Enlightenment subject's passage into language.

While my consideration of the body will constantly parallel an Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment reflection on writing and legibility, it is my contention that the possibility of "reading the body" has always been posited only in retrospect—as a utopian originary moment in which meaning was supposedly immanent, embodied, and uncomplicated by its social situation. I will argue that over the course of the nineteenth century, repeated attempts were made to subject the body to a specific regime of legibility in continuance of an Enlightenment hermeneutic tradition. By and large, these attempts—which built on the pseudoscience of eighteenth-century physiognomy—succeeded in suppressing a more radical strain of thought that recognized both the contingent nature of the body's movements and the importance of aesthetic criteria in establishing a social choreography.

I do not, then, offer here a chapter that "reads the nineteenth-century body," but rather one that seeks both to locate the very possibility of bodily reading historically and to reexamine moments of critical stumbling in that hermeneutic. I will argue for a "dialectic of tact," in which social choreography is presented as a necessary accommodation to the state of a society fallen from grace (or self-immanence). This fantasized state of grace—the originary moment of true and immanent democracy—was figured as a situation in which the direct physical communication of members of a community with each other was still possible.

The pivotal figure in this chapter is the nineteenth-century French theorist of theatrical deportment and declamatory gesture, Francois Delsarte, who built on a tradition of speculation about the body's relation to language in order to develop a systematic study of physical deportment and public speaking that was immensely influential for the body consciousness of the educated middle class in Europe and America. As a figure who fuses the taxonomic zeal of the encyclopedist with the spiritualism of the nineteenth-century parlor, Delsarte serves as a bridge to the early theorists of modern dance in the United States. His observations on the significance of gestures—which originated, according to his own account, in his early training as an (unsuccessful) actor—were hugely influential at a time when a newly emergent bourgeois class was eager to represent through its body, as well as its possessions, its newly acquired status. If that status could be represented physically, it was assumed—in the "natural" language of the body—that the social status of this ascendant class could itself be represented as something natural and inevitable. This is, then, a chapter on bourgeois gesture. By making such a general claim, I do not seek to oppose the bourgeois gesture to, say, the proletarian—although the criminological and cultural work by figures such as Cesare Lombroso and Max Nordau at the end of the nineteenth century was organized around just such divisions. I am arguing instead that the very concept of "gesture" is itself bourgeois in the sense that it seeks to universalize and naturalize, through a choreographic embodiment, the cultural language of a specific class.

To this extent, Delsarte is pivotal precisely because he raises a question implicit in all of the other figures I treat in this chapter: When does a physical action function as a "gesture"? By tracing this question briefly through a variety of thinkers—from Rousseau to Bergson, then on to the Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben, in our own day—I wish to suggest that bourgeois culture has always been troubled by the (im)possibility of embodying itself. Seeking to codify itself in a series of appropriate and acceptable gestures and manners, bourgeois culture always risked reducing itself to mere code, undercutting the naturalizing legitimacy it sought in the bodily language of gesture.

At its most simple, I trace bourgeois social choreography back to learning comportment and how to walk—to the promenade that clearly shows off the body and makes of the very condition of man ("walking on his own two feet") an aesthetic gesture, a mode of representation. Walking is that human action where performance and text meet, where the question poses itself: Is this a gesture?

Before fleshing out this argument on walking, it is necessary to point out what is at stake politically in such reflections. In an essay examining the fundamental importance to Enlightenment political theorists, of the metaphor of walking, Bernd Jiirgen Warneken cites as paradigmatic Kant's essay "What Is Enlightenment?" with its exhortation to all liberated humanity to "take a single step without the go-cart to which they are harnessed." As Warneken notes, this Kantian peripatetic pedagogy also accepts falling as one of the processes whereby mankind will learn to walk. Thus Kant's investment in a certain "epistemology of walking," so to speak, does not preclude the occasional inelegant stumble.

Examples of walking as the central trope of an emerging Enlightenment politics abound. Thomas Hobbes famously defines freedom in specifically physical terms as freedom of movement; and in a passage that certainly complicates the class politics of Schiller's celebration of dance, Johann Pestalozzi critiques the dances of the upper classes as effete, and recommends instead a good, brisk, bourgeois stroll. In the late eighteenth century, for the first time, walking could be celebrated either as an escape from a corrupt society and a return to nature, or as a democratic and revolutionary communion with the hoi polloi.

After quoting an enthusiastic German walker of the early nineteenth century—"I consider walking to be the most noble and independent thing about a man and believe that things would work better if people walked more"—Warneken concludes: "Particularly from the 1780s on, a new bourgeois culture of walking is discussed and rehearsed in Germany. It could be claimed with some justification that the bourgeoisie's attempt to develop its own lifestyle and its own body culture did not simply include walking and posture among other things, but that this new culture of walking acquired a significant and independent role both in inculcating a modern bourgeois habitus and in demonstrating bourgeois self-consciousness" (179). Clearly, the questions of walking and gesture—or walking as gesture, as a "demonstration of bourgeois self-consciousness"—are questions of cultural hegemony, and it is as such that I wish to approach them now. We might begin this examination of walking as bourgeois gesture at the moment of its putative demise. In an essay on gesture from Infancy and History: The Destruction of Experience, the Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben has argued that "by the end of the nineteenth century, the gestures of the Western bourgeoisie were irretrievably lost."* This loss of gesture, however, might be seen instead as a loss of syntactical or legible gesture, for in fact what seems to have happened—at least in Agamben's account—is instead an explosion of gesture beyond the bounds of legibility.

In charting the destruction of gestural experience from the clinical writings of Gilles de la Tourette at the end of the nineteenth century, Agamben notes how the wild gestures noted by Tourette (and captured in the films of Marey and Lumiére) seemed to have gone underground "until the winter's day in 1971, when Oliver Sacks, walking through the streets of New York, saw what he believed were three cases of Tourettism within the space of three minutes" (137). This historical and bodily return of the repressed leads Agamben to conjecture "that beyond a certain point everyone had lost control of their gestures, walking and gesticulating frenetically" (137).

The fate of the gesture is interesting here: precisely to the extent that nonverbal languages have been subjected to a prevalent logocentrism, this very subjection has apparently unleashed a proliferation of unreadable bod- ily ejaculations. The repression of the body's (linguistic) movements has led to ever broader ranges of (uncontrolled) movement. It is as if we were faced with a paradigmatic Foucaldian play of repression and pro- liferation, in which the usual displacements that enable a sublimation have no "place" left. The body—the final resting place of the repressed, in so many cases—cannot itself be displaced. It is as if, in other words, displacement had reached a dead end and we had nothing left for protection and camouflage but the techniques of condensation—the terse, condensed gestures of Tourettism.

Of course, if we accept the hypothesis that Agamben proposes, any analysis of parapraxis—and the regime of reading on which it depends— becomes highly problematic. If the body's gestures have become spas- tic, we can no longer simply read back from them—even parapracti- cally—to a putative subject. Thus the very project of situating such bodies culturally and historically—the project of cultural studies—be- comes problematic because such bodies will not sit still long enough to be situated: they do not signify according to established norms of legi- bility. It is only from the perspective of an already alienated body that the somatic can be made to figure anything like a "natural language."

In effect, Agamben's argument works only if we posit an implicit distinc- tion between gesture and gesticulation; the former a willed linguistic articulation, the latter a subjection of the body to spontaneous or invol- untary movements. "The gestures of the bourgeoisie" would then de- note a bodily regime by virtue of which a certain class asserted its hegemony. The loss of bodily control observed by Tourette would then serve as the marker of the demise of bourgeois cultural hegemony. In Stumbling and Legibility 83 other words, Agamben understands "bourgeois gesture" as a form of embodied communication. Its crisis is a crisis of writing and intentionality (a loss of control of gesture) and of legibility (the gestures no longer "mean" anything). Bourgeois cultural hegemony is understood as a certain regimen of reading and writing, and "gesture" would be the action wherein that regimen attempts to take on an apparently transhistorical and natural form: it is my body, not my class, that speaks. We find a similar logic in Adorno, where a nostalgia for the bourgeois promenade of the nineteenth century retrospectively simplifies what it meant to walk in that century.

I wish to demonstrate, however, that reflections on gesture always resulted from moments of stumbling. The self-assured bourgeois promenade was always a potentially precarious affair, aestheticized most elegantly in an ironic essay by Balzac, "Théorie de la démarche." The slight consideration Agamben's essay gives to choreography in either the limited or the expanded sense is as telling as his observation of Balzac's "Théorie de la démarche"—that it is, "when all was said and done, disappointing" (135). Agamben does not entirely neglect dance, however: it serves for him to describe the condition of Tourette's syndrome, in which "the patient is incapable of either beginning or fully enacting the most simple gestures; if he or she manages to initiate a movement, it is interrupted and sent awry by uncontrollable jerkings and shudderings whereby the muscles seem to dance (chorea) quite independent of any motor purpose" (136).

Dancing, then, figures a movement beyond the communicative gesture—the sublime "vibrations" of Ruskin are now experienced only as a shuddering. Dance fails as gesture through an inability either to begin or to complete the gesture, and it figures a linguistic play that neglects the work of semiotic closure. Moreover, chorea necessitates a rethinking of "purpose" with respect to bodily movement. Dance figures either an aesthetic of interruption or, stated more positively, an openness to discourses that cut across primary lines of communication, confounding hegemonic meanings. And yet, dance—as movement "independent of any motor purpose"—might be taken as paradigmatic of a Kantian aesthetic of "purposiveness without purpose."

This suggests a fascinating possibility that choreography as an aesthetic practice responds to the "loss of gesture" or "destruction of experience" in the bourgeois era; that it emerges both as an uncontrollable chorea, or symptom of the loss of gestural control, and as an attempt to regain control through aestheticization. However, this reading of dance would finally limit itself too closely to Agamben's constricted parameters for understanding the nineteenth century. For example, his foregrounding of Tourette is tendentious: in the mathesis of nineteenth-century gesture an incalculably more influential figure was Delsarte, whose theory of oratory and gesture permeated many fields of cultural and social life.

Perhaps the most striking cultural expression of a nineteenth-century obsession with "gesture," Delsarte's oratorical system—never satisfactorily transmitted in his own fragmentary writings—became de rigueur for would-be public speakers and, most notably, for genteel young ladies seeking to supplement their lessons in deportment. Isadora Duncan, for example, tells of her early exposure to salon Delsartism at her home in California. Delsarte's systematization of social self-presentation was obviously conducive to a society in which greater class mobility was now possible. The classification of gesture allowed for the naturalizing, through embodiment, of a newly acquired social standing. Delsarte's system was disseminated in the United States thanks to his followers Steele Mackay and Genevieve Stebbins, but it was most thoroughly vulgarized as a tool of social climbing. By looking at the dissemination of Delsarte's work toward the end of the nineteenth century, I wish to show how a concern with gesture became a unifying cultural phenomenon. Any apparent loss of cultural hegemony on the part of the bourgeoisie was no more than an inevitable failure to install that hegemony as a natural condition through gestural language and an all-embracing social choreography.

Tracing back to eighteenth-century treatises on the origins of language, the various roles ascribed to dance and gesture as transitional forms of language would allow us to understand how for Enlightenment thinkers choreography, like grammar, served to organize "naturally" occurring communicative impulses. However, we would immediately confront the question of gesture and gesticulation both as a philosophical figure and as a historically determined articulation of the body.

While I propose to focus on the essay by Balzac that Agamben passed over, it is helpful to consider a short passage from Rousseau's famous Essay on the Origin of Languages to contextualize my arguments within a broader Enlightenment project. Since learning to gesticulate, Rousseau opines, "we have forgotten the art of pantomime, for the same reason that with all our beautiful systems of grammar we no longer understand the symbols of the Egyptians. What the ancients said in the liveliest way, they did not express in words but by means of signs. They did not say it, they showed it."

Rather than elaborating a semiotic from Rousseau, I would simply point out that gesture, as gesticulation, is already a problematic phenomenon. It is not a product of but rather a replacement for a lost mimetic capacity. Rousseau obviously uses "symbol" to indicate that language that predates articulation: "In the most vigorous language everything is said symbolically, before one actually speaks" (7). The symbolic writing of Egypt somehow figures as a language that predates speech, whereas gesticulation—the linguistic articulation of the body—marks the relativism of grammar. It would seem that the possibility of meaningful body language is always something that we project onto the past. If it is Tourette, according to Agamben, who finally charts the demise of the bourgeois gesture, Rousseau is already forced to search in antiquity for gestures that retain some of the power he otherwise associates with the hieroglyph. His examples of symbolic gesture range from the violent (“Thrasybulus lopping off poppies”) through the sensual (“Alexander applying the seal to the mouth of his favorite”) to the quotidian (“Diogenes promenading in front of Zeno”) (7), and culminate in the terrible “harangue” delivered to Darius by the King of Scythia. According to Rousseau’s own taxonomy, however, the example of Diogenes differs from all the others. The King of Scythia is already using language, whereas both Alexander and Thrasybulus engage in acts of amatory or violent touching.

“Generally,” Rousseau writes, “the means by which we can act on the sense of others are restricted to two: that is, movement and voice. The action of movement is immediate through touching, or mediate through gesture. The first can function only within arm’s length, while the other extends as far as the visual ray” (6). If this taxonomy is accepted, then strictly speaking only Diogenes engages in gesture, which is understood as movement mediated and distanced by symbolic signification. Gesture, then, would be the mode of passage from direct to indirect communication. It involves putting the body on display, and thus the most fundamental gesture is the simple act of self-presentation: the promenade. Diogenes actually becomes a symbol through the simple act of walking.

The promenade as a significant social gesture is, then, already a nostalgic figure in Rousseau, already a historical anachronism even before the nineteenth-century heyday of the flaneur. It marks the possibility of the body signifying in a symbolic or mimetic fashion without engaging in gesticulation. Rousseau exemplifies in this essay what we might call a “dialectic of tact” in which rhetorical tactfulness enables a semblance of seamless social integration, but only in the face of a loss of actual tactile interaction. Gesture is already a mediated form of communication that comes into play with the demise of direct touching—politics “within arms length”—as a feasible practice.

When communities can no longer embrace themselves quite literally, they resort to gesture. To study gesture, then, is to study instances of a failure to connect. Thus, the most basic of gestures would be the gesture that signifies the lack of connection, the gesture that displays its own failure in direct physical connection. It is just such a gesture that forms the basis of Balzac’s “Théorie de la démarche’” of 1833. Balzac offers an anecdote at the outset of his study: in the street one day he observes a man exiting his carriage to hail a friend. Lurching forward to broach the acquaintance, the stranger loses his balance and stumbles as his friend moves out of reach of the salutary hand.

It is this simple stumble on the part of a stranger that gives rise to Balzac’s observations on the absurdly difficult task of walking. The stumble seems clumsy and tactless—and Balzac’s essay will develop, in fact, into a treatise on elegance—and yet, marking the moment when the other moves out of reach, the stumble is the inaugural moment in which social tact becomes necessary. It is as if Balzac’s instance of a failed salutation, a failed interpellation, marked precisely that moment where any natural, palpable social order is lost. Stumbling and Legibility 87 Stumbling, then, would be the gesture that inaugurates a language of gesture. Balzac’s scenario troubles the simplicity of the famous Althusserian salutation or interpellation that we instinctively know to be addressed to us. The friend remains oblivious to the stumbling commotion he leaves behind him. If walking is to be read as a gestural self-presentation, it is nevertheless preceded by a stumble over the threshold of social mediation. We might say that stumbling is less an instance of singular socialization than of a certain social order finding its footing. It marks not just the moment of nature's transition into culture—as in Rousseau, the somatic expressive gestures discovering their communicative value—but any moment at which one cultural order, perceived—or no longer perceived, in fact—as natural, makes place for another.

Whereas the Althusserian paradigm focuses on the inevitable interpellation of the one hailed, Balzac is interested, instead, in the bumbling mechanisms of the one who hails. "In society man is obliged to move continually from the center to all points of the circumference," Balzac notes. "He has a thousand passions, a thousand ideas, and his basis is so scarcely proportionate to the extent of his actions that at every moment he is in danger of being taken in a moment of weakness" (56-57). Under such circumstances, how can he fail to stumble?

Balzac's notion of a constant social movement "from the center to all points of the circumference" and the necessary faiblesse that results (i.e., man's inability to compose all his bodily indicators to signal the same hypocrisy) suggest that ours is a society produced by parapraxis. "Théorie de la démarche," with its twelve central axioms and its pseudoscientific empirical rigor, reads as an extremely funny parody of taxonomic encyclopedism. Indeed, the essay begins with a defensive gesture of astonishment. Balzac asks: "Is it not extraordinary to note that ever since man has been walking, no one has thought to have asked how he walks, whether he walks, if he could walk better, what he is doing when he walks, or whether there might not be some better way to impose, change or analyze his walking: questions that bear on the very philosophical, psychological, and political systems that so preoccupy the whole world?" (17).

The absurdity of the presentation cannot mask a serious concern here—the same concern that informed the political theorists of the Enlightenment touched on earlier. Precisely those things that no one would think to ask—how we walk, for example—are the things that form the basis of our world. To ask about walking (démarche) is necessarily to ask about how our society works (marche). Let us take the ironist at his word; for indeed it is strange that no one should have asked so simple a question—how walking can happen, or "comment ¢a marche." Balzac's concerns are epistemological. Stumbling provides him with a model of scientific method—a model that allows him to critique and yet pursue the project of the Enlightenment encyclopédiste. This text offers a curiously "postmodern" twist on scientific method as a form of stumbling that moves beyond any simple positivism.

The central question of method, Balzac will claim, is itself a question of balance: "A madman is one who sees the abyss and falls in. The man of knowledge hears him fall, takes his fathom stick and measures the distance .. . There is no single movement, no single action that might not be seen as an abyss where even the wisest man might leave his reason and which might not provide the man of knowledge with the occasion to take his measuring rule and measure infinity itself. There is an infinity to be found in the slightest gramen" (26-27). * The fou simply falls—this is not what interests Balzac. Likewise, the measured empiricism and quantifications of the scientist do not interest him either. Instead, he explains, “here, I shall forever be between the fathom stick of the man of knowledge and the vertigo of the madman . . . placing myself at the very point where science touches on folly” (27). He advances to the abyss, teeters and stumbles on its edge, then—by virtue of a rétraction—theorizes in measured terms. We might see in this stumbling a new and important critical methodology that takes the pathological and aberrant, the unbalanced, into the very act of critique, making parapraxis the very measure of praxis. By parodying the taxonomic vigor of the encyclopédistes, Balzac demonstrates how critical thought will constantly stumble rather than promenade across a terrain of leveled categories. Notably, Balzac is interested not in an act of falling—an act of failing, let us say—but in stumbling; that is, in a failed fall, in an act of recuperation or rétraction. He is quite insistent on this point when citing, in mock academic style, from the existing authorities on the question of the démarche. Referring to the authority of Borelli’s De actu animalium, Balzac chronicles his own disappointment on realizing that “Borelli tells us why a man, carried beyond his own center of gravity, falls; but he does not tell us why that man often will not fall, if he knows how to make use of a secret force, discovering in his feet an unbelievable power of recovery [rétraction]” (40). It is stumbling, not falling or walking, that is at the heart of Balzac’s study of the démarche. He is concerned with how order and system are grounded on parapraxis rather than seeking, like Rousseau, some moment of immediate physical communication. Where Balzac does begin to expatiate on the refining of physical representation, his essay quite explicitly shifts gears into a consideration of elegance: that is, he envisages as a willed aesthetic construct that which Rousseau posits as an historical origin—a certain state of grace. This is what makes Balzac’s study so important for those who seek to resist the aestheticization of politics: for while it recognizes the aesthetic endeavor as the basis of the social collective, it refuses to ground that political aesthetic in a moment of pure communication and communitarian self-immanence. Stumbling needs to be thought of not as a loss of footing but rather as a finding of one’s feet: it is the act in which the body rights itself by a rétraction and the mind becomes aware of the operation of measure and balance—“a secret force” —operating in and through the body. To reflect on what it means to walk is necessarily to reflect on what it is to profess a science. Is it, perhaps, to reflect on the necessity of a shift from Enlightenment science to the critique necessitated by the dialectic of Enlightenment? Although I hesitate to make what seems the inevitable deconstructive gesture, Balzac indeed finally obliges us to question the relation of walking to writing, and to ask what it might mean to stumble in literary terms. “You might ask why such emphasis on so prosaic a science” (20)," he reflects in a rhetorical aside that itself suggests the importance of the rhetorical. Walking is “prosaic” and Balzac is concerned with the question of writing prose. If this concern seems a little distant from our concern with social choreography, Balzac's own literary point of reference suggests the connection once again. Balzac's essay on the bourgeois gentleman, Le bourgeois gentilhomme, explores the idea of "vital expenditure" through movement and the question of whether some profit can be drawn from this new discovery. Balzac is concerned with the unconscious natural will operative in man and the potential for stockpiling vital energy. He discusses the possibility of directing the action of this constant phenomenon and storing up invisible fluid that a person possesses without knowing it.

Balzac's analysis hints at the danger that vitalism poses to the storing up of surplus value, leading him to seek out modes of stockpiling that value. He touches on the idea of self-perpetuating expenditure that later theorists would link to the intoxicating effects of dance and rhythm. The energies Balzac deals with in this essay—"prodigality" and "stockpiling"—are ultimately the twin energies that make the flow of capital possible.

However, the question remains: How might we collect and amass gestural capital if, by their very nature, gestures are prodigal and antipathetic to any economy? Balzac argues that "the soul loses in centripetal force what it gains in centrifugal" (56). In this model, human energies are essentially centrifugal, passing from man into the objects of his labor. The classic example of such exorbitant expenditure is, for Balzac, the act of writing itself, from which he draws his most ironic example of a possible resistance to energistic entropy. He writes admiringly of those "autograph hunters" and those who claim to be able to judge men's character by their handwriting, describing them as "superior people" (38). The autograph hunter is a form of literary capitalist. He realizes that the autograph is not simply the indexical marker of the subject that produced it, but rather the fixation of the energies emanating from that subject. In collecting what we might call the "graphic power" of the great man, he acts like the capitalist who exploits the labor power of the worker. This, finally, is why focusing on the question of the truth or falsehood of gesture—and writing—is misplaced: gesture figures writing as a mode of performance. Gesture would be the happening of writing—writing beyond reference. As we shall see, this emphasis on performance, while never fully lost, submerges in the taxonomic fervor of the nineteenth century. Subsequently, gestures will be traced to their origin—as the manifest to the latent: what will be forgotten is the "gesture work" through which the collective mediates and performs itself. We need to insist on stumbling precisely in order to rescue Balzac from a more facile notion of subjectivity that clearly appeals to him and that he draws from the eighteenth century. In extending his system of homologies, Balzac refers to Lavater's physiognomic studies: "Before me, Lavater already said that since everything in man is homogeneous, his manner of walking must by necessity be as eloquent as his physiognomy: walking is the physiog- nomy of the body. But this was just a natural deduction from his pri- mary proposition: "Everything about us corresponds to an internal cause" (21)." This system of homology, reducible to "an internal cause," posits a centered notion of subjectivity at both the physical and the metaphysical levels. This physiognomic cataloging of the body is ideological precisely insofar as it posits a preexisting subject that can be inferred from both its actions and its physical embodiment. Although Balzac declares as his first axiom that "walking is the physiognomy of the body," the epistemology from which we are freeing him is precisely this 92 Social Choreography epistemology of the physiognomic, that will, in fact, reassert itself toward the end of the century. (The work of Lombroso and Nordau, for example, depended on just such an assumption of the homology of physiological and intellectual or moral traits.) My argument is that Balzac's stress on the stumble in performance draws attention to the work of social choreography, both collective and individual, but that this critical awareness will be buried again later in the century by an insistence on the legibility of the body, on the body as text. While the "scientific" claims of physiognomy were, of course, always rather precarious, the physiognomic epistemological construction can only continue to exist in an explicitly ideological form after Balzac effectively debunks it malgré lui. By shifting critical awareness from moments of legibility toward the notion of social choreography as a performance (in his consideration of poise and élégance), Balzac challenges our notions of "body as text" and indicates what I take to be a broader shift (exem- plified in my reading of Isadora Duncan) away from essentially "literary" models of (national) culture, toward ideology as performative. Near the end of the essay, as he begins to reflect on the deportment of passersby, Balzac introduces the distinction between /e mouvement faux (a false movement), in which is revealed "the nature of the character," and Je mouvement gauche resulting from habit (82). The former denotes a body, and its falsehood is referential (it reveals something “false” in the character), whereas the latter is performative and aesthetic, finally; its falsehood is an effect (produced on the observer) rather than a cause. As the essay moves from pseudoscientific reflection on the hu- man motor to an altogether more frivolous assessment of the charms of feminine movement, it also moves away from questions of true and false, or le mouvement faux. The apparently sociological or merely fashionable turn toward le mouvement gauche constitutes, in fact, a rejection of the textual and referential as a means of “reading” the body. Balzac’s treatise is not, in fact, about the legibility of the unconscious subject through their actions or parapraxes but rather the power of ré- traction that causes us to right ourselves, to represent ourselves ges- turally despite the fallibility of social interpellation. Balzac is already beyond a theory of interpretation that would depend upon vrai and faux. As the essay develops, it soon becomes clear that he is concerned instead with the élégant and the gauche. This movement of the treatise Stumbling and Legibility 93 from its own feigned center of gravity, or gravitas, is a critical stumble that opens up different epistemological questions.

That our earlier analogy of writing and a prototypical labor theory of value is not altogether misplaced is suggested by an example that Bal- zac offers to demonstrate the necessity of his shift from a physiognomic consideration of vrai and faux movements to a consideration of élé- gance. He describes a craftsman who lathes marble in a repetitive movement of exorbitant expenditure. Does the object, the production of objects, sap our power? What results in the workman is a gesture of habit—and habit is the origin of the mouvement gauche.*° A critique of the inelegant is a critique not of misrepresentation—the habits incul- cated by repeated labor are not “false,” indeed they are adopted pre- cisely because they are, in some sense, “correct” in their adaptation to the task—but of misproduction. The habits of repeated labor produce something “wrong” rather than derive from something wrong. We en- counter here something akin to the aesthetic socialism of the English writers already considered. Balzac’s critique of repetitive toil derives from an observation of an ugly or gauche action. Mechanized or repeti- tive labor is rejected for being gauche rather than faux. This method- ological shift from a pseudoscientific treatise to a rather frivolous ex- amination of elegance is extremely important. Like Morris, who saw the production of beautiful objects as tied to the physical production of beautiful subjects, Balzac derives an implicit critique of toil from the observation of a lack of élégance. What is the significance of this criterion of aesthetic discernment? What do we gain from mustering an aesthetic critique of the gauche rather than a cognitive critique of the faux? Clearly the faux depends on a model of reference: a gesture is faux when it fails to reflect “the nature of the character.” The gauche meanwhile is a purely aesthetic judg- ment—offending not because it is misrepresentative but rather because it is repetitive, belabored, and mechanical. It is wrong not because it fails to represent human subjects truly but because it fails to produce true human subjects. This is a crucial shift. Methodologically, Balzac points out what would become a persistent ethical problem throughout nineteenth-century reflections on gesture and comportment. If we are to read the gesture's emotional referent, the project of cataloging becomes highly problematic because it reduces gestures to legible and nominal signs that can simply be copied. If we categorize in an encyclopedic fashion the mimetic language of gesture, do we not risk a denaturing—a perfect dissembling translation of true affects into merely hypocritical gesture? (It is notable that Bergson, for example, uses over and over the example of Moliére's prototypical hypocrite Tartuffe in his study Laughter.) Balzac's vitalism might be read—at least in its linguistic implications—as an attempt to counter such possibilities. Rejecting, by the end of the essay, the simple listings of an encyclopedia entry, he is concerned instead with a theory of writing organized around the active agency of the verb. In an analysis of action that will be taken up later by Delsarte, Balzac reads gesture as verb rather than noun—performance rather than designation: "From then on, movement, for me, included thought, the most difficult action of a human being; the verb, a translation of thought; then walking and gesture, the more or less impassioned completion of the verb. . . . transformations of thought in the voice, which is the sense of touch by which the soul most spontaneously let flow miracles of eloquence and the heavenly enchantments of vocal music. Is the word not, in a sense, the heart and brain's manner of walking?" (34-35).* Of course, the idea that language can be thought of as "the heart and the brain's manner of walking" might easily be accommodated to a form of logocentrism, and Balzac himself facilitates such an accommodation when he argues, for example, that "granted that walking is the expression of bodily movements and Voice the expression of intellectual movements, it seemed impossible to me to make movement lie" (35).* The idea that walking is an embodiment of the metaphysical values of voice necessarily reframes our consideration of what it means to walk. However, we must not forget the importance of the stumble in Balzac's theory. If neither la démarche nor la voix can lie, both can, nevertheless, falter. Indeed, they both only become aware of themselves insofar as they stumble or stutter in performance.

Before moving on from Balzac, I should clarify what I take to be the critical significance of the stumble and, more broadly, the historical significance of Balzac's essay. It is important to note a dialectic operative within the very episteme of physiognomy as Balzac understands it; a dialectic that allows us to see this essay as, in many senses, the threshold of a modern "social choreography" (it would subsequently become most important for Baudelaire). In moving on from Balzac let us say, for the moment, that he serves in the present context to represent a certain nineteenth-century model of the promenade that has already been problematized by the very stumble that inaugurates his reflection. He at once confirms an urban, modernist nostalgia for the promenade, depicting a worldview in which elegance is more than just excess and display; in which "every jolting movement betrays a vice or a bad education" (59).** At the end of the essay, Balzac focuses on the question of representation in its political as well as its semiotic sense. Looking at the representational function of the monarch, he notes how "it has been proven in autopsies performed on royal personages that the habit of representing introduces vice into the princes' bodies: they are feminized" (86). By dint of representing (and in this case no body is more representative than the king’s) the body loses its equipoise and falls into vice, into the rupture of legibility and the jolting movement. Thus, we might say that the stumble or jolting movement is the last legible bodily sign insofar as it connotes vice, but the vice that it connotes is the fall from grace that sunders bodily performance from will, intentionality, or political subjectivity. To this extent, Balzac’s stumble marks the threshold of legibility and illegibility. It is legible as the historical threshold of the illegible. Subsequent attempts to reinstate a purely mimetic notion of gesture will necessarily be anachronistic. For Adorno in Dialectic of Enlightenment stumbling would subsequently become the paradigmatic mode of totalitarian induction; we all stumble at the threshold of subject formation and, in failing to become subjects, genuflect before the totalitarian collective. In Balzac I am stressing instead the self-critical rupture that stumbling makes possible; the awareness of the constructedness of social order.

That Balzac launches into a celebration of elegance indicates that he by no means opposes constructed social orders to putatively natural ones. The criterion of political discernment is aesthetic, and Balzac envisages an aesthetic social order—a social choreography—that might be more physically and aesthetically pleasing than others. To this extent, he stands in the tradition of Schiller outlined in the introduction. What he resists, however, is the colonization of all critical potential by scientific positivism: the essay’s movement beyond the faux indicates that the critique of ideology cannot, for Balzac, be restricted to a cognitive "reading" of false statements measured against empirical historical reality. Ideology is performative, and so is its critique—in this case, as élégance.

Given the privileged position accorded Balzac by Marx in his explication of art’s ability to function as a critique of ideology even despite itself, I am suggesting that we need to reevaluate the importance of the performative, as opposed to the simply denotative, in our understanding of ideology and its critique. In Balzac there is a clear aestheticization of politics—he choreographs social orders that are elegant but in so doing he recognizes the fundamental function of social cohesion performed by the aesthetic. Thus, the historical significance I accord his work is retrospective rather than causal. It is for the critic that he marks a break—a break that historians need to historicize and evaluate for its broader significance.

In what follows, I will look at the interplay of performative and taxonomic approaches to gesture in the wake of Balzac, and at the ways in which these approaches relate to each other. In essence, Balzac’s move toward an aesthetic concern with deforming habit marks a methodological shift away from a reading of gesture and démarche as mimetic, semiotic, or reflective instants toward a concern with the epideictic or performative nature of gesture; a concern, that is, with what gestures enact rather than with what they represent.

Moreover, I contend, the observation of physical "habits" also reflects a concern with the automation and decadence of gesture that had already set in early in the nineteenth century. This concern with "habit" and its deleterious effects on human movement also forms the cornerstone of Bergson's theory of laughter, to which I now turn. Notably, one of the central examples from Bergson's study is that of a pratfall observed in the street: "A man, running along the street, stumbles and falls; the passers-by burst out laughing. They would not laugh at him, I imagine, could they suppose that the whim had suddenly seized him to sit down on the ground. They laugh because his sitting down is involuntary. Consequently, it is not his sudden change of attitude that raises a laugh, but rather the involuntary element in this change,—his clumsiness, in fact."* The example is paradigmatic of Bergson's theory of laughter in so many ways that we would do well to stand among the passers-by and refrain, for a moment, from laughing. What important elements of a theory of laughter are exemplified in this passage, and how do they contribute to our examination of a social choreography dependent on a stumbling?

We encounter, first, laughter at the man's predicament exemplifying an "absence of feeling" (4) or that "momentary anesthesia of the heart" (5) that Bergson sees at the heart of the comic. Contrary to theories of contagious kinaesthesia central to so much modern dance theory in the twentieth century, then, we see a community being produced through a curious anesthetic effect. Second, laughter is elicited here by a lapse of will. What remains to be seen, however, is whether the somatic eruption of laughter itself merely repeats or compensates for the failure of will on the part of the man who falls. Is laughter an intellectual or a somatic reflex, or both? Third, this lapse of will is itself seen as gauche or clumsy in physical terms. In fact, however, the gauche is always linked to the faux in Bergson's presentation, because all stumbling traduces a certain organic human nature. Fourth, those who laugh do so at the "mechanical inelasticity" (10) of the man who cannot adapt to specific conditions and who therefore falls. Finally, the laughter of the passersby is itself, on the contrary, "a living thing" (2), an irrepressible explosion of the vitality of the body.

To this extent, we might see this scenario of stumbling—fall and recovery—as descriptive of Balzac's rétraction, only now the force of rebounding has been projected onto the collective: in the fall we see man's lapse into mechanical rigidity; in the laughter of the passersby the recuperation of vital collective energy. This is not an instance of one man falling but of a paradigmatic social stumble in which the collective is established as a recuperation from the fall. Laughter, we might say, is the mark of that Balzacian rétraction that keeps us from the pratfalls of the fool. But where, we might ask, is the community? The "momentary anesthesia" of Bergsonian laughter obviously challenges the kind of social order dreamt of in modern dance, with its grounding principle of kinesthetic, sympathetic movement. Indeed, the principle of anesthesia seems to call into question the fundamental viability of the social; for, in Bergson's presentation, "comedy can only begin at the point where our neighbor's personality ceases to affect us. It begins, in fact, with what might be called a growing callousness to social life" (134). In essence, then, the comic plays a paradoxically socializing role while itself deriving from a certain antisocial (and somatic) impulse. Clearly, Bergson attempts here to parse out the gesture of the one who falls and the gesture of laughter itself as a response. He demands "unsociability in the performer and insensibility in the spectator" (145). This presentation can all too easily be deconstructed, however; for it overlooks not only a certain sensibility of the laughter to the 98 Social Choreography laughter of others, but also the social work performed by the one who falls and makes possible the community of laughers. The opposition of this model to a choreographic understanding of the social becomes manifest in the text of Laughter when Bergson notes how we need only “stop our ears in a room, where dancing is going on, for the dancers at once to appear ridiculous” (5). Here is neither the bodily communication of kinesthesia nor the all-encompassing order of the Schillerian dance: social order as understood through a community of laughter is a critical construct: “Its appeal is to intelligence, pure and simple” (5). “This intelligence,” Bergson observes, “must always remain in touch with other intelligences” (5). The man who finds dancing ridiculous because he has shut his ears to the beat, or Takt, of those around him is not necessarily empowered to laugh: “You would hardly appreciate the comic if you felt yourself isolated from others” (5). This community, we should note, depends on a paradoxical state of being “in touch” with others—even in our isolation the fantasy of an immediate pregestural social order persists. Laughter needs community, then, but it also grounds it. If this is true, and if “the comic does not exist outside of what is strictly human” (3), then we must conclude that Bergson’s conception of the human is essentially social. “Several have defined man as ‘an animal which laughs,’ ” observes Bergson, “they might equally well have defined him as an animal which is laughed at” (3-4). The man who falls in fact performs vital human labor just as do those who laugh at him. It would appear, then, that any isolation of the forces of rétraction and social recovery on the side of those who laugh is premature. Here we begin to encounter certain problems. For while Bergson justifies the preceding statement by insisting that “if any other animal, or some lifeless object, produces the same effect, it is always because of some resemblance to man” (4), he also insists that what we laugh at is a lapse of will and a reduction of man to a mechanical level beneath that of humanity (see the second and fourth points above). So, do we laugh at things and animals because they remind us of people, or do we laugh at people because they remind us of things and animals? Bergson’s anthropological binaries begin to blur. Consider the notion that the man who falls does so through a mechanical habit. Bergson will use the example of a man whose routine is upset by a practical joke, whose chair has been moved slightly and who falls over because his body memory is stuck in the old patterns.* First, Stumbling and Legibility 99 we should note with regard to the victim of the joke that his gaucheness is a sign of intellectual operation at the level of the body: the body does what it thinks is right. It thinks, but thinks wrongly. The body merely thinks that it thinks, one might say—whereas in fact we are merely encountering that Balzacian habitude that is at the root of all gauche actions. Bodily gaucheness is a form of intellectual laziness or ideology. But is it the falseness of what the body (wrongly) thinks or the gauche- ness implicit in the fact that it thinks that forms the basis of the comic? Bergson argues that “a comic character is generally comic in proportion to his ignorance of himself. The comic person is unconscious" (16). By contrast, the laughter of the passers-by is both a recuperative vital force and "intelligence pure and simple." For all the irrationalism of Bergson's vitalism, Laughter in fact attempts to isolate a purely rational instance in social interaction. It is not only the one who falls who becomes complicated: those who laugh are equally complex. Clearly, the attempt to parse out conscious and unconscious across the two terms of the joke—those who laugh and those who are laughed at—is very reassuring. Nevertheless, this attempt consistently fails: For to what extent is the laughter itself voluntary? Its very vitality springs from its ability to bypass the regimen of individual will. In many ways, laughter is itself as mechanical as the man who falls. Man becomes risible through his functioning as a machine, through mechanistic repetitions that invoke the brainless operation of a machine. But likewise, "laughter appears to stand in need of an echo" (5); it inaugurates a mimesis rather than being an unrepeatable and unique eruption of the body. Laughter too is caught in a logic of repetition and mimesis—no less than the butt of the joke: "It is not an articulate, clear, well-defined sound; it is something which would fain be prolonged by reverberating from one to another, something beginning with a crash" (6). There is something mechanistic and reiterative in the very enunciation of a laughter that Bergson would like to present as a sort of somatic commonsense: ha ha ha. Laughter is a form of sonic stumble. It is stuck in a repetition that is not yet articulation, but is—for Bergson at least—nevertheless human.

At the conclusion of the book, he will finally acknowledge this mechanistic element of laughter—supposedly itself the recuperation of the mechanistic. "Laughter," he writes, "is simply the result of a mechanism set up in us by nature or, what is almost the same thing, by our long acquaintance with social life. It goes off spontaneously and returns tit for tat" (198). This linkage of the machinic and the spontaneous indicates a new phase of vitalism passing over into "techno-logy." Laughter, then, reveals the mechanisms at the very heart of the human, debunking the organicist tendencies of Bergson's vitalism. Moreover, the group formation necessary to laughter vitiates another of his crucial distinctions. Laughter is infectious in an almost literal sense—it is communicated from body to body: "How," Bergson asks, "should it come about that this particular logical relation, as soon as it is perceived, contracts, expands and shakes our limbs, whilst all other relations leave the body unaffected?" (7). When we laugh, we do not, in fact, raise ourselves to the level of pure contemplative intellect but rather yield to a physical reflex passed on by the bodies of others. If we recall (from Rousseau) that gesture is inaugurated at the precise point when bodies can no longer directly communicate with each other by touch, this logic of contagion acquires an ideological significance: it articulates a quasi-pathological fantasy of immanent bodily community. To maintain this image of laughter as a contagion, we might better describe it as an inoculation—the entry of the organic into an intellectual and social structure that was itself in danger of becoming mechanical by its own rigor. To this extent, then, Bergson might be seen as radicalizing the tradition of Balzacian skepticism toward the taxonomic zeal of science. Whereas Balzac pokes fun at the taxonomic, cataloging zeal of the Enlightenment—which could happily embrace the organic world—Bergson's view is more Manichaean here. The rigor of taxonomy has been overtaken by the rigidity of the machine. What is at stake, of course, is the question of social order: organic or mechanistic? Where Bergson has traditionally been ranged alongside the organicists, we need to be sensitive to the mechanistic tropes that undercut his scheme of laughter at mere machines. Where his model of rationality itself seems to become mechanistic and closed, however, it too stumbles and becomes susceptible to the organic and bodily contagion of laughter. This idea of laughter as inoculation is exemplified in Laughter by the rituals of the circus.

The simplicity of Bergson's presentation of a theatricalized pratfall is only apparently simple. In aestheticizing the stumbling man on the street into the schtick of a circus clown, Bergson writes: “The first time, the clowns came and went, collided, fell and Stumbling and Legibility 101 jumped up again in a uniformly accelerated rhythm, visibly intent upon affecting a crescendo. And it was more and more to the jumping up again, the rebound, that the attention of the public was attracted” (58-59). It is no longer the very act of falling down that is comic in its implicit inflexibility and intractability; now it is the act of (social) rebounding (or Balzacian rétraction) that has become the source of laughter. The mechanistic and automatic impulse that always lies at the heart of the comic here presents itself not in the pratfall itself, but in a mechanistic and ritualistic self-righting that is at the root of the comic. The “rebound” of the clown mimes the rebound of vital energies that is itself enacted by social laughter: in laughter, a social intelligence also “bounces back.” In effect, the audience laughs at the embodiment and enactment of its own strategy of laughter; it sees in the clown's rebound the image of its own rebounding through laughter. And it laughs. Because bourgeois society cannot admit that something is wrong—that people keep falling—it has to keep them mechanically bouncing back as if full of life.

Given that Bergson has taken laughter as a distinguishing feature of mankind, he quite rightly questions the suitability of the examples he has just given (the man who slips and the man who forgot that his chair had been moved) for “in both cases the result has been brought about by external circumstance. The comic is therefore accidental: it remains so to speak, in superficial contact with the person” (10). He does not draw the radical conclusion of Adorno, for whom stumbling is paradigmatically funny because it reveals that man himself is accidental: that there is, in fact, no human essence. Instead, Bergson retains the traditional distinction of essence and accident to ask of this superficial comic element: “How is it to penetrate within?” (10). He suggests imagining “a certain inborn lack of elasticity of both senses and intelligence” (11). He pictures this lack as a lag in tempo—a kind of synco- pation—and asks us to “imagine a mind always thinking of what it has just done and never of what it is doing, like a song which lags behind its accompaniment” (11). He then acknowledges that “in one sense it might be said that all character is comic, provided we mean by character the ready-made element in our personality, that mechanical element which resembles a piece of clockwork wound up once and for all and capable of working automatically. It is, if you will, that which causes us to imitate ourselves" (150). That which resists is the comic—"all character is comic." In a reversal of the Enlightenment trope of the subject standing on his own two feet—learning to walk—all centeredness, all character, is now suspected of rigidity and eccentricity. All character is now strictly mimetic (if only of itself). As we shall see when we move on to consider the popularization of Delsarte, what is demanded in place of this mechanical body is a new flexibility or elasticity—a fun-gibility that acts as the physical and mental identity structure corresponding to the conditions of exchangeable labor power.

What we seem to be confronting, then, is Agamben’s scenario of a body unable to master its own movements. From the perspective of social modernization, however, this failure of the body is not to be understood as something unfortunate but rather as a necessary surrender of autonomy. The derisive laughter that stumbling evokes should not be understood as an irrepressible explosion of the vital, as Bergson would have us believe, but as a mechanistic, mimetic, and quasi-ritualistic iteration: ha ha ha. "The attitudes, gestures and movements of the human body are laughable in exact proportion as that body reminds us of a mere machine" (31).

In broader terms, this brings us to the conclusion that the very notion of the gesture has itself become problematic and risible insofar as significant gesture might be presumed to maintain some pretense to autonomy. What Bergson corrects in a laughter that might more properly be called derision is a lack of the "flexibility" deriving from the élan vital. Flexibility, however, does not betoken "character" but rather its lack. It is not a spiritual state or an amalgam of skills but a merely physical condition. Thus, habitude—of which any character might consist—is encountered merely as a restraint on flexibility.

The Balzacian formulations have been retained, but to quite different ends: whereas for Balzac habitude connoted a deforming physical action that hampered the development of a character displayed by physical elegance, for Bergson habitude in fact betokens character—yet for this reason it is equally to be renounced. If we think of the movement from Balzac’s promenade—already problematic and dependent on an aestheticization that seemed to recognize its precariousness—through Tourette’s analysis we confront a fact that seems to sit uneasily with the implicit Bergsonian analysis of community. For Bergson, remember, "tension and elasticity are two forces, mutually complementary, which life brings into play . . . Society will therefore be suspicious of all inelasticity of character, of mind, and even of body, because it is the possible sign of a slumbering activity as well as of an activity with separatist tendencies, that inclines to swerve from the common centre round which society gravitates: in short, because it is the sign of an eccentricity" (19). In such a configuration, Tourettism seems a particularly overdetermined historical syndrome. It figures that play of tension and elasticity that has become the very spring of Bergsonian social order. The tics of Tourettism are but one side of the coin, however. The demand for "elasticity" as a physical as well as spiritual condition provides us with an interesting backdrop for reading the growth of gymnastics and physical culture at the end of the century. Whereas the Kérperkultur tradition of naturism and gymnastic dance saw in rhythmical movement the free play of a centered and self-centering subject—élégant in Balzac’s terms—a Bergsonian reading allows us to understand how the privileging of rhythm and elasticity in fact reflected an anti-humanist agenda. Rather than reading flexibility and elasticity as the virtues and competences of a centered subject, we might also read them as foreclosing that minimal fixation or habitude constitutive of character. In such a reading, the demand for flexibility would approximate Arendt’s condition of labor rather than the agonistic intersubjectivity of action or the objectivity of work.

What I wish to indicate in this movement from Rousseau through Balzac to Bergson is a degeneration in the course of the nineteenth century from the social ideal of action to the minimal gesture and, finally, to the loss of gesture and a new ideology of mere "flexibility." This degeneration traces the collapse of an ideal of immanent community, the subsequent emergence of a strictly codified bourgeois subject capable of constructing and manifesting itself "aesthetically" through gesture, and the eventual somatization of that individual body to a condition of mere potentiality. To reiterate the terms employed in chapter 1, what we observe is the emergence of Marsyas as a prototypical post-subjective model of embodiment.

As Bergson notes, even in the gesture—that seeming last retreat of the autonomous body as it seeks to articulate itself within and against a collective: "[society] is confronted with something that makes it uneasy, but only as a symptom—scarcely a threat, at the very most, a gesture. A gesture, therefore, will be its reply. Laughter must be something of this kind, a sort of social gesture" (20). Gestures threaten the hegemony of any universal schema of social legibility, for they mark either the last idiosyncratic retreat of the embattled subject or, as gesticulation, the demise of that subject (Agamben's Tourettism) and the loss of any referent to which the gesture might refer. And yet, in Bergson's presentation, society itself responds through a gesture reduced to the level of ritual: laughter.

In moving now from Bergson to Delsarte—whose immensely popular exercises reinstated the taxonomic project mocked by Balzac—I wish to indicate a process whereby a regimen of bourgeois subjectivity was recon- structed through the rendering legible of gesture. What I will suggest is that both Bergson's and Delsarte's reworkings of stumbling typify a return to a "physiognomic" way of understanding the body's actions. Now, however, the displacement of reading from the face and skull (as in Lavater) onto the entire body betokens a move into the parapractical, into the reading of bodies by their slips. Action has been reduced to the parapractical. As Bergson notes in an abso- lutely key passage:

Instead of concentrating our attention on actions, comedy directs it rather to gestures. By gestures we here mean the attitudes, the movements and even the language by which a mental state expresses itself outwardly without any aim or profit, from no other cause than a kind of inner itching. Gesture, thus defined, is profoundly different from action. Ac- tion is intentional or, at any rate, conscious; gesture slips out unawares, it is automatic. In action, the entire person is engaged; in gesture, an isolated part of the person is expressed, unknown to, or at least apart from, the whole of the personality. In other words, the gesture necessarily problematizes the political and social ideal of action deriving from Arendt. The slippage from action to gesture is a movement from intention to automation—the sign of a new "techno-cracy." A gesture that was legible—physiognomically, in the eighteenth-century tradition—bespoke the persistence of a subject. If stumbling is to be understood as the debacle of the gesture—the fall out of action into gesture as a mode of bodily experience—we face two possibilities. Either the gesture is to be read counterintentionally, as parapraxis; or we need to examine the possibility of a loss of gesture—a complicated spastic body—in which the hegemony of the social is figured by a return to the somatic.

Moreover, if we are to see in the nineteenth century's obsession with gesture and its composition an anxiety regarding the possibility of reading and constructing subjects from their signs, we need also to ask what it means for this parapracti-cal, antiintentional notion of gesture to be resubsumed under a system of legibility and interpretation in the Freudian system. What is the difference between Bergson's observation that "inadvertently to say or do what we have no intention of saying or doing, as a result of inelasticity or momentum, is, as we are aware, one of the main sources of the comic" (112), and Freud's reevaluation according to which we do at the unconscious level "intend" and signify by such lapses?

Could it be that the very system of analysis that seemed to undermine the rational bourgeois subject (psychoanalysis) in fact restituted a system of legibility (a distant relative of Lavater's physiognomy) that refers back to a subject, even after thinkers such as Balzac more radically undercut any such restitution? And if so, is Freud not more closely linked than one might think to such contemporaries as Lombroso and Nordau, who extended such systems of legibility to bodies that seemed, through their stumblings, to have become increasingly illegible?

In tracing the persistence of an epistemology of legibility with regard to the body in the late nineteenth century, few figures can be as important as Delsarte. A failed actor who dedicated his life to cataloging the rhetorical gestures of the body, Delsarte wavered between the taxonomic zeal of an encyclopedic rationalist and the irrational metaphysics of Swedenborg. Although he never collected his thoughts in a definitive work, his system was picked up eagerly by devotees in both Europe and America and made the basis of a series of practical and pragmatic exercises that effectively reduced him to the status of the Dale Carnegie of the nineteenth century. Delsarte's "system" fuses the vitalist and the taxonomic aspects of the nineteenth century's concern with gesture. Many of his supporters and popularizers—particularly in America, where his practical exercises were stressed—accepted that the spiritual pretensions of the system were little more than mystical mumbo jumbo, identifying affinities and homologies across completely unrelated phenomena, from the smallest gesture to the movements of the cosmos. At another level, however—and particularly in its more popular forms—Delsartism served as a dictionary for the reading and writing of bodily signs. Not unlike vulgar attempts to codify Freud in terms of phallic symbols and dreambooks, Delsarte's system too was often reduced to a primer for reading—and, more importantly, writing—the body. Delsartism offered an etiquette, both a labeling and an ethos for a class seeking to naturalize its cultural hegemony through its physical comportment. The ideology of legibility, crucial to social interaction, assumed that one could reconstruct an origin, intentional or otherwise, through reading signs. Delsarte's contribution stemmed from the physiognomic tradition, offering a method of reading moral and spiritual qualities from the body. This method was further developed by Balzac's "Théorie de la démarche," which replaced pseudoscientific rigor with aesthetic élégance, presenting the subject as a cultural construct. Delsarte's approach reconciled a constructivist notion of identity with a centered metaphysics, providing a primer for simulating affect rather than interpreting it.

On one level, Delsarte's work can be reduced to a "how to" of oratory and self-presentation, explaining his popular posthumous success. In An Hour with Delsarte: A Study of Expression, Anna Morgan warns that people form estimates of our character based on our bearing, not just our language or face, but the entire body. The model of reading is parapractical, with the will not controlling the signals being sent or the codes within which they will be read. The function of art, therefore, is to reinsert intentionality into the reading of the body and avoid misreadings. The central paradox of Delsartism lies in its codification of a putatively natural language, exposing it to artifice and allowing for more effective counterfeit. A system that is supposed to unlock the deepest secrets of (human) nature through a homology of spiritual and physical attributes now in fact serves an upwardly mobile social class as a handbook on how to fake it. Thus, there is a deliciously Wildean—yet unintended—cynicism to Anna Morgan's observation that "all gesture, to be natural, must be unconscious, or seem to be so" (62). If everyone knows such and such a gesture connotes such and such a sentiment, it becomes possible to feign and dissemble sentiments through bodily manipulation. Morgan's troubling warning is thus highly ambiguous. If people do, indeed, judge me as "weak, conceited, vain, and vulgar"—and the implication, of course, is that I am really none of these things but just appear to be through bad posture—how is it possible that these readings are, in fact, misreadings?

We are faced with two models of reading: the parapractical and what we might call "the corrective." Either people judge us "weak, conceited, vain, and vulgar" because the body cannot lie (although we might seek to hide such qualities even from ourselves); or they judge us so because the body is sending the wrong signals. If we allow the possibility—implicit in Delsartism—that the body is sending the wrong signals, the whole physiognomic system of homology is broken down and the ideology of natural language is revealed as fantasy. In this sense, then, Delsartism needs to be seen as a resistance to the model of parapraxis: there is no hidden self revealed against one's will, but merely a failure of the will to communicate properly in bodily terms. The opacity of the signifier—the body—distorts social communication.

A study of Delsarte serves as a prophylactic or corrective. Thus, Delsarte performs a double ideological function in the narrative I present here: at one and the same time, he recognizes the failings of the "physiognomic" epistemology while seeking to reinstate it across the entirety of the body. An insistence on the possibility of reading—even if it is only a complaint about ubiquitous misreadings of our body by society—seems even more important than the accuracy of the readings.

Thus, a subject reemerges in a kind of Barthesian "author effect" as the putative origin of the bodily text. In fact, though, Delsarte himself—unlike his commonsensical American devotees—was less than confident that bodily meaning could be traced back to any individual, intentional, authorial subject. As opposed to the didacticism of American Delsartism, the mysticism of Delsarte's own pronouncements offers a second solution to the central paradox: if the body is unable to lie, why is it saying such unpleasant (and, implicitly, untrue) things about me? Rather than reading gesture as the semiotic of an intentional subject, Delsarte derives meaning not from an intentional subject but from a higher being. To push an analogy, where Tourette sees physiological loss of control, Delsarte sees a form of spiritual possession. "What is human reason, that faculty at once of so little avail and yet so precious?" he asks. "The answer," he concludes, "must spring from the study of the phenomena of instinct. . . . If these phenomena are directed by a physiological or a spiritual necessity, a necessity on which instinct is based, I am forced to admit, here, a reason that is not my reason; a superior, infallible reason in the disposition of things; a reason that laughs at my reason, which, in spite of itself, must subsist under pain of falling into absurdity. In other words, misinterpretations arise due to the individual's failure to master a kind of transcendental semiotic that occupies a space both higher than its own empirical subjectivity and more fundamental than its distorted experience of its own body. What I am proposing is that Delsartism marks a failed attempt to make sense of the body by forcing gesture to signify; by grafting onto the body (physiognomic) models of reading. This quest for meaning, however, bypasses the category of the intentional subject to imply a direct link between body and spirit that transcends the intellect. Where Delsarte differs from an analysis of parapraxis, however, is in his refusal to read against the category of the subject and in his displacement of intention into an external objective realm. Building on precisely the parapraxes that seem to beset all gesture, Delsarte posits a more all-embracing metaphysical reasoning in which any absence of meaning can be recuperated. What trace do we find of such a reason? It is a divine yet derisive Bergsonian "reason that laughs at my reason." Laughter serves, as it did in Bergson, to figure intellect. Whereas intellect was folded into biological reflex in Bergson, however, in Delsarte it has become transcendental. Nevertheless, it is not difficult to locate in Delsarte's system social imperatives entirely consonant with Bergson's humiliating social model.

As if anachronistically versed in Bergson, early popularizers of Delsarte in the United States made the question of elasticity—as a spiritual as well as a physical virtue—the basis of their concerns. Elasticity, we may conjecture, is precisely that power of rétraction that can be proven at the moment of stumbling, as well as a capacity for the abstraction of psychic and physical labor. In An Hour with Delsarte, Morgan observes how, "thanks to the genius of Delsarte, we are in possession of means whereby we may obtain muscular strength, but not at the expense of flexibility, which is the basis of grace. He has given us a perfect method by which we may not only obtain freedom and elasticity of action, but one which adds force and meaning to our every moment. It frees the body from all restrictions, and renders it as it should be,—subservient to its master, the will" (8). Morgan superimposes aesthetic and productivist discourses in her concern for pairing muscular strength with flexibility. It is flexibility and "grace"—a fusion of aesthetic and religious qualities—that Delsarte offers as a supplement to the brute strength of the body.

Contrasted with the metaphysical vagaries of Delsarte's own sparse writings, Morgan's presentation is most notable, however, for its commonsensical American reintroduction of the will as the origin of expressive gesture. By reinserting notions of intentionality and personal agency missing from Delsarte himself, Morgan effectively makes of the body a means for the production of a subject. Her linkage of "force and meaning," meanwhile, tacitly recognizes meaning itself as the cultural force productive of those subjects. In Morgan's digest of Delsarte, the body becomes a proving ground for both class and race distinctions to the same degree that the physical becomes the primary trope for the intellectual. Thus, she argues that "muscular flexibility is found in its greatest perfection among intellectual people; and as the intellectual fibre becomes coarse in quality, so the muscles lose their delicacy, and as the muscles gain in mere physical force, they lose in temperamental or flexible strength" (46). The introduction of the category of flexibility is coterminous with an aesthetization of the social order. This privileging of flexibility over muscle reflects both industrial society's need for more fungible workers and fears about the dwindling muscularity of a post-pioneer population. Not surprisingly, this aestheticization of the social order is underpinned by a healthy dose of racism: "As we said of the limbs in the chapter on the vital division of the body, that they attain the greatest perfection of physical strength among the inferior races of men, so in the highly sensitive organisms of the more advanced races, as the quality of the material becomes finer and the quantity is lessened, there is a gradual development toward the perfection of flexible strength" (46). Note the implicit fear that the inferior races are more vital: mental refinement seems necessarily linked to a "lessening" of quantitative vitality and to an increased "flexibility." Beauty and proportion are still white, for the idea that force and vitality are in themselves beautiful has not yet fully taken hold of aesthetic thought.

What, then, are we to make of Morgan's assertion that "as man becomes civilized and refined there is a greater freedom in the movements of the arms and legs, showing a blending of the mental and emotional natures in man" (38)? Has the very ideal of social choreography become a (white) refinement of the dwindling vital force in this American context? Time and again, the aesthetic and the sociological aspects of flexibility are intertwined in Morgan's presentation, the aesthetic discourse serving to legitimate the social demand for flexibility.

Chapter 3 of her study—"Plea for Flexibility" —argues that "we must free the body from the stiffness of individuality by yielding it up to the claims of universality. We must break down error before we can build up truth. This object is attained in physical training by surrendering the body to the discipline of an aesthetical gymnastic drilling" (15-16). Freedom has come to mean the surrender of individuality to "aesthetical gymnastic drilling." As in Bergson, individuality is experienced only as a disabling "stiffness." Meanwhile, the criterion of "error" and "truth" has been conflated with that of bodily grace in a manner entirely opposed to Balzac's paradigmatic distinction between the faux and the gauche.

Whereas Balzac's turn to the aesthetic served to destabilize scientific certainties, positive truth claims now reenter the aesthetic realm. Science and art collaborate in shoring up the subject. The question finally boils down to issues of literacy and legibility: the notion of being read and who gets to read whom. On the one hand Morgan posits a natural language of gesture, claiming that "gesture is the language of nature, and it is comprehensible to people of every tongue; whereas their different forms of speech must be laboriously learned before they can be employed or understood" (58). At the same time, however, she envisages the production of art in terms of genius and a necessary servility to the will of the great man. It is not fanciful, I think, to see the appeal of Delsartism—with all its contradictions—to the specific situation of late-nineteenth-century America. In the land of the melting pot the idea of a universal bodily language is clearly attractive, while at the same time posing a threat to the privilege of the literate classes. We all speak different languages, but there may be a universal language of the body that would be democratic. In the writings of figures such as Lombroso and Nordau—who sought to harness the physiognomic structure of homology derived from Lavater to the pseudosciences of eugenics and social Darwinism—it was primarily a question of reading the criminal classes. In America, there arises now the frightening utopia of a universal legibility. The universal code is everywhere and nowhere, for there is, finally, no subject as referent outside the regime of legibility itself. In Morgan, this has become the possibility of panopticism: what if one were always being read; if every gesture could be read without our knowledge or volition?

Delsartism may have originated in observations and interpretations of gesture—in "reading"—but as a practice, it was obsessed with being read or, more precisely, being misread. "The pupil's attention," Morgan writes, "should be directed to the study of himself as the first step to a knowledge of others, and an assistance to him in observing nature and studying art" (10). Social existence becomes a form of proofreading, correcting the bodily errors that might obscure our legibility. Morgan's bodies have to be readers and writers at the same time, for fear that the signs be unclear or open to misinterpretation.

"The study of the attitudes of the head and those of all parts of the body, especially the various expressions of the eye, nose, and mouth, should be carefully practiced before a mirror. Most people [112] consult their mirrors for the single purpose of seeing their attractiveness; we should study them for the purpose of seeing ourselves as others see us" (97-98). This imposition of the task of self-reading means that in a literate democracy, self-alienation is inevitable. Individuals are obliged to become the first readers of their own bodily texts to police the possibilities of their interpretations.

Moreover, this regime of reading—for fear of being misread—is explicitly opposed to an alternative aesthetic concern with "attractiveness." Balzac's ironically scientific treatise on elegance has now shed all irony, and as Delsarte himself proclaims, "aesthetics, henceforward disengaged from all conjecture, will truly be constituted under the severe forms of a positive science" (57). The distinct epistemologies of the faux and the gauche will now merge: performance and textuality become one.

While it is not my aim to enter into the metaphysics of Delsartism, arcane as it is, it is nevertheless important to note the way in which the central value in his system is ascribed to "Being," described by Anna Morgan as a synthesis of "the soul and body." Being needs to be understood as an indivisible vital unit rather than as a simple reconciliation of the traditional metaphysical binaries of body and soul. It is through a consideration of semiosis that Morgan effects this shift. Describing the study of Delsarte as the study of "expression," she goes on to conclude that expression is "the Sign of the Being." By way of example, and as an introduction to Delsarte's triune system of vital, emotive, and mental forces, Morgan offers the following as examples of signs: the response to a question (mental sign); the cry of pain at being pricked with a pin (vital sign); and the cry of grief at learning bad news (emotive sign). To demonstrate the importance of the unity of body and soul in the definition of the sign, she points out that a dead body, when pricked, will not cry out because it lacks Being. Being, then, is a category that anticipates Bergsonian vitalism. It is notable that all of Morgan's examples of sign appear, at first glance, to be indexical in the Peircean sense—each of them caused by the thing of which they are the sign. But in fact, the signified of the answer is not the question; nor is the signified of the cry the pinprick. Morgan is quite precise when she argues that expression is "the Sign of the Being," for what her examples signify is the fact that the body is a signifying medium. It is only the body as a conductor of spiritual or physical stimuli that makes such signs possible. "Being" is the ability to produce signs—no more, no less.

In describing her pedagogical method, Morgan reconstructs a conversation with a pupil: "Now, then, we have said that expression is a sign of the being. I will ask you, Mr. B., to exemplify or apply that definition in your own person by some action." Mr. B. reflects for an instant, during an impressive silence, and then admits that he is unable to do so, at the same time shifting in his seat and crossing his legs with embarrassment in his manner. "Why did you shift so in your seat and cross your legs when you replied?" "Well," he continues, more confused than ever, "I scarcely know; I supposed it's because I was a little nervous." "Exactly, because you were a little nervous; you are not in the habit, I see, of analyzing these signs of your being; you answered my question unconsciously." (35)

Whereas a reading of this exchange as a parapraxis would assume that there was something the student wished to hide—either from himself or from his teacher—for Morgan, the body simply wishes to keep open dialog even when the intellect is incapable of providing the required response. The student "scarcely knows" but comes to know through a reading of his own body.

Morgan's work represented a first wave of Delsartism in America, deriving from the work of Steele Mackay, who not only came to dominate the reception and propagation of Delsarte's work on that continent but who was, in fact, the first truly to systematize the master's work. To locate the Delsartian inheritance in a distinctly American social choreography, however, would require examining the writings and teaching of Genevieve Stebbins. In reading her work, the Delsarte System of Expression, one is immediately struck by the simplifications that have taken place, even when compared to Morgan's presentation of Delsarte. Now, the value of Delsartism has been isolated: "There are two sides only to Delsarte's System, in spite of the fact that he built everything upon threes. These are the physical and the metaphysical. One is practical and valuable; the other is of doubtful use to any but the lover of metaphysical abstractions."** The concept of Being that, despite its nebulousness, made Morgan's work so interesting has been displaced by precisely the metaphysical binarisms that Delsartism otherwise sought to undo. Moreover, if we recall the epistemological uncertainty deriving from Balzac's balancing act between the scientist and the madman, in the work of Stebbins—the most influential popularizer of Delsarte and the most directly engaged in reflections on dance that helped shape the work of early modern dance pioneers—this ambiguity has been definitively resolved: "This is an age of formulation. In the history of the propagation of Delsartism, we see a culture weary of productive activity, shunning the performative to set down a textual ledger of bodily gesture. Stebbins, sensitive to the charge that Delsartism is imprecise and mystificatory, resorts to a positivism that discards the Swedenborgian hermeticism of most of Delsarte's own pronouncements. By establishing strict discursive parameters, she effects a shift away from Delsarte's own anatomistic conception of science and sees the very principle of discursive rationalization itself as the principle of positivism. In other words, sociology becomes the paradigm of science insofar as it is capable of plotting the relations between other sciences. Stebbins reduces Delsarte to a physiognomic system of homology.

Whereas Morgan's semiotic was essentially indexical in its presentation of signs caused by the things they represented, Stebbins is resolutely iconic in her insistence on trans-historical and transcendental homologies. For example, she "credit[s] the French master with being the first in modern times to formulate a fixed principle or law that stands indisputable and unmovable in its triune manifestation in the art of human expression. This fixed principle is the great Law of Correspondance, a law almost as old as man... 'God created man in his own image' " (390).

Precisely because it seeks to retain a notion of necessary causality while rejecting anything but what Althusser would subsequently call "expressive causality," Stebbins's Delsartism has to posit a purely internal cause: the divine, or nature. "All outward forms being but manifestations of an internal cause, between which there was a co-necessity," she writes, there must be "a perfect correspondence uniting cause and effect" (391). The stumble that in Balzac made apparent that power of rétraction on which all elegance is based—and which in Bergson became the principle of Stumbling and Legibility 115 flexibility—has now been replaced by a rigidified insistence on the "fixed" and the "unmovable."

What we have is a dialectical play between flexibility at the level of the social subject betokening a transcendent "fixed principle" at the level of the transcendental subject; a coalescence, that is, of metaphysics and social fungibility. Recalling Agamben's description of Tourettism as "a movement . . . interrupted and sent awry by uncontrollable jerkings and shudderings whereby the muscles seem to dance (chorea) quite independent of any motor purpose" (136), we begin, I think, to appreciate the historical significance of Delsartism. In effect, what we encounter at the end of the nineteenth century are coexistent stages in the decomposition of reading strategies. Dance, as chorea, figures a semiosis "independent of any motor purpose"—in other words, a recognition of the "non-motivated" nature of the sign. At the same time, however, a symptomatic reading of Tourettism posits a causality that reestablishes both a somatic and a semiotic "motivation." Thus, any diagnosis of Tourettism effectively undercuts the philosophical and linguistic presuppositions of the condition itself. Stebbins, meanwhile, can be seen as moving in the opposite direction. Starting from a belief in expression as semiotically motivated—either as index (“cause and effect”) or as icon (“correspondence”)—her work of popularization and standardization nevertheless pushes the body in the direction of the non-motivated sign, the conventional symbol. It is, perhaps, Morgan—in a no-man’s-land between the two—who retains the most interesting possibilities.

Notably, in attempting to generate his semiotics by means of a physiological rather than sociological motor, Delsarte finally makes his breakthrough in the Paris morgue. “Dead bodies only attracted me,” he writes, with a rather necrophiliac turn of phrase, “when they were—if not dissected—at least flayed” (401). In this presentation, we encounter, in all its paradoxicality, that Marsyan impulse outlined in our consideration of Ruskin, Morris, and Wilde. For Marsyas—now a flayed body on the mortuary slab—represents a liberation of vital human forces that are themselves destructive of any delimitable human subjectivity.

If dissection is the most obvious image of an attack on the bodily integrity of the subject, then flaying—the laying bare of the body’s vital and muscular motor—is no less destructive. One is reminded of the definition of touch from the Encyclopédie that serves as epigraph to this chapter. Touch is the sense that establishes us as something other than 116 Social Choreography “automatons that have been dismantled and destroyed.”** The skin—that which has been stripped from the flayed body—is the very organ of the tactile.

At the point where vital forces are revered as mere principles rather than as embodied historical realities, respect for both bodies and subjects ceases. For Delsarte, the possibility of reading bodies semiotically—and thereby of fathoming the vital nexus of “motivation”—paradoxically exists only in the moment of death. “I sought in some portion of the body, common to all,” he explains, “a form or sign invariably found in all... . The hand furnished me that sign and responded fully to my question. I noticed, in fact, that in all these corpses the thumb exhibited a singular attitude. ... Such persistence in the same fact could not allow of a shadow of doubt; I possessed the sign-language of death, the semiotics of the dead” (404; italics mine). Delsarte’s project of semiotics is grounded, finally, in the corpse. Conspicuously, the rétraction that signified life in Balzac has here become a death spasm, an “adduction or attraction inward” (404) of the thumb that he encounters in all corpses and that unlocks for him the complementary gestures of vitality.

We have finally arrived at that moment in modernity where the most energetic and vital of movements resemble the final spasm or paroxysm of death. At the heart of Delsartian vitalism is a deathly semiotic. This extends to Delsarte himself as an observer at the morgue. Like the spectator of a Bergsonian pratfall, he avows that “the emotion which such a sight would have caused me under any other circumstances was absolutely null at this moment; close attention dulled all feeling in me” (405). The meeting of the aesthetic investigator and the corpse of Marsyas dramatizes a lack of sensation, an absence of “tact”—with only the retracted thumb as the signifier of a final deathly movement.

At the end of the nineteenth century—before, that is, the point when vitalism had been popularized as a dominant philosophical and ideological current within modernity—Delsartism represented one effort to recontain bodily and semiotic instability—“stumbling”—in a system that was itself nevertheless informed by vitalist presuppositions. As a social phenomenon, Delsartism seeks both to celebrate and contain the semiotic profligacy of the body; to find immanent bodily meaning that can serve as the basis of a social textbook. Taking it as a primer for a new social "flexibility," we need to note for the sake of political critique that its end and origin is the corpse.

"America Makes Me Sick!" NATIONALISM, RACE, GENDER, AND HYSTERIA

All of representation is based on a making-present—of the nonpresent and so on. ... Thus the assumption—Perpetual Peace is already here—God is among us—America is here or nowhere—the Golden Age is upon us—we are magicians—we are moral and so on.—Novalis, Fichte Studies

In this chapter, I focus on Isadora Duncan in order to consider the cultural significance of dance as a form of political and national embodiment at the beginning of the twentieth century. My consideration of Duncan here will be prefaced by a reconstruction of some of the critical commonplaces that derived from and, in turn, helped shape the discourse and ideology of modern dance. By drawing on the writings of modern dance's early proselytizers in the United States, I argue for the emergence of a new aesthetic order in the early twentieth century, one in which choreography acquired an important—indeed, predominant—role as the privileged form of what we might call a "postliterate" culture.

I seek, then, not simply to shift along the aesthetic continuum from a consideration of social choreography to a consideration of dance in the more aesthetic sense, but rather to highlight a moment when the aesthetic realm acquired a particular importance in the resolution of essentially non-aesthetic problems of political self-representation in modern democracy.

To talk of postliterate cultures is by no means to suggest that ideals of cultural literacy as the measure of national identity had been lost. By this time, the establishment of public schooling in leading industrial nations had clearly enshrined literacy as a preeminent cultural and civic virtue. Significantly, Isadora Duncan herself quite explicitly acknowledged philosophers and writers as her primary dancing masters.

What I suggest here instead is an ideological adjustment whereby the ideals of prelapsarian language and community that had always informed Enlightenment thought (for example, Rousseau's genealogy of gesture discussed in the preceding chapter) sought and found in dance some adequate artistic expression. I call the era post-literate only to the extent that dance was thought to offer the possibility of a more "immediate" cultural expression unadulterated by the grammatical and formal demands of linguistically mediated "textual" cultures.

More specifically, here I am interested in how this realization of a certain linguistic fantasy served at the same time to complete two other logical structures. First, aesthetic theory's traditional division of plastic and musical arts would be overcome in dance. In the realm of cultural politics, meanwhile, a nation—America—would finally find its adequate aesthetic expression in dance. By overlaying these three ideological structures—language, aesthetics, and politics—I aim not to provide concrete historical context but rather to suggest a third way for thinking about historical determination with respect to cultural phenomena. Effectively, I am suggesting a structure of overdetermination in which shifts in the aesthetic order are fully explicable neither with respect to external historical determinants nor in terms of their own, wholly self-determining logic. 

Only those forms and genres that at the same time offer solutions to other, deeper, ideological problems will emerge from the variety of cultural possibilities as the characteristic aesthetic expression of a given era. In other words, I will argue that the immanent logic of aesthetic development generates solutions to its own problems that might then be picked up as models for the resolution of ideological conflicts outside the aesthetic realm. That these "aesthetic" solutions in turn reflect the conditions of the society that produces them goes without saying. The process is not monodirectional, however, and the aesthetic realm—as in the case of dance at the beginning of the twentieth century—is capable of producing forms of social resolution unprecedented in the other political and ideological realms.

I will begin my consideration of the postliterate cultural formation with a quote from John Martin, the hugely influential dance critic of early American modernism. In his seminal study America Dancing: The Background and Personalities of the Modern Dance Martin observes: "In the present period of civilization an excessive evaluation is placed upon literacy ... Nothing has meaning until it is translated into words; there is no substance in an emotional reaction, no validity in a muscular response; there is only language" (87-88). Martin's mistrust in literacy is in fact a mistrust in the translations and mediations necessary to move from the body to text. In the place of such translation Martin develops a notion of immediate bodily communication, or kinaesthesia, that would become a crucial cornerstone of modern dance theory. Kinaesthesia serves as that language that does not require translation—a language without positive, static terms; a language in which the Saussurian "negative relations" that create meaning have been positively rendered material and organic.

By cloaking the problem of translation as an attack on literacy, Martin contrasts his new aesthetic ideal to those of the nineteenth century, for which music was the privileged form of postliteracy—or, rather, the model toward which language, in the form of poetry, was supposed to tend. Martin contrasts dance, America's new contribution to the history of aesthetic forms, to music, the privileged, nonmimetic genre of late-nineteenth-century postromanticism and aestheticism. Reversing the commonplace that poetry was to aspire to the self-enclosing condition of music, he argues that music itself still partakes of a fundamentally verbal/poetic episteme: "Music, with its method of notation and its elaborate fabrications of systems and codes . . . is reducible to paper and ink, those noble instruments of literacy ... The dance, poor wretch, handed down from generation to generation by imitation, if at all, illiterate, unrecordable, depends for its existence upon the vulgar exertions of the body, that vile prison in which the sin of Adam has encased man's spirit" (AD 94). Martin exemplifies in extreme form an antipathy toward a culture of literacy that is embedded in mimesis. Paradoxically, however, it is a mimetically choreographed moment ("handed down from generation to generation by imitation") that lifts dance out of the representational, mimetic episteme encoded in writing. Furthermore, the fantasy of what I have been calling prelapsarian language is figured as the very opposite—as the condition of dance in "that vile prison in which the sin of Adam has encased man's spirit." Martin is attempting to resurrect a prelapsarian language in a postlapsarian body. In geopolitical terms, he wishes to establish an authentic post-literate, non-translated culture in America, the land of assimilation and cultural translation. It might be tempting to see in Martin no more than a classic case of that logocentrism to which a couple of decades of theory have rendered us so alert: thus we encounter a familiar opposition to the letter, to writing and notation—and a privileging of performance or even an embodied "natural language." In this vein, for example, Martin writes that "it is safe to say that when any art form has got itself to the point where it can be translated into words, it is dead as an art form. (By 'words,' of course, one means in this place to imply the medium of intellectual factualism, and not in any sense the stuff, though it happens to have the literary designation of words, by which poetry projects its meaning)." Although he is quick to explain that he intends no attack on poetry per se, such an attack seems implicit in his project. At the very least it is clear that for Martin dance is an attack on the very episteme of interpretive "literacy" that had thus far delineated national cultures.

This marks a crucial shift from prevailing nineteenth-century assumptions about national culture that privileged a literary heritage and a shared language as the precondition of nationhood and that took academic shape in philology and anthropology. Martin's championing of the body against literacy is a championing of one conception of national culture over and against another. How, then, did American culture as bodied forth in dance understand itself as heir to a cultural history whose privileged forms it tended to discard? In other words—reversing the terms in which the question is traditionally posed in considerations of modernism—how did dance understand itself in relation to poetry?

This question of literacy and embodiment is crucial, as we shall see, to understanding Isadora Duncan and the other pioneers of modern dance. In her 1927 essay "Danc-ing in Relation to Religion and Love" —an essay that allows us to think the relation of religion to rhetoric, or of the religious to the aesthetic— Duncan presages that antipathy to the discursive that we have already noted in Martin. "People," she writes, "have an entirely false concep-tion of the importance of words in comparison with other modes of expression, just as potent as words." What does it mean to envisage a country dancing as Duncan—in the grip of a Whitmanian enthusiasm—does? To what extent and in what way can dance "embody" nation? And what is the significance of the shift from predominantly literary and philological figurations of cultural nationhood in the nineteenth century to a Whitmanian singing and, finally, to the performances of figures such as Duncan? Of course, the division of literate and postliterate is highly schematic: those European nations that most clearly exemplify high literate cultures often privileged a romanticized "performative" bardic culture and oral tradition in constructing their literary genealogies. Their logocentrism was always suspicious of the textual. But this is the point. The shift from Europe to America and from literate to postliterate responds to anxieties about the possibility of any immanent self-defining cultural unity. Martin's linkage of the verbal to translation foregrounds problems inherent within the episteme of literacy (i.e., the idea of a prelapsarian language in a postlapsarian body). 

e., the problems faced by any logocentrism). To hypothesize any such shift—from literature to dance—in the aestheticization of nationhood is to take cog- nizance also of a shift from representation to performance. The nation is no longer something already existing that needs only to be repre- sented in language and literature: it is something that needs to be actively and performatively called forth in the dance. The nation has, for what I loosely term a “literate” culture, the status of a referent. With the shift to what I tentatively call the postliterate it acquires the status of something to be invoked and produced through performance. Thus, whereas literary representations of nationhood might at least notion- ally be held up as “true” or “false” representations—and judged accord- ingly—the danger of the new performative paradigm was that it might not simply mis-represent, but mis-beget the nation. The privileging of dance as a national cultural form brought with it the danger of a miscreant—or, more specifically, a miscegenated—culture. If America cannot close itself around a referent, it must perform its act of self- definition. Interestingly, Whitman’s singing and Duncan’s dancing are both forms that leave no artifact as trace—that do not even produce a referent. Thus, the nation becomes a work in progress and nationality 122 Social Choreography is oriented not toward the uncovering of a hidden past referent but toward the future. Nationhood becomes messianic. In the words of Goethe’s Wilhelm Meister, quoted by Novalis in this chapter’s epigraph, the very status of American nationhood differs from that of other nations: “America is here or nowhere” —it is a per- petually present state, an ideology of perpetual presence. Thus, I will argue here that a certain narrative of aesthetic discovery was modeled on a narrative of the discovery of America, and I will present what I take to be some of the more important aesthetico-political conse- quences of such parallels. In looking at the specific social choreogra- phies constituted through American modern dance, I wish to take liter- ally this notion of a “shift” (from representation to performance) and to examine the narrative of aesthetic discovery whereby the perpetual “here” that is America is located. Obviously the possibility of a non- mimetic self-performative identity—implicit in the shift from liter- ate to performative cultures—was particularly attractive to a nation grounded in the ideology of self-creation, a perpetually young nation sentimentally oriented toward the future rather than toward the repre- sentation of its past. Notwithstanding the importance of Germany in twentieth-century dance history, I will argue that the hegemony of a certain formalism in modern dance reflects America’s desire to figure itself through dance not as one nation with its own characteristic aes- thetic demands, but as the locus of both a historical and an aesthetic realization of nation and art in their very essence. In “America” a cer- tain understanding of dance’s very preconditions is completed as an aesthetic trope for a concomitant end of history. The “here or nowhere” of Goethe’s utopian vision exemplifies a cer- tain ideology of presence that has become fixed and representable in a specific historical and geopolitical location: America. To identify the utopian with America is to suggest a specific geopolitical location for the realization and liquidation of ideology. I will be arguing that the “end of ideology”—linked, necessarily, to the surpassing of language that both Martin and Duncan see as the task of dance—is the American form of ideology par excellence. Both Martin and Duncan will renarrate the historical and aesthetic "discovery" of America and link it to what Martin calls "the heresy of an American art" (AD 21). The term itself—"heresy"—is, of course, significant; Martin, like many others, links this notion of heresy to a Protestant American tradition, invoking "America Makes Me Sick!" 123 images of Puritan exiles committed to the rigors of their art no less than their ancestors were to the rigors of their religion. As the conflation of aesthetic and moral Puritanism progressed (suffering for one's art), it would even become possible to think of Isadora Duncan—whose relationship to any moral Puritanism was highly complex and ambiguous, to say the least—as a Puritan figure.

In the debate in question, Puritanism figured both a sublime, romantic desire for pure form (Puritan and Protestant, indeed, in its iconoclastic opposition to mimesis) and the possibility of rational, classical order. Puritanism needs to be thought in aesthetic terms in both a formal and a substantive way. As the pursuit of pure form it eschews the body for abstraction—or, rather, understands the body itself as an abstract and grammatical articulation. As an ideology of substantive physical and moral purity, however, it calls for the display and purification of the body. This, I will argue, poses a dilemma in any understanding of American modernism—a set of forces pulling in opposing directions, toward abstraction on the one hand and toward the figuration of a (purified or aestheticized) body on the other—between, that is, the representation and figuration of purity and the iconoclastic purification "from" all representation. This tension is one that informed the political, religious, and aesthetic discourse for the entire course of Duncan's career.

According to Ann Daly: "Duncan projected an arc between late nineteenth-century romanticism and the secular collectivism of the 1930s: she shifted between these two realms and facilitated the transition, though she never completed the leap."¹² The paradox confronting those who sought a characteristically "American" cultural constellation lay in a certain ideological commitment to the oppositional notion of "heresy." To be American is to be a heretic, but the very structure of heresy is to take issue with any such identity. The paradox of American "heresy" is that it proves itself American even as it proclaims itself a heretic against all that is American—this is, indeed, the structuring paradox both of this chapter and of Isadora Duncan's own ambiguity toward her nationality. As Daly again points out: "Despite—or because of—her self-imposed exile (she left for Europe in 1899, at the age of twenty-two) Duncan was fundamentally informed by the idea, if not the reality, of her homeland"ⁱⁱ. Such a contrarian but sentimental relation to one's homeland is not, indeed, that unusual, but Duncan's "progressivist" ideology makes the final turn into reactionary and racist thinking precisely at the point when the division between "the idea" and "the reality" is erased; that is, at the point where her discourse is informed by a certain "idea of the reality" of America. This stage in Duncan's thought is clearly marked by the emergence of tropes of "reality"—geography and race, specifically—in her later writings. I will begin here by establishing what early dance pioneers in America understood to be the project of a heretical American choreography. "According to Martin, 'the basic practice of real internationalism, whether in art or any other medium, involves the recognition of individual divergences, a respect for their values, and a willingness to pool these values in a common purpose' (AD 26). This model does not really hold for American dance as it would for German opera or Greek tragedy, however. For whereas these other 'national' art forms become general by being absolutely specific in national-cultural terms (even German opera, although musical, depends on a regime of national language), American dance becomes specific and American by being general—by literally incorporating the possibility of translation as something passed from body to body rather than through language. It is the raw material of this American art form, the body, that will render it universal. Pure matter becomes the placeholder for, and then the actualization of, pure spirit. Herein lies the grave political danger that underpins the discourse of modern dance in its early years both in America and in Germany: the conflation of eugenics and pure reason.

Where other nations attain some level of universality by virtue of giving lasting aesthetic expression to their national specificity (opera, or tragedy), America, we are told, discovers its specificity only through a fathoming of the universal (in dance). In other words, the formal self-completion of dance parallels the historical self-awareness of 'America.' America is not only the medium for the realization of humanity: humanity is the medium for the realization of America. That America's self-actualization will mark not a coming to speech but a movement beyond language is vital, for what makes American dance general is its movement beyond any need for translation, its very physical immanence.

Martin generally insists that 'the whole idea of national art is, of course, abysmal nonsense' (AD 32). For him, art neither reflects nor represents a national essence in its purely formal principles: forms are geopolitically neutral, predicated as they are—in the case of dance—on the articulation of a body figured as preliterate. The discovery of a 'prelinguistic language,' however, is something that Martin will link to a specifically American experimentation in dance. In his presentation, American modern dance pioneers demonstrate their national sensibilities in the very movement beyond nationalism, in their realization of a formalism emptied out of ideological content. Martin sees America as the proving ground for an art that will not simply reflect but shape a nation.

The myth of American self-actualization through art and the myth of the arts' own systematic self-reconciliation (i.e., the overcoming of the schism between musical and plastic arts in dance) are linked in such a way as to suggest a historical and aesthetic idea of manifest destiny. History can in fact be located—in America—in the moment of its completion: just as time folds into space in dance, history will fold into America. As we shall see, Martin is led to posit a universalism of the body that runs counter to a secondary critique of aesthetic and political colonialism in his work. It is precisely the attempt not to sink into chauvinism that leads Martin instead into sublative and totalizing conceptions of America as, quite literally, a utopian 'end of history.' How can we have an American art and yet resist narrow nationalism? Not unreasonably, Martin observes how 'it is even permissible in the most orthodox circles to speak of Greek tragedy, Italian primitives, German opera, Russian ballet. They are no less international or universal, apparently, for being associated with specific peoples. But let some temerarious soul venture to mention American dance" (AD 29). The problem, however, comes when we consider the specific aesthetic form—dance—that will constitute this American heresy. Unlike all the other forms he cites, Martin ascribes to dance a specific quality: natural language. He uses the term metakinesis to describe what would subsequently come to be known in dance theory as kinaesthesia—the natural sympathy of one body for the movements of another. According to this notion, "when we see a human body moving, we see movement which is potentially producible by any human body and therefore by our own; through kinesthetic sympathy we actually reproduce it vicariously in our present muscular experience" (AD 117).

The very terms in which Martin insists on the cultural specificity of aesthetic forms assigns a particular importance to dance and, consequently, to America: "Because man, wherever he lives, gives the first expression to all his emotional experiences in terms of the movement of a body which, in spite of great variety, is fundamentally the same everywhere, it is possible for men of different cultures to respond in a measure to each other's arts; but because the objects which inspire these emotional experiences depend so largely on local conditions, it is impossible for men of different cultures to respond to each other's art in equal measure" (AD 27-28).

The ideological slippage in Martin's argument—the slippage that allows him to figure kinaesthesia as, in effect, a natural and prelinguistic language—is the erasure of the mimetic. Although metakinesis is an experience in which "we actually reproduce" (i.e., a mimetic and secondary reproduction), it is still a "present muscular experience." In other words, it is a performative reenactment rather than a denotative re-production. Nevertheless, Martin presents metakinesis in the form of a hermeneutic, calling it a sixth sense in which "what we see we interpret in terms of our own muscular experience" (AD 113). Metakinesis turns the body into a producer of interpretations. Thus it never escapes the regime of literacy and representation, despite the critic's claims to the contrary.

In defining a specific form for his American heresy, Martin's argument runs roughly as follows: cultural phenomena are always limited and determined to the extent that they are articulated in a national idiom (Greek sculpture, Italian opera, etc.). This does not necessarily curtail their ability to function beyond national and historical limits and to address all of humanity: on the contrary, it demonstrates the embeddedness of man himself in history. The general is not the opposite of the specific but rather its sublation: the general must acknowledge its relation to specificity. We can be spoken to only by those whose historical inability to address us in our own language resonates with our perception of our own historical limits. Dance, however, is different. In the passage cited above, Martin distinguishes between the dance medium (the body, "fundamentally the same everywhere") and the "matter" of dance ("emotional experiences depend[ent] so largely on local conditions"). In the case of Greek sculpture, the body has been reduced to matter rather than medium: almost paradoxically, the living thing (the body) becomes the object of a representation and an object (stone) becomes the living medium of communication. The trans-historical, transcultural element is missing from the body itself as medium — it is the stone that perdures and “speaks” across time. Thus, the general validity of Greek culture derives from a specificity symbolized by the passage through a stone that resists any transubstantiation. The same will not be true of dance as a specifically American form. Martin envisages the body as medium rather than material when it comes to American dance, while recognizing that “any theory of dance that attempts to make use of the body as an instrument of pure design is doomed to failure for the body is of all possible instruments the least removable from the associations of experience” (AD 92). In other words, despite its orientation toward production and performance rather than reference, purely abstract dance is never possible because the medium itself — the human body — functions as a trace of the fore-closed figure of the specific.

Distinguishing American dance from German ideals of absolute dance, Martin notes of the former that “it has never confined itself, even in its most experimental period, to absolute-ness. Indeed, it could not do so from its very nature, for the movement of the human body is inevitably associated with experience and cannot be made into an abstraction of line and form under any circumstances” (AD 66). Any absolute that cannot account for the specificity of bodies is not absolute at all but rather “confined.” The putative German commitment to the absolute renders their aesthetic nationalism merely abstract, as opposed to an American identity that is historically realized and is itself, indeed, a “realization” of history.

For Martin, dance is the closest thing to a natural language of the body, and it passes universally from body to body through “association” rather than translation. Consequently, to posit dance as the American art is to posit America as the locus of humanity’s self-actualization. What is “specifically” American, in other words, is America’s passage — through the specific medium of the dancing body — beyond historical specificity. Martin’s materialist idealism is inflected by an idealist materialism: the body becomes the locus of humanity beyond national cultural limitations.

What this means, of course, is that America — for which dance is a natural and adequate aesthetic expression — takes as its specificity the general itself: humanity. While modern dance will be American, its very physicality will make it international. Again, the political implications are troubling; the moral purification of mankind can potentially be reduced to a eugenic project.

What is it about dance that will make it peculiarly suited to the expression of “America”? To answer this question, of course, is to confront “America” as something other than an empty signifier and to acknowledge a cultural or historical specificity that aligns it with dance rather than with some other form. The crucial ideological element in establishing this link is puritanism — which, in the debates around modern dance, slowly transmutes from a religious to an aesthetic creed. Martin’s early invocation of “the sin of Adam” makes it clear that puritanism is an unconscious as well as a conscious trope in his argument. A puritan consciousness of that sin implies, for Martin, a commitment to the limitations of the body. Dance expresses a condition of worldliness opposed to metaphysical otherworldliness and acknowledges man’s fallen nature. Martin's dilemma lies in his desire to transcend the fallen nature of American dance and his recognition of the value that comes from embodiment. America's sense of self is rooted in a confrontation with the universality of the body, as well as the spiritual experience of the lapsarian body. Martin's conception of American dance is marked by two puritanisms: the aesthetic and the moral. These conflicting viewpoints make it difficult for Martin to define American dance.

Martin considers the claim of an indigenous American art form as heresy, and this heresy is the essence of what it means to be an American. The rhetorical logic of this heresy dictates that the claim of an American form is true, as long as it is deemed heretical. Martin argues that the "outstanding American trait, anti-authoritarianism" is exemplified by the dance of Isadora, which was "anti-authoritarian in that it rejected all set formulations of movement codes, functional in that it dealt with problems of human emotion instead of with the plight of distraught butterflies, democratic in that it took the dance away from a little cult of initiates and urged everyone to practice it" (AD 41).

Martin sees the heretical "anti-authoritarianism" as demanding the rejection of "all set formulations of movement codes" and the expression of human emotion rather than the representation of an external referent. America's contribution to dance stresses a "functional" element that demands a change of thematic. It is still mimetic, as its themes are now substantive.

With regard to the historical force of American aesthetic and political heresy, Martin argues that "the momentous overthrows of authoritarianism which are resisted by armed force" are presaged by "skirmishes of smaller dimension which prepare the ground for greater contests" (AD 58). He takes as an example the "ragtime uproar of 1910 and thereabouts," as if seeing in the new frenetic choreography the harbinger of a coming revolution. Dance, in other words, no longer represents a historical achievement, but nor is it yet caught in the ahistorical synchronicity of formal self-reference: its referential function is anticipatory. Dance presages and projects the future. Unlike other characteristic national art forms, American dance will serve not to reflect an already established cultural consciousness, nor to lead a people to recognize itself, but, in fact, to produce and bring about the national consciousness. The act of presaging, however, is not only temporal but also geographical: America will represent the future to Europe through dance. Most explicit in such claims was Martin, with his tendency to consider Duncan alongside the popular dance crazes that swept the world just before World War I. In this conflation—which would have horrified Duncan, of course—he accurately reflected European responses to American dance imports, which did, indeed, tend to blur the boundaries between high and low culture—carried away, as they so often were, by the vigor of the new forms.

Keeping in mind Schiller's presentation of the English dance as a model of harmonious social order, it is clear that by the turn of the twentieth century the prevalent ideal of social choreography had changed. Martin notes how the colonial boot is now on the other foot: "Europe is even now generally shocked at the American idea of ballroom dancing; it is so unstandardized, so haphazard... Actually its real claim 130 Social Choreography to distinction is its spontaneousness . . . The beautifully behaved dancer of, say, the English ballroom has really no idea what a genuinely creative sport dancing can be when it is done in the best American style" (AD 60).

The contrast with Schiller could scarcely be more striking; Schillerian Spiel has now been rationalized as sport. More important, though, the points Martin makes with regard to Duncan—her antiauthoritarianism, her functionalism, her democratic impulses—prove, in his presentation, to be essentially true of dance per se. In realizing a specifically American form of dance, Duncan implicitly brings to its realization dance tout court. Because dance is a performative rather than representational and denotative form, Martin will argue, "there is no alphabet of movement, no set of symbols passed on by convention of authorities" (AD 74).

Again, there is the attack on the textual, literate culture: systems of writing and notation are linked explicitly to authority whereas performance is implicitly aligned with an immanent national truth. This paradoxically logocentric gesture claims for America, through dance, a direct access to truth denied those cultures whose self-expression is still grounded in text—German philology for example. The very ephemeral nature of dance seems to resist both linguistic codification ("alpha- bet" and "symbols") and "convention of authorities." If, in Martin's presentation, Duncan's dance is unruly, it thereby approaches dance's pure form, which must always be unruled and unruly—resistant to the "authority" of written notation.

In adapting dance to America, Martin implies, Duncan in fact reveals something fundamental about it—its antiauthoritarian resistance to denotation and codification (or writing). Martin's consideration of the "heresy of an American art" is further couched in terms of a sophisticated critique of cultural imperialism and colonization. The rhetorical logic may be reconstructed as follows: "The whole idea of national art is, of course, abysmal nonsense" (AD 32), and even if it were not, America, as a colony, has been deprived of the right to lay claim to self-identity through art. The claims of America—any claims made in the name of America—are necessarily the claims of a heretic. To embrace one's identity as an American, therefore, one must first pass through a rejection of identity itself as a culturally coherent totality. Dance—as a preparatory and performative rather than denotative art form—is itself heretical: it invokes and yet defers identity as something tentative in need of being produced rather than something self-evident in need only of finding adequate representational form. Martin posits a natural affinity between the messianic mode of identity in postcolonial America and the performativity of dance. He asks, "How does one apportion international art in this system of aesthetic imperialism?" (AD 34). Martin's formulations and rejected possibilities reveal his nuanced perspective on the dance of native American Indians and the cultural resurgence of Harlem. He sees these as already cultural possibilities marked by the force of their oppression: "Thus, however great the art of the Indian, which we have virtually never seen, and the art of the American Negro, which has not yet been created, we have no claim to them whatever beyond that of the plantation owner to his minstrels' performances. They are the arts of the subject peoples of America" (AD 37).

Martin's invocation of "subject peoples" is characteristic in his review of the early years of American modern dance. He articulates the emergence of a national aesthetic form in a fascinating manner in terms of postcolonial identity formation. Martin observes, "The devoted colonial believes that art has been discovered in its various departments by certain individuals in the past, much as Captain Cook discovered Hawaii" (AD 22). The colonial's error consists in likening art to geographic landmasses, yet Martin and others will do precisely this when seeking to characterize the expansiveness of American dance forms.

Martin writes, "America is here" (AD 22), distinguishing two narratives of (cultural) colonialism. The difference lies in the play of the "there" (Hawaii was "there" and Cook discovered it) and the "here" that is America. The "there" of a discovery—Hawaii was already there, waiting to be "discovered"—is opposed to the temporal and spatial "here"—an immanent America that is not "already there" and that can only be experienced rather than posited (or "placed"). The one colonialist narrative (the narrative of Captain Cook) approximates what I have been addressing through the term “literate”: something is there waiting to be discovered/referenced. America, however, is “here”—it exists in a presence that can only be performed and that is, moreover, spatial more than temporal. In seeking to establish a truly “American” dance form, Martin is necessarily unable, of course, to take into full account the indigenous culture that was already “there”—for to do so would be to fall back into the Captain Cook narrative of discovery and an entirely different episode of cultural representation. His own cultural colonialism is a result of his investment in the aesthetic immanence of America. This, of course, is the central paradox behind his postcolonial formulation of an American dance aesthetic.

On the one hand, Martin resists Eurocentric notions of the aesthetic, which he links to an ideological universalism, and claims that such formulations assume that aesthetic forms, like land masses, are always already “there” waiting to be discovered. However, by placing himself in the spatio-temporal present—“America is here”—he posits an aesthetic immanence that effaces history. The universalist spatial “here,” we might say, effaces the historical perspective. In other words, Captain Cook at least acknowledges that there is, or was, a “there” there: Martin cannot. For him, the American ideology will be, preeminently, an ideology of matter, of the body. The body itself replaces the universalist and colonizing subject as an ideological center. Its transubstantiation through dance, meanwhile, ignores the “America Makes Me Sick!” 133 existence of all external materiality—of those bodies that might, however inconveniently, already be “there.”

It is important that we understand this American embodiment as a shift in the very definition of ideology. To acknowledge allegiance to an intellectual idea of nation is to acknowledge, implicitly, an allegiance to the idea of the idea: to experience nation as something posited and ideally constructed. To claim to embody the nation, however, is to assert a national immanence: America is “here”—in my body. This distinction between body and figurative language raises questions of literal and figurative language that I address below with regard to Isadora Duncan. The somatic body is not a rhetorical figure for the national body politic but rather is the medium through which the idea of nation passes into the literal. Ideology, I would argue, needs to be understood in precisely this way: not simply as a set of tropes and figures but as the moment where those tropes and figures displace or enter into the literal. At its extreme, hysteria is the condition of ideology.

Isadora Duncan’s relation to the two forms of American puritanism—aesthetic and religious—reflects an ambiguity as to her own status as a descendant of the colonists. On the one hand, as an Irish woman of self-proclaimed frontier stock she opposes “the Puritan spirit of Amer-ica” but she acknowledges that “I was still a product of American puri-tanism . . . the land of America had fashioned me as it does most of its youth—a Puritan, a mystic, a striver after the heroic expression rather than any sensual expression whatever, and I believe most American artists are of the same mould.”® In a eulogy to Duncan, Max Eastman would refer to the result of this ambiguity within her in a peculiarly fitting formulation as a “wrongtiousness” that negates yet replicates the righteousness of Puritanism. In his commemorative essay in The Art of the Dance, Eastman takes note of "an exaggerated reaction against America's 'righteousness.' Wrongtiousness is what you would have to call it if you wished to appraise it with a sense of its origin" (47). This felicitous coinage of "wrongtiousness" is extremely helpful in assessing Duncan's relation both to the puritan tradition and to the generation of dancers that followed on from her. It is not a simple, determinate negation but rather a dialectical negation. What it resists, finally, is an orthodoxy—be that an orthodoxy of consent or an orthodoxy of dissent. As Shaemas O'Sheel notes in The Art of the Dance: "America fighting the battle against Americanism—that was Isadora." In this sense, "Isadora was very American. The big way in which she conceived things, and undertook them, and the way she succeeded with them, was American. Even her faults were American—her passion for 'pulling off stunts'— 'gestures' is the way she would say it—was American" (39).

Formally, for all of Isadora's neoclassical posturing, her greatest skill lies in "pulling off stunts" or "gestures"; there is something of the music hall "turn"—a certain resolution of high and low—in Isadora's high cultural schtick. Although it is not my aim in this chapter to render an impression of Isadora Duncan dancing—thereby "doing her into dance," to borrow Ann Daly's own borrowing from Isadora—it is nevertheless important to gain some notion of the stages of her career and the kind of body she presented at each stage. Daly's study is indeed one of the very best for conveying some sense of Duncan's changing stage presence.

After Duncan's 1899 departure for Europe, Daly divides the dancer's career into roughly three stages. The first involved the lyrical manipulation of space in the three-dimensional enlivening of classical precedent. As Daly notes of Duncan at this time: "Her dancing, which was based on physical release, seemed to materialize her spectators' inner longings and impulsions. This fluid self freely circulating—an image of 'becoming'—appealed to a wide variety of spectators, who saw in her the embodiment of their own desire for social, political and artistic change. She was, for them, a symbol of spontaneity and freedom" (15). At this stage Duncan was offering something aesthetically new, but offering it quite specifically as a cultural import that effectively reasserted the "colonial" status of her homeland.

This began to change in a second stage, characterized by the more allegorical dances of the war years. Under the influence of Nietzsche, as well as the towering theatrical figures of Eleanore Duse and Ellen Terry, Duncan "took to heart the example of the Greek chorus, and she endeavored to fuse the arts of music, drama, and dance" (15). Emblematic of this period were Duncan's interventionist dances—particularly the Marseillaise, for which she draped herself in the French flag. Although such interventionism alienated many in her base of radical supporters in America at this time, these dances made explicit—albeit in crude form—the project of national embodiment with which I frame Duncan's work in this chapter.

In the final stage of Duncan's career—roughly speaking, after 1922-23 "America Makes Me Sick!" 135 and the sojourns in Soviet Russia—Daly sees "a monumental Isadora who barely moved, striving for the ultimate: to harness the force of dynamic movement in utter stillness. Her solos, sculptural and increasingly independent of their musical accompaniment, became more a matter of tragic acting—the expression of epic gesture—than dancing" (15). Although Duncan seemed to have penetrated to the heart of the Greek and classical models that had always inspired her, that very breakthrough went hand in hand with a new nativist discourse in her polemical writings against “nigger culture” and a playing up of her true-blue frontierswoman Americanism in her autobiography. In this Duncan differed from exoticist and orientalizing dancers such as Ruth St Denis, in that she no longer sought foreign examples for their foreignness, but rather, as the key to a more fundamentally "American" identity. Ted Shawn, whom I discuss below, would subsequently attempt to characterize dance movements according to their gender specificity. Much that he would associate with "male" dancing was, in fact, derived from Duncan. As Daly points out, Duncan's dance was not vocabulary intensive—it was based on quotidian gesture and movement rendered pathetic through emphasis and repetitions but never reduced to a series of poses. (Particularly in the later years, however, when Duncan excised all extraneous movement from her work, many claimed that it was, indeed, a mere series of poses). These quotidian and gestural traits are values Shawn would claim for masculine dance. Even in photographs of Duncan from the earlier "prettier" dances, we encounter an attempt to render massive the plane of the face and chest. For all of her skipping—imitated, much to her disgust, by her many acolytes—Duncan always located the seat of movement in the solar plexus (not the feet or legs), opening up her chest and pulling it upward out of a solidly grounded pelvis. Daly's descriptions of these basic and enduring elements of Duncan's aesthetic all serve to assert the autonomy of the embodied subject, following Duncan's own rhythms rather than a beat arbitrarily imposed by musical accompaniment. Duncan famously had a preternatural rhythmic sense that could dance against the beat while capturing the profounder flow of the music. She was, even in this regard, "wrongtious." Max Eastman's invocation of Isadora's "wrongtiousness" allows us to think of the American national mission in dance—its "heresy"—as something distinct from the national cultures of Europe. It is a cultural vision that seeks not an ideological closure but rather an embodiment; it is nation as body rather than nation as idea. We should note, however, that Duncan was not simply wrongtious—she was often just plain wrong. For example, she explicitly rejected "the ragtime, the trivial foolish jingles" (JS 38) as in any way representative of a true American culture. The racism underlying her rejection proves to be the rule rather than the exception in the writings of modern dance pioneers in America. As Susan Manning has noted, for all of its claims to a universal, transnational language of the body, "modern dance became an arena for the forging of national identity, while 20th-century ballet became an arena for international competition." For Duncan, however, racism is but one element in a broader cultural snobbery that was part and parcel of her attempt to justify her own cultural endeavor in terms derived from nineteenth-century European high culture, even as she consistently presented herself as an American rebel. Her simultaneous invocation of an ethnic ancestry and her rejection of other ethnic cultures raise the question, however, of precisely which bodies will be allowed to embody the nation. Duncan, for one, would have been aghast at the conflation of high and low culture taking place in Martin's invocation of "American" forms of social dance as harbingers of a new social order. "America makes me sick," she will proclaim, "positively nauseates me. This is not a mere figure of speech. America produces in me a definite malady" (JS 129). Of particular interest to me in this characteristically emphatic pronouncement is the linkage of America not only with a certain physical sensation of nausea but with the rule of the literal. Taking specific issue with the forms of American social dance, Duncan further complains, in an essay titled "I See America Dancing," that "it seems to me monstrous for anyone to believe that the Jazz rhythm expresses America. Jazz rhythm expresses the South African savage. America's music will be something different. It has yet to be written . . . Long-legged strong boys and girls will dance to this music—not the tottering ape-like convulsions of the Charleston, but a striking upward tremendous mounting" (AOD 48-49). It is telling that in denying to jazz and popular ballroom dance the status of an American art form Duncan should refer to the "convulsions" of the Charleston, as if this dance form somehow aestheticized her own abject relation to America. On the one hand she "America Makes Me Sick!" 137 insists that America makes her sick (convulses her), while on the other she refuses to draw from this the logical aesthetic conclusion; namely, that the dance forms appropriate to twentieth-century America may, indeed, be convulsive rather than inspirational. I see in this a perfect example of "wrongtiousness," or "America fighting the battle against Americanism." Try as she might to escape American literalism, Duncan is trapped in it: her rejection is physical and embodied; her hysteria is a literal expulsion of American literalness. We can trace the rhetorical logic of racist and racialist images in American writings on choreography back to Duncan's nausea and with it the likely experience of "vomiting"—a hysterical attempt to locate and expel the foreign within the national body." Duncan's convulsive reaction both rejects and enacts the status of the "literal" that is identified with America—her body dances a form of abject, convulsive Charleston even as she avers that such dances make her sick. In terms of the shift I have been tracing from literate to postliterate or performative notions of nation, it appears that when Duncan despairs of America she pushes it in the direction of the literal—the letter. But even as she does so it retains a literal grip on her body, convulsing her just as it convulses the dancers of the Charleston. Even as she rejects America, her body somehow remains American. Duncan offers clear examples of her "new ideology" in her 1927 essay "Dancing in Relation to Religion and Love"; an essay that allows us to think about the relation of religion to rhetoric, or of religious to aesthetic puritanism in her work. In this essay, we see coming together a variety of concerns that are traced throughout this chapter. Clustered around the trope of puritanism are issues of sexual liberation and ascetic aestheticism; concerns with the founding of nation and racial purity; dance formalism, and so forth. Here, these concerns all turn around the question of language. It is important to read beneath the surface of Duncan's explicit ideological pronouncements—her racism and her eugenicism, for example—not in order to excuse them but rather to trace their implication in a broader attempt to move beyond an existing regime of language. Ramsay Burt has rightly noted in his study Alien Bodies: Representations of Modernity, "Race," and Nation in Early Modern Dance, how "in the inter-war years, difference was often expressed through bodily metaphors, 'pure race' being understood in terms of 'pure blood,' while anxiety over national boundaries (cultural, geographical) was equated with 138 Social Choreography concern over bodily boundaries, pollution and degeneration. Dance, whose primary means of communication is the body, became a locus of anxieties over loss of national and racial identity due to modernity's impact. Consider Duncan's pedagogical zeal in the following passage:

"It is of the utmost importance to a nation to train its children to the understanding and execution of movements of great heroic and spiritual beauty; to raise their many bans on the realization of sex, which is a fine thing in itself, and to put these same prohibitions on the frivolous caricatures and symbols of sex which are found in such dances as the fox trot and Black Bottom" (AOD 126).

Beyond the attack on popular culture and the appeal to a new sexual ideal, Duncan's perverse puritanism—her wrong- tiousness—reveals itself as a championing of what we might call the "real" (rather than the "literal," which implies literacy and textuality) over the figurative. What she seeks is the self-realization of the nation through a "realization of sex"; her vehement opposition to popular culture is an opposition to "caricatures and symbols of sex" (emphases mine). The opposition could scarcely be more explicit: a championing of an embodied—"realized"—sexuality over and against the symbolic. This antirhetorical rhetoric, I would argue, marks a cru- cial shift in the understanding of the function of the body in ideology: the body no longer tropes the nation but realizes it and offers a fantasy of access to the real that bypasses the symbolic.

Of course, the question of embodiment raises questions of gender as well as race. Aesthetically, we might postulate that at this time the female body offered possibilities of ideological "realization" closed to the male, whose traditional ideological function remained mediated through discourse. As Duncan herself notes in her essay of 1905 "The Dancer and Nature": "One might well be led to believe that women are incapable of knowing beauty as an Idea, but I think this only seems so... Through the eyes beauty most readily finds a way to the soul, but there is another way for women—perhaps an easier way and that is through the knowledge of their own bodies . . . Not by the thought or contemplation of beauty only, but by the living of it, will woman learn" (AOD 66-67).

Whereas Susan Manning in Ecstasy and the Demon: Femi- nism and Nationalism in the Dance of Mary Wigman has stressed the emergence of female spectatorship as a crucial moment in the kinesthetic continuum, it seems clear that for Duncan the function of woman "America Makes Me Sick!" 139 lies in embodying rather than visualizing and figuring the idea. Opposition to what I have been calling "literacy" and the opposition to contemplation are of a piece. The new ideological body—the body that seems to insist on its own reality and resist a figuratively ideological co- optation—is female. We need to recognize in this formulation the opening up of new (“antiideological”) ideological and representational possibilities from within the gender stereotypes and rhetorical common- places of the fin de siécle. The notion that men know and women embody is to be found again and again in late-nineteenth-century and early-twentieth-century sociological, sexological, and aesthetic writ- ings, but now the opposition acquires new ideological significance. Now, for the first time in America the nation is "here" rather than "there," experienced immanently rather than posited ideologically. 

As an embodiment of this new conception of nation, the female body acquires new significance. Pointing the way into a new century, yet still imbued with the romantic connotations of an old one, the body of woman serves as a vehicle—a non-figurative vehicle, we should stress, because this is not simply a question of a shift in tropes—for this new experience of nation. What I am suggesting here is that the new conception of embodied nationhood and the shift from the ideal male to the corporeal female opened up new aesthetic representations of nation. Martin's theorizing of metakinesis, for example, smacks of Freud's early, Charcot-influenced description of medieval hysteria that "appeared in epidemics as a result of psychical contagion." And it is perhaps not a coincidence that Duncan's discovery of the solar plexus as the origin of movement matches Freud's isolation of the hysterogenic zones "in an area of the abdominal wall corresponding to the ovaries, in the crown of the head and the region under the breast" (1:43). I am not suggesting anything so banal as that Duncan was a hysteric—only that her rejection of national and sexual "caricatures and symbols" enacts and exemplifies a shift toward new (and politically troubling) experiences of nationality whose terms we can also find analyzed in early discourses on hysteria. Nor, of course, am I positing an epidemic of hysteria as historically determinant of the turn of the century. Instead, I wish to examine the semiotic and somatic conditions of a certain aesthetic ideology, a certain social choreography.

A model for understanding the shift from what I am terming, for simplicity's sake, literate to postliterate aesthetic ideology can be derived from later Freudian analyses of the shift from obsessional neurosis to hysteria. In a neurotic compulsion, in the "Project for a Scientific Psychology" Freud explains that the formation of symbols also takes place normally. A soldier will sacrifice himself for a many-colored scrap of stuff on a pole, because it has become the symbol of his fatherland, and no one thinks that neurotic. But a hysterical symbol behaves differently. The knight who fights for his lady's gloves knows, in the first place, that the glove owes its importance to the lady; and, secondly, he is in no way prevented by his adoration of the glove from thinking of the lady and serving her in other respects. The hysteric, who weeps at A, is quite unaware that he is doing so on account the association A-B, and B itself plays no part at all in his psychical life. The symbol has in this case taken the place of the thing entirely. (2: 349) In other words, in hysterical symbol formation, "A is compulsive, B is repressed" (2: 350). It is telling that Freud draws his first example from the realm of patriotism, for I am suggesting that the shift that permits America to see itself dancing is a shift from a neurotic ideology of nationhood to what we can provisionally call a hysterical one. We need to distinguish between two modes of nationalism—one of which I identify with the literary-discursive formation of nineteenth-century philology, and the second of which eschews the discursive to seek immediate aesthetic form in the dancing body. The shift from the former to the latter is one that seems, furthermore, to be intimately tied to "the heresy of an American art," to a peculiarly "American" understanding of national self-representation. The resistance to translation most explicit in Martin's formulation of American modern dance—"when any art form has got itself to the point where it can be translated into words, it is dead as an art form" —is the characteristic form of this new ideology______ We can co-opt this passage from Freud to elucidate a specific moment in Duncan's career: the charge of vulgarity aimed at her when, in a moment of interventionist fervor at the beginning of World War I, she wrapped herself in the French flag and danced—or posed—to the strains of the Marseillaise. In the semiotic terms outlined by Freud, the symbolic force of this performance is neurotic not hysterical—a relapse into symbolic modes of national self-representation (identified by Freud with the male soldier and the flag). Isadora's "neurotic" performance in this, the second stage of her career (as outlined by Daly) implies that what I have been positing as a shift in nationalism—both temporal (from nineteenth to twentieth century) and geographical (from Europe to America)—is not abrupt and absolute. Duncan's performance was felt by many contemporaries to be uncharacteristically vulgar, but we need to understand the relation of the aesthetic charge of vulgarity to the symbolic nature of patriotism.

The new nationalism—the nationalism performed in dance—is one that spurns explicit articulation and the traditionally mimetic signifiers of denotative language. It is performative, implicit in the body itself—invested in movement. And yet, according to Freud, hysterical symbol formation is, on the contrary, rigid and "excessively intense" (2: 350): "Instead of B, A always becomes conscious—that is, cathected. Thus it is symbol-formation of this stable kind which is the function that goes beyond normal defence" (2: 352).

On the one hand, then, we have an ideology of dynamically produced symbols—the body as a symbol of the nation that requires no flags or conventional markers and standards—and on the other, a rigidity of symbolic formation that seems to filter into Duncan's very performances, eliciting from critics charges of vulgar "posing." To offer a critique of this new nationalism, then, we need to examine the relationship between its fluid, organic ideal of immanent community and the rigidity of the semiotic regime on which it relies.

In the tenth of his series of "Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis," Freud develops a semiotic of four types of symbolization: namely, relation of part to a whole; allusion; "plastic portrayal" (i.e., rendering visible and thereby disguising); and the symbolic. He then argues that "since symbols are stable translations, they realize to some extent the idea of the ancient as well as of the popular interpretation of dreams... They allow us in certain circumstances to interpret a dream without questioning the dreamer, who indeed would have nothing to tell us about the symbol" (15: 151).

Thus, we should beware of simply understanding the symbolic as something organic that resists simple translation—in strict opposition to a mechanistic or "literate" allegory. It is the very stability and translatability of symbolism that is particularly open to the collective task of nationalism. It is hardly surprising, then, that Duncan would be accused again and again of merely stringing together in her dances a series of poses plastiques derived from classical precedent—for this freezing (or friezing) of movement exemplifies the rigid nature of hysterical symbol formation disavowed in protomodernists' insistence on kinesis or movement. At the same time as the ideology of embodied nationhood seeks to make organicist claims that mask its ideological provenance, it cannot simply open itself up to representational instability. The semiotic fluidity of dance would not provide the "stable translations" necessary for social and national cohesion, so dance must organize itself around fixed poses and attitudinizing. The complexity of Freud's etiology of hysteria suggests that the cause is often linked to a trauma, but it is not as simple in other cases. The connection is only a "symbolic" relationship between the precipitating cause and the pathological phenomena. There is a paradox: the breakdown of symbol formation is the result of a merely symbolic system of causation. Hysteria is an example of "taking literally" that is both caused by and results in rigid symbolic structures.

In Freud's presentation, the symbolic is more "democratic" because it is grounded in consensus and convention. Freud uses the example of vomiting following a feeling of moral disgust to explain his model of hysterical causation. Duncan's insistence on the literal condition of nausea is important: for her, vomiting is the moment of recognition of the nonfigural at the heart of language. This experience of language parallels the newly "embodied" experience of nationhood: America would, indeed, make her vomit.

The attempt to purge oneself of American moral puritanism through a more literal bodily purgation is a paradox. Vomiting is the misrecognition of the obligation to embody, a hysterical expulsion of the hysterical episteme—a performative contradiction. The question raised by this overlaying of Freud is essentially semiotic. How do bodies signify, and how do different bodies signify differently? Does this newly foregrounded bodily function of national representation shift us out of the possibility of "metaphor" in general and into a hysteric realm of nationalism? In other words, perhaps the "connections between the individual body and the collective body" (ED 28) that Susan Manning rather loosely identifies as the basis of choreography's ideology cannot be imagined simply along the lines of a symbolic representation. Indeed, the terminology of national self-identity already pervades Freud's understanding of hysteria when he argues that we need to treat traumas like "a foreign body" (2: 4) that enters our system and continues to work. Duncan's literal "sickness" at America allows us to think of vomiting as an expulsion of foreign bodies that both expels and enacts the hypersymbolic function that has taken control of us. The problem is that these traumas alienate us from our own bodies by making them the ground of a symbolization we no longer control. It makes our own body foreign. This is why we need to pursue the abject relations suggested in Duncan's literal nausea.

If our hypothesis is true and hysteria becomes the condition of new national ideologies, we need to face some troubling consequences. The dilemma of this new American "embodied" nationhood lies in a both implicitly and explicitly racial "urge to purge" that only serves to alienate us from our own American body. In what remains of this chapter, I will concentrate on two related questions: racist eugenicism and gender panic as discourses on the fitness of bodies to their work of representation.

For Susan Manning, "what is difficult to accept with regard to Duncan is how intertwined were her feminism and nationalism. Both were tainted, her feminism with eugenics, her nationalism with the possibility of female spectatorship" (ED 285). Clearly, aesthetic and eugenic questions were closely linked for Duncan, who argues that "it is not only a question of true art, it is a question of race, of the development of the female sex to beauty and health, of the return to the original strength and to natural movements of woman's body. It is a question of the development of perfect mothers and the birth of healthy and beautiful children. The dancing school of the future is to develop and to show the ideal form of woman. It will be, as it were, a museum of the living beauty of the period" (AOD 61).

This ideology of "perfect mothers" and "beautiful children" is overdetermined, driven by both a racism and a commitment to high culture that coalesce in an opposition to "nigger-culture." Duncan's racism demarcates the field of debate for early modern dance theorists in the United States precisely because the idea of performing the nation, rather than simply denoting it in mimetic fashion, entrusts to aesthetic creation an ideological function parallel to physical procreation. If my performance brings the nation into being, and if the nation in this new episteme is embodied, then my dance becomes a eugenic exercise.

While the rejection of "nigger-culture" is all too common in the writings of early modern dance theorists, it is interesting to note how this racism plays out against a romanticization of the figure of the Native American. The figure of the Native American serves, especially in the later modern dance, as a polemical counterpoint to the depredations of a popular culture coded as negroid. The racism of this construction goes without saying, but it is interesting to note the recurrence of the aesthetic underlying it. We will recall Martin's more nuanced rejection of both Native American and African American cultural forms as "the arts of the subject peoples of America" (AOD 37). Ted Shawn—cofounder, with his wife, Ruth St Denis, of perhaps the single most influential dance school in America, Denishawn, and later founder of America's first all-male dance troupe—in turn refers to black jazz culture as "scum. "His charge is repeated in less virulent form by Martha Graham, who turns instead to the Native American for an 'America Makes Me Sick!' 145 alternative cultural and eugenic model, arguing: 'We are an essentially dramatic country. We build in mass and are built in mass, spiritually and physically. We have two primitive sources, dangerous and hard to handle in the arts, but of intense psychic significance—the Indian and the Negro. That these influence us is certain—the Negro with his rhythms of disintegration, the Indian by his intense integration, his sense of ritualistic tribal drama.' Graham’s opposition of Negro 'disintegration' to Native American 'intense integration' is telling; for the problematic of 'integration' clearly allows of a political as well as an aesthetic reading. The Native American therefore serves two functions: he holds out the possibility of an 'aboriginal' dance—that is, the reconstruction of an American origin—and the possibility of a resistance to popular culture that would not necessitate a retreat into the highbrow and equally 'convulsive' forms of ballet. In fact, Graham’s essay flirts with political analogies only to confound them. Ambiguously, she writes: 'Subject as we are to immigration physically, and sympathetic to it as we are spiritually, these waves of influence almost engulfed us. With what results in the art of the dance? That as an integral art form it did not exist and that the foreign forms were reduced to decadence in this country by the transplanting' (249). Immigration is something to which we are 'subject' and yet the importation of people and ideas leads to degeneration. The influence of eugenic thinking on Graham’s aesthetic seems clear: implicit in the parallel of foreign forms and foreign races (as 'immigration' or 'transplanting') is an assertion that a racial decadence befalls the immigrant. 'As a result' of this empathy with the immigrant, Graham will write, 'we have had a dance of 'appearance' rather than a dance of 'being'— instead of an art which was the fruit of a people’s soul, we had entertainment' (250). Here, entertainment is posited not simply as a cultural value coexistent with, and inferior to, high culture: it is being opposed to a concept of ontological dance. America expresses itself through entertainment because, we are asked to believe, it has no ontological sense of self.

Building on and moving beyond Duncan, Graham will proclaim: 'We shun the imperialism of the ballet, the sentimentality engulfing the followers of the great Isadora Duncan, the weakling exoticism of a transplanted orientalism' (252). Just as Duncan and others claimed that the importation of European forms was inimical to the democratic 146 Social Choreography American spirit, Graham seems to be suggesting that any form of transplanting leads to decadence and degeneration in both art and life. Consequently, as a transplanted culture, Negro jazz will be rootless—as, of course, is the orientalism of Graham’s teacher and rival, Ruth St Denis. Martin’s rhetorical resistance to 'translation' is here refigured as a political resistance to the disintegrating sorts of cultural transmission effected through immigration. In Martin’s interpretation of Graham, we can perhaps best assess the relationship of geography to nation, national institutions, and the concept of Volk: 'In what she has called the psyche of the country she bases her art, and her relation to it is almost a mythic one.'" She is a tenth-generation American, but it is to the continent itself that she belongs, rather than to its people alone or to its national organizations. With its vastness and its variety, the rhythms of the American continent must necessarily be rhythms of integration rather than of expansion: the need is not for spreading out but for drawing together" (AD 203-4). The shift toward the body in apportioning the work of national representation has now progressed even further, and the task has been displaced onto the very geography of the nation. Whereas the attempt to ground national ideological cohesion in the body was an attempt to escape the very charge of ideology, the American experience of migration in fact renders even the body itself unstable. The putative ideological and aesthetic purity of the American body is compromised by cultural miscegenation. Only an intensely introspective and "integrative" Native American culture seems to resist this mingling, but finally it will be the land itself that allows for a post-subjective "non-ideological" figuring of national ideology.

The fundamental question is that of the "aboriginal." All the figures considered here—Martin, Duncan, Graham, and Shawn—center on this question: Can there be an aboriginal American dance? If so, does it consist of Native American traditions or of a dance that reflects America as a historical force; an industrialized dance? If no such characteristic dance form exists, are we to eschew reflections on origin or are we to look outside America for anthropological remnants of an aboriginal dance (as early "exoticist" dancers did)? The anthropological displacement of originality onto the "other" marks a national alienation from the very concept of origin. The attempt to posit a cultural or genealogical origin will be replaced by a search for (geopolitical and metaphysical) "ground." Thus, the concern for all of these figures is with developing a social choreography that not only regulates the functioning of the community but also demonstrates that functioning to the rest of the world as a national characteristic.

The desire to play off the immigration and assimilation central to the American experience against the "integrative" aesthetic represented by the Native American leads to precisely that hysterically literal vomiting and compulsive expulsion of "foreign bodies" that we saw in Duncan. What is required is an image of embodied nationhood that will not be an image—a metaphysical ground that will shun its own metaphysical pretensions through a merging with the literal dirt—the dirty literalness—of the ground on which we dance. If our hypothesis regarding the "hysterical" nature of the new nationalism is correct, we obviously also need to consider the status accorded within this ideology to the male body. While hysteria is traditionally coded as feminine, it is not a question in this new nationalism of a traditionally "masculine" symbolic chauvinism being replaced by a new "feminine" performativity. Women had long since been privileged as symbolic national figures in popular and political iconography. Nevertheless, the new episteme of nationalism did pose particular problems to the male dancer. What has now, in popular prejudice, become a reflex association of dance with effeminacy originally posed more fundamental political, as well as social, problems. This problem of embodiment—the need to embody both masculinity and Americanness—is one that provided the ideological motor for the choreographic and entrepreneurial work of Ted Shawn and his male dance troupe. Shawn's memoirs provide valuable insights into the issue. His story about a fraternity brother's reluctant acceptance of dancing as a suitable career for a red-blooded American male sheds light on the complex interplay of sexual, national, and racial factors. The question of sexual difference and effeminacy is reduced to racial terms, with the question of "red blood" being central.

As dance becomes the quintessential American art form, the nature of origin and the possibilities for an aboriginal dance must be examined in the context of a certain gender crisis concerning the activities proper to "a red-blooded American male." Historians have already demonstrated that there was a cultural crisis articulated around the turn of the century through male bodies. Male bodies played important ideological functions within dance, and the major development in ballet in the early part of the century was the emergence of the male body.

The question we need to ask is: What does it mean for a man to dance in America? The paradigm for national embodiment has shifted, with the body of the woman now providing the (hysterical) model for an immanent and nonreflective experience of nation. What does it mean for men to persist in dancing? Are the twin tasks of proving dance's masculinity and proving its patriotic credentials irreconcilable?

Shawn's fraternity brother's comment needs to be read in the context of internal political battles about the racial, rather than simply national, coding of art forms. Julia Foulkes argued that "Shawn transformed his offstage homosexual inclinations to an onstage American virility, shaping the American male dancer into a near-nude Greek ideal of an athlete-artist: a heroic image that Americans heartily embraced." While this might be Shawn's own perspective, it is tempting to take his dichotomous views of gender at face value.

We need to distinguish between "masculinity" and "virility" as we explore the complex relationship between sexuality, creativity, and the closeting of homosexual desire. While Foster is obviously right, her observations by no means lead us to accept Shawn's assessment of Nijinsky. Shawn may be right in that early article—"America demands masculinity more than art" (19)—but for all that Nijinsky's masculinity or even his sexuality were at question, his virility never was; at least, not on stage. The feral and virile power of Nijinsky lay, for his audiences, precisely in his passage through the potential effeminization inherent in spectacular performance. His sexuality was perceived as an excess rather than a lack (of masculinity). Admirers were, therefore, often disappointed at meeting the unassuming and slightly malformed young man offstage. Shawn, by comparison—precisely because he must combat the effeminization potentially inherent in the medium—exudes a quite hysterical masculinity that undercuts its own pretensions. The masculinity his dances project is mimetic, prudish, or even camp. Foster's description of Shawn's dances gives us some indication of what film footage also confirms—the centrality of the pose (a term already compromised well before the Marquess of Queensberry accused Wilde of 'posing of a Somdomite' [sic]) to Shawn's vision of masculinity. Foster writes of the dancers' "stiff torso, arms held rigidly in place," of "clenched fists," of dancers who "locomoted and then posed," of "relentless, repetitive, symmetrical" movements (164). The nexus of virility and masculinity, then, is rather more complex than might first appear. Masculinity, we might say, is a hypostatized and hysterical enclosure of the otherwise uncontainable energies of virility.

By contrast, a review from the German Berliner Tageblatt makes the connection clear between race and masculinity. "Ted Shawn," it states, "is a native of America. Usually you couple this land with the dancing of nigger-obstreperousness and the harassing of the jazz bands where everything sways in an elemental rhythm. Shawn has appropriated out of these phenomena only the best of his native country: freshness, youth, even boyishness. In his case you search in vain for the sluggish, degenerate Russian weariness of civilization—that soft unmanly femininity that disgusts us."*4 That the Ballets Russes should be associated with effeminization may not be surprising, but it is interesting to note how central a role this association played in the rejection of 150 Social Choreography ballet by certain modern dance enthusiasts. What I wish to note here, however, is the double front on which war is being waged—against the racial threat of "nigger-obstreperousness" and against the degeneracy, and degendering, of Russian ballet.

In defending his dream of an all-male dance company in an interview titled "Should Men Be Graceful?" Shawn invokes the traditional distinction between the spatial and the temporal in order to defend dance as an expression of masculine vigor: "God made man's body as beautiful as woman's. The perfect female body is passive rather than virile. It is beautiful in repose and languor, while man's body is beautiful in action and in its display of strength. A male dancer can be thoroughly masculine and there is every reason that he should be. But we have regarded beauty as belonging solely to woman for so long, that we consider beauty in itself effeminate, whereas beauty has no sex."** This passage is important for the way in which it envisages a "new" form of (masculine) beauty that is dynamic rather than passive. The attempt to rethink beauty as something dynamic partakes of the aesthetic ideology that I have been tracing here. This ideology sees the aesthetic as formative rather than merely mimetic (although, in practice, Shawn’s own dances were highly mimetic on the whole) as an activity rather than an escape from social reality in Marcuse’s sense of affirmative culture. In order to fit dance as a medium for masculine activity, definitions of beauty organized around the poles of time and space, active and passive, and musical and plastic have to be reformulated. This entails a redefinition of the “work” of art and a reconsideration of the notion of performance. So long as it was considered a feminine activity, performance could content itself with traditional definitions of beauty: even as the woman performed she remained, nevertheless, an object or artifact for the male gaze.

When men perform, two problems clearly arise: first, the potential scandal of a male object of the male gaze (the queering of dance) and, second, the status of the artifact in performance. In order to avoid the scandal of a homosexualized aesthetic consumption (men watching men, whose performance is secondary to their physical embodiment), a new definition of aesthetic production is necessary.

In a contemporary essay on Shawn's 1930s project for a "America Makes Me Sick!" 151 male—and masculine—dance, one critic, Lucien Price, poses the problem as follows: “But how shall male dancers erase the stigma against males' dancing? By dancing like men and not like women. Then how does a man dance? Their programmes are built from those rhythms of bodily movement which are recognizably peculiar to the male: hunting, war, ritual magic (tribal); planting, harvest, threshing floor, wine press (labor); play, sport, ceremonial (folk); and based on these—as sonata and symphony, 'pure music,' derive in part from folk dance and folk song—the dance as pure art form.”*

The critic's assessment returns us to a question posed earlier that now needs answering in specifically national and gendered terms—that is, the status of "work" in the writings of early American modern dance pioneers. Price is actually reiterating what was for many the most objectionable of Shawn's theses on dance: namely, its reliance on outmoded gender stereotypes that held that women's work configured the small enclosed spaces and gestures of sewing, cradling, and enclosing, whereas the work of men suggested the opening up of an expansive space and a broad gestural language. In The American Ballet, Shawn draws his distinction in the following way: “Men have always done the big things, the important things in life, being quite willing to let the embroideries and ornamentations be the work of women. And until big themes, religious themes, cosmic themes, become again considered as the natural and rightful field of the dance, men capable of doing big things will not see in the dance an opportunity for great art expression” (93). By means of these grossly simplified gender binaries, Shawn argues that because religion condemned dance, dance was not able to treat the important things in life and became courtly and trivial—that is, effeminate. Of note for my consideration of ornament in the final chapter of this volume is the presentation of ornamentation as women's work. Shawn's vision of America dancing, meanwhile, acknowledges the heterosexual compact that grounds even the seemingly antiauthoritarian American social dance. This passage has been cleaned up and separated into two paragraphs to improve readability:

Shawn's thought on masculine dancing is commented on by contemporaries: "Masculine Dancing (says Mr. Shawn) is on the sweeping scale; the great gestures... All great gestures, Mr. Shawn says; perhaps on the grandiose order—gestures that start from the ground up and sweep out to an ending that is not an ending, but suggests a sort of going on to infinity. Now the feminine gestures are more restricted... Their gestures suggest those of needle-work, rocking the cradle."

The problematizing of the work-character of the aesthetic is of particular importance to the male dancer, who legitimates his aesthetic endeavor as the work of national self-representation. The problematic of work in Shawn's choreography divides itself between the desire to present dance itself as work and the desire to demonstrate the possibilities for a mimetic representation of work through dance. Which of these two justifies dance as masculine "work"? The problem Shawn will face is whether dance itself will have to remain mimetic in order to represent its own grounding in work, or whether it must efface this mimetic moment in order to assert that it is work, that it is a primary mode of production rather than as a secondary mode of reproduction and representation. In other words: the double bind consists in the need in the dance to represent and reiterate dance's movement beyond representation: do I present dance as hard work, or do I represent hard work in dance?

The dilemma derives from the need to mark mimetically the relation to work as a grounding (masculine) principle and the disruption from the origin that a mere mimetic marking necessarily effects. To merely represent work thematically is to exempt oneself from the traditional obligation to work—to engage in the feminine work of reproduction rather than the masculine work of production. (It is highly significant that in all of the early propaganda for Jacob's Pillow, the home of Shawn's all-male dance collective, Shawn consistently spoke of the work the men performed in clearing the space, building their home, and so on. The dance company itself had thus become a microcosm of the American frontier.)

Shawn's fetish-ization of labor in many of his works offers a sexually inflected version of that shift I demonstrated in chapter 1—from dance as play to dance as labor. For Shawn, the interplay of male bodies in labor provided an acceptable framework for the rhythmic and erotic interactions that were otherwise taboo. Similarly, in writing of the foundation of Jacob's Pillow, Shawn would write obsessively of how the men worked together to clear their own space—a space of dwelling but also a space of the aesthetic and (though never so acknowledged) of the erotic. What is at stake is the status of representation as "work" —that is, as production or reproduction. Shawn's innovation—from an avowedly masculinist and yet anachronistically organicist position—was to aestheticize industrialization itself as the "techno-logy" of a newly erot- "America Makes Me Sick!" 153 icized social organization. In the light of my reflections in the introduction on the history of social dancing, it is important to note that Shawn opposes his own high art (however camp) to the hegemony of social dance in its dominant and debased form of couple dancing. "I believe there is a place in the history of dancing for the couple dance," he writes in The American Ballet, "but when social dancing has entirely degenerated into couple dancing, it is a very sad time for the art of the dance" (45). While the relationship of theatrical to social dance has been theorized in terms of the relation of high to low, elite to mass culture, Shawn’s theatrical elitism should be seen as something more than a simple aesthetic position. It is also a social critique: for “if we consider the true meaning of the word ‘social,’” Shawn argues, “these dances are most decidedly not social and are almost anti-social” (41). The heterosexual imperative, he argues, actually works against the formation of broader social collectives by subtracting individuals from the group and pairing them off on the dance floor. The social vision embedded in so-called social dancing is inappropriately heterosexual, he will argue: “The wooing and courtship theme in life has its place, and a very important place, but it should not absorb all of our life . . . I believe that in this factory age, when so many people are doing routine things—take as an example the workers in a Ford factory . . . [that] man needs something better as a dance, to release his pent-up creative instinct” (46). The critique seems startlingly “queer” avant la lettre. Shawn is examining the ways in which an emerging commodity culture ex-emplified by the new dance craze not only reinforces the hegemony of a new monopoly capitalism but also normalizes and aestheticizes the heterosexual contract.

If social dance encodes heterosexual relations as a normative social order, obviously the maintenance of a high-low cultural divide at the same time retains the possibility—within high culture—for non-heterosexual experimentation. By the same token, new forms of work also open up possibilities of homosocial interaction, in which—to follow Foster’s description—there is “no trace of the degenerate, no hint of the feminine. Inverting the invert, the dancers never looked soft or flexible; they never curved. They never even touched except in those rare moments when the choreography stipulated that all bodies contribute to a common design” (168). Given the degeneration of social dance to the minimal social unit of the heterosexual couple dancing together, Shawn’s reassertion of the high cultural mode allows for precisely the homosocial modes of dance to be found in works such as his Symphony of Labor. In short, for all his posturing, Shawn allows us to glimpse the continued importance in the twentieth century of the high cultural domain as an arena for homosocial experimentation.

It is precisely when Shawn embraces industrialization as a template for the rationalization and abstraction of human motion (i.e., as the modernist practice described above by Foster) that the possibilities for apparently deeroticized homosocial encounters proliferate in the (aesthetic) workplace. Shawn’s bodies become physically intimate at precisely the moment they become abstracted through their assimilation to a technological order of production. Thus, Shawn’s aestheticization of labor is, on the one hand, politically troubling in that it posits a perfected technologized social order; on the other hand, however, the aestheticization of labor also makes visible the moments of excess—and the persistence of gendered bodies—in every rationalized interaction. Rather than sharing Martha Graham’s belief that “integration” necessitates a return to preindustrial or mythological cultures, Shawn sees the progressive movement of American history itself as a process of rationalized—yet eroticized—integration. The industrialized mythology of his own age represents for Shawn not only a new social order demanding new mimetic responses, but also a model of "integration" through labor that is as compelling aesthetically as it is socially. T. Jackson Lears has demonstrated in his study of American antimodernism, No Place of Grace: Antimodernism and the Transformation of American Culture, 1880-1920, how many of the issues considered here—crises of gender, fears about immigration, and so on—came together at a crucial historical juncture.*

He notes how "as the nature of work changed and women, immigrants and black men 'invaded' men's spheres, masculinity was experienced as increasingly difficult to prove. Sexuality emerged as a central element of American manhood" (99-100). While we are accustomed, from a Foucauldian perspective, to focusing on the emergence of "sexuality" in the late nineteenth century as a juridical and medical concept, in America at this time other forces are at play. Studying dance as the work of social integration—as social choreography—allows us to explore the emergence of sexuality, instead, as an aesthetic exploration of specific sociological phenomena.

Similarly, anxieties about social changes in America—specifically with regard to "America Makes Me Sick!" 155 the question of immigration and the emergence of new competition in the workforce—also led directly to calls for an "integrative" rather than "disintegrative" aesthetic. This aesthetic—identified with the Native American rather than with the "disintegrative" influences of Negro culture—would offer one channel of escape from social "disintegration."

In conclusion, we might see in the emergence of new modes of aestheticizing nationhood through dance—modes themselves identified with America as a nation—a response to certain crises in both personal and national configurations of subjectivity. Given, though, she was to melodramatic nationalist performances and simplistic national caricatures, Duncan enacted a shift toward what we can only provisionally call a "hysterical" or performative nationalism.

The paradoxicality of her position is revealed precisely in the compulsion—the choreographic "convulsion," indeed, that she would reject in her modernist successors yet experience through her own body—to vomit at the thought of America. For the expulsion and rejection of America's hold on her body is itself enacted in precisely the medium that the newly embodied nation would sanction—at the level of the real.

Likewise, for all of her indebtedness to literary and philosophical precursors, Duncan nevertheless made possible a way of thinking the aesthetic beyond the traditional notions of "literacy." With the canonization of modern dance as America's national art form, Martin would subsequently make explicit the ideal of a move beyond community bonded in a mediated fashion by discourse to community physically bonded by metakinesis. The attack on literacy and the move beyond traditional symbolic forms of national identification go hand in hand.

The Scandalous Male Icon
NIJINSKY AND THE QUEERING OF SYMBOLIST AESTHETICS
The Nineteenth Century's guilt, World War One, was danced by Nijinsky on January 19, 1919. —Frank Bidart, The Sacrifice Of the various characteristic forms that helped define the contours of a modernist aesthetic, dance is, perhaps, unique in that its leading pioneering practitioners were women. From Loie Fuller through Isadora Duncan, Martha Graham, Mary Wigman, and others, dance provided a medium in which other voices of modernity might make themselves heard. Correspondingly, the groundbreaking scholarship in the field also has been carried out by female scholars whose work was central to establishing the related disciplines of dance history and performance studies in the academy. To engage in dance history, therefore, is to place oneself at a faultline of gender and aesthetics as they have been deployed in the establishment of a modernist canon. More recently, work on the male dancer has questioned some of our assumptions about the gendering of dance by examining the cultural context of male performance in the early twentieth century. Such studies demonstrate what we perhaps already know—that male dancers have consistently been effeminized from within the ideology of modernist performance. They slip from a position of masculine power and control exercised through cognitive knowledge into a dangerous realm of the body, while at the same time surrendering the traditional male power of spectatorship to become objects of aesthetic pleasure for an audience that for the first time—at the beginning of the twentieth century—was made up of both men and women.

The display of masculinity is dangerous not only to the observer—who runs the risk of surrendering to an inappropriate voyeuristic pleasure—but also to the very condition of the male as a rational (i.e., male and unmarked) subject. The male dancer is a scandal—but what exactly is an aesthetic scandal, once the claques and coteries have gone home and the cheers and hisses have died down? Is there a “logic” of scandal—something intrinsic to performance rather than a contingent circumstance of its given historical coordinates? Certainly, there is a narrative of scandal; it is the master narrative of modernist performance, no less.

The scandal of Nijinsky’s performances, the consciously engineered brouhaha of the opening nights—Lapres-midi d’un faune when Nijinsky feigned masturbation on stage; and Le sacre du printemps when the music was all but drowned out by the cheers and hisses of the audience—have become iconic moments in the recounting of modernism’s genealogy. These moments offer dates and places around which a history can be written, and they dramatize that “tradition of innovation” that serves as our master narrative of modernism’s glorious onward march.

Perhaps the best example of this is Modris Eksteins’s important study, Rites of Spring, which builds around Nijinsky’s startling and scandalous choreography a veritable mythology of modernism, foregrounding the moments of violence inherent both in its aesthetic and in the politics that responded to that aesthetic. Eksteins makes of Nijinsky an iconic figure for the atavistic male violence celebrated by modernism, and he offers an extraordinarily homophobic reading of cultural modernity organized around the thematic of sacrifice. He rightly points out that this major work by Nijinsky concerns the sacrifice of a young maiden, and he draws on this observation to critique a homosocial culture he conflates with homosexual desire. As Eksteins observes: If Diaghilev was increasingly bent on confrontation and sensation, so were his collaborators. In retrospect the preparations for Le sacre have an almost conspiratorial air . . . the initial title Stravinsky assigned to the score was revealing and hardly affirmative: The Victim. And in the libretto the last tableau involves, of course, the sacrifice of the chosen maiden. The ballet ends with the enactment of a death scene in the midst of life. The usual interpretation of the ballet is that it is a celebration of life through death, and that a maiden is chosen for sacrificial death in order to honor the qualities of fertility and life that she exemplifies. However, because of the importance attached to death in the ballet and the violence associated with regeneration, Le Sacre could be regarded as a tragedy. (39) To Eksteins, Nijinsky serves as an icon to imply that modernism's exclusion of, and violent antipathy toward, women is the work of a homosexual cabal that hijacked Western culture sometime shortly before World War I. He writes quite explicitly of a conspiracy, a plot, of avant-gardists: "a kind of homosexual Swiss Guard" (34), he calls them, citing Stravinsky, a heterosexual coconspirator who turns state witness. Similar assumptions have underpinned many dance historical approaches to Nijinsky, however illuminating they may be in other ways.

One might counter this scenario of homosexual misogyny anthropologically by discussing the logic of sacrifice inherent in all systems of representation, in the substitutional play of signifier and signified; or by historical context. The logic of displacement and sacrifice, for example, is complicated by Marie Rambert's recollection that in rehearsal Nijinsky himself danced the role of the Chosen One for Maria Piltz and conveyed a self-destructive frenzy that the female dancer could not match. Instead, I wish in this chapter to tackle two fundamental concepts left unexamined by readings of Nijinsky as an icon of modernism's logic of scandal. The very terms "icon" and "scandal" themselves have been subsumed by the narratives of cultural history they ground and have lost the specificity of their meaning with respect to the works they seek to explain.

How might Nijinsky allow us to understand just what an "icon" is, just how a "scandal" works? Do his works and the critical responses they generated at the time reflect any awareness of the semiotic specificity of these terms? Instead of reading the scandalously iconic figure of Nijinsky for what that icon connotes, might we return to his works in the hope of rediscovering how the icon connotes?

At first sight, there might seem no more mimetic medium of signification than the icon. Like photographs or portraits, iconic representations relate to their referents by a system of mimetic similarity that seemingly denies all autonomy to the signifier. To this extent, nothing would seem less suited to modernism's orientation toward abstraction and linguistic play. From such a perspective, the iconic would seem hopelessly compromised by its dependence on representation and figuration. However far removed the icon might seem from the logic of abstraction we normally identify with modernism, my argument is that a reexamination of the nature of Nijinsky's "scandals"—as something fundamental to the problem of performance itself, something more fundamental than the banal head-to-head of competing cultural cliques on a given night in Paris—allows us to reexamine the operation of an "iconic" impulse within pre-World War I modernism.

I will argue that the "queer modernism" that Eksteins effectively holds responsible for an entire culture of violence in the interwar period was itself the "victim" of a cultural sacrifice, whereby a transgressively embodied and performative masculinity was consigned by a tradition of post-World War II criticism to the realm of cultural kitsch and identified with a mimeticism that is in no way adequate to its cultural significance. The traditional gendering of cognitive power relations at the turn of the twentieth century held that while men could know truth, women could embody it. In this division of labor, it seemed, there was something for everybody. Men gained power over systems of knowledge at the price of sacrificing the possibility of any experience of truth, while to women was ascribed the possibility of unmediated experience, unclouded by consciousness, but unformed by rational reflection. To argue simply that the dancer is effeminized by overstepping this boundary is to underestimate just what it was that Nijinsky felt he could achieve through dance. “I am a philosopher who does not reason,” he would write in his diaries, “a philosopher who feels.” A Socrates, perhaps, who learns to dance only in old age, when facing imminent death, or a Nietzschean Zarathustra, whose philosophy is expounded in the dance. “Feeling” is invoked here not as a feminine, embodied supplement to knowledge but as an alternative medium for its production. Nijinsky thereby offends one of the most basic assumptions of the autonomous bourgeois aesthetic as it had been traced by Kant in the eighteenth century—namely, the separation of aesthetic and cognitive regimes. It was precisely through the choreographing of the male body, I will suggest, that a fusion became possible at the time. In this chapter, I wish to consider Nijinsky’s modality of “feeling” as something both physical and cognitive, as an experience articulated through the male body. I shall demonstrate the ways in which his body is refunctioned as it performs this work and I will outline a semiotics of the male body as something for which an otherwise abstract and disembodied aesthetics of modernism sought to make a place. I will argue that the critical modernist commonplace whereby the Ballets Russes have been presented as “the dream of Mallarmé realized” is woefully inadequate to an understanding of the work of Nijinsky as dancer and choreographer. Instead, in this chapter I posit a radical break between the symbolist milieu of the fin de siècle in which dance first reemerged as a viable and serious art form (in Fuller, and then Duncan) and the choreographic work of Nijinsky. In order to trace this development I will focus on two performances by Nijinsky, whose work—like Duncan's—was never filmed. I will trace an arc from Nijinsky's most radical work, his choreography for Le sacre du printemps, to his final public performance in 1919 at a private benefit in St. Moritz, at which it finally became clear that he had, indeed, become insane. I will approach the first event through an important essay by Jacques Riviére that places Nijinsky's work within a choreographic continuum from Loie Fuller through the work of Fokine for the Ballets Russes (the dances that made Nijinsky famous). Riviére's essay—for all its faults and its still tentative movement toward a new postsymbolist vocabulary adequate to Nijinsky's work—acknowledges the radical break that Nijinsky enacts. I will address Nijinsky's final, traumatic performance through his own diaries, kept as he slipped rapidly into insanity. Using the terminology of the American nineteenth-century semiotician Charles Sanders Peirce, I will argue for the "iconic" status of Nijinsky's performance, a mediated and semiotic relation to the "truth" of dance quite different from Duncan's ideals of immanent embodiment. The "literalness" of Duncan's performance, as demonstrated in the preceding chapter, marked both her break with and her indebtedness to a condition she herself identified with "America." "Contemporary critics grappling with Nijinsky, by contrast, were haunted by the need to understand his choreography in terms of a poetics or a rhetoric. It is to this queer rhetoric of the male body that I seek to give theoretical articulation in this chapter. Within this space of rhetoric that recognizes the materiality of signifiers, both linguistic and bodily, Nijinsky’s choreography, I wish to argue, was open to the plays and displacements of sexuality in ways that the ultimately “literal” and anti-rhetorical choreography of Duncan and Shawn could never be. Similarly, it opened up a space of figuration that cannot be collapsed into mere mimetic representationalism.

Jacques Riviére’s essay of 1913 on Le sacre du printemps is a startling and impressive attempt to come to terms with the significance of Nijinsky’s choreography. Riviére effectively demonstrates the limitations of a traditional aesthetic logic organized around the binary terms “symbolic” (i.e., an organic and self-transcending system of representation in which signifier and signified bear a putatively natural relation to each other) and “allegorical” (i.e., a merely mechanical and constructed relation of signifier and signified). Here I will submit that Riviére’s work suggests the need to introduce a third term—“iconic”—as an aesthetic possibility that cuts across such long-established dualisms.

In positing a radical break between the new works choreographed by Nijinsky and the Ballets Russes repertoire established by Fokine, Riviére marks out two stages of innovation against artifice (herein lies, in fact, one of the limitations of his analysis—namely, his tendency to view aesthetic “progress” as a movement away from artifice into a pre-aesthetic, prelinguistic, and, ultimately, prehuman condition with “no trace of aesthetic effect. The work is presented whole and in its natural state” [164]. First, in the works of Fokine, Riviére finds a reaction to the artifice of a Loie Fuller, darling of the symbolists. Fuller’s artifice consisted of “the play of lights, floating draperies, veils that envelop the body and disguise its shape, the blurring of all contours; the dancer’s chief aim is to lose herself in her surroundings” (164). In opposition to such vagueness, Riviére argues, Fokine offers line and contour; he “brought clarity back to the dance” (164). In one stroke, then, Riviére makes impossible any simplistic attempt to read the Ballets Russes as the dream of Mallarmé realized. Fokine’s rejection of symbolist transubstantiation—the conflation of dancer and dance—culminates in a reemergence of the body. “Henceforth, our only impressions were to come from the body’s own movements and from the clearly visible and distinctly outlined figure drawn by the dancer with his arms and legs” (164): the body reemerges from the veils, indeed, from the very dance that veiled it. Faced with such works, Riviére avers, “I made a discovery in art similar to that of geometry in the sciences” (164). At this stage of the argument Riviére identifies this discovery with “a perfect scientific demonstration” (164). There is, however, something troubling about an aesthetic that can be reduced to the terms of science, and it is perhaps Riviére’s own reductionism that leads him to perceive a similar reductionism in the work of Fokine." Riviére's analysis of Fokine's work reveals the body's disappearance beneath the very figures it traces. The intensity of motion and the arabesque described by the dancer's movement consume the dancer. What Riviére implicitly uncovered is the operation of a vitalistic ideology that conceives of meaning only as "force" or movement. Despite the apparent liberation of the body in Fokine's work, the body has instead been subjected to energies and forces that pass through it and consume it.

In Fokine's ballets, such as Le spectre de la rose, Nijinsky's body literally disappears in its own dance. Riviére found a second level of artifice in Fokine's work, namely "dynamic artificiality." This artifice, or "lack of inner truth," threatens Riviére's project for a truly modern choreography. The disappearance (or disarticulation) of the body and the outlining of a figure are coterminous.

Recent critics argue that Fokine may have introduced types of representation that were new to dance, but they could nevertheless be fitted into existing conservative gender ideologies. Fokine's failure to surpass early modernist precursors seems to have entailed a failure to rethink the operation of gender in dance.

In Riviére's presentation of Nijinsky's work, passions reveal themselves in such a way that we can contemplate them before the arrival of language. Dance operates as a language that precedes language. This vision will parallel a projected sociology of "man's movements at a time when he did not yet exist as an individual." Quite contrary to Nijinsky's own insistence on tion, Riviére wishes to eradicate from Nijinsky's "choreography" all sense of "vacillation." "What this leads to is the assertion of a grounding 'etymological' function in Nijinsky's choreography—a return to linguistic and somatic origins. Thus, Fokine grounds his vision 'choreographic' in opposition to rhetoric: 'Nijinsky's language consists of perpetual detail; he lets nothing pass; he seeks out all the corners. There is no turn of phrase, no pirouette, no preterition' (166). Finally, the etymological return to the very origins of movement proves itself antipathetic to any pirouette or rhetorical turn of phrase. Although he rejects the figural production of subject positions in Fokine, Riviére nevertheless attacks not the ideology of the subject itself, but the need for translating that subject through movement and linguistic mediation. This privileging of etymology over syntax makes of Nijinsky a 'vibration' as a mode of communication.

Riviére's aesthetic model—grafted onto Nijinsky—is one of control and restraint, guaranteed by the unitary origin of embodied language. This gesture toward an alternative model of cultural production is at best, of course, politically ambiguous: it was Riviére, after all, who would subsequently launch the conservative post-World War I rappel à l'ordre in French cultural life."

What Riviére misses in his insightful but tendentious presentation is the very fact of performance, which Nijinsky himself (educated entirely within the institution of the theater) remained constantly aware. To accommodate the actuality of performance to Riviére’s critical response to Nijinsky, I turn now to a second performance—Nijinsky’s final, terrifying appearance at the Suvretta House in St. Moritz at the time of his final descent into madness. Rather than simply opposing a “poetics” or “rhetoric” of dance to the actuality of performance, however—thereby privileging performance itself as an immanent happening of the choreography’s “truth”—I wish to invoke the semiotics of Charles Sanders Peirce as a way of reconciling performance and text, body and soma. In essence, we confront the same question that framed the preceding chapter: What happens to the body—in this case, the male body—when it is obliged to perform the work of representation? It is in the critical and performative elaboration of this “work” of representation—not in the circumstances of specific stormy performances—that we must locate the scandal of Nijinsky's career and the ultimate “queering” of symbolist aesthetics.

As a preface to our consideration of Nijinsky's final tragic—and, yes, sacrificial dance—let us consider the relationship of dance to the scandalous by way of René Girard's important essay on the Salome figure. In this essay, Girard assumes an ideology of dance performance that effectively elides representational work in order to set up an opposition of dance and scandal, arguing that, “scandal is everything that prevents us from dancing. The grace of the dancer delivers us less from our bodily infirmities, which are insignificant, than from skandalon itself. The movements of dance seem to untangle for us the otherwise unyielding knots of our desires. To enjoy the dance is to identify with the dancer; it is to dance with her and no longer to feel our imprisonment in Mallarmé's ‘ice’ or to be mired in Sartre's ‘visqueux.’”¹

Scandal, here, is ontologically opposed to dance. To enjoy dance is to engage in a work of identification, while scandal is associated with both “bodily infirmities” and “our desires” and must be countered by an act of dancerly “grace.” Only if dance is figured as disembodied and nondesiring does this distinction hold, of course—and Nijinsky's choreography is scandalous precisely because it refuses that separation. Girard's understanding of dance—as the antithesis of skandalon—is mired in gender assumptions (“to enjoy the dance . . . is to dance with her”) that are all oriented toward the establishment of a kinaesthetic identity. Nijinsky's choreography, I will argue, sacrifices precisely this subject position.

Girard's notion of skandalon is drawn from biblical and ecclesiastical Greek, where it is generally translated as “offense” or “unseemly or unrighteous conduct.” This meaning, however, is only a secondary derivation from a more fundamental meaning of skandalon, in which it indicates either the trigger of a trap on which bait is placed in order that the trap be sprung, or a “stumbling block.” For Girard, according to one critic's gloss, “the skandalon designates a very common inability to walk away from mimetic rivalry.”² Scandal is, thus, related to the mimetic desires that generate cultural violence (the links to Eksteins's presentation of the violence of interwar culture are obvious here) and results at the somatic level in the erection of a “stumbling block,” in an “inability to walk. "Dance, meanwhile, as the bodily translation of a religious grace, is the aesthetic negation of such offence. In what follows, we shall see how the stumble, or scandal, forms the very basis of a choreographic vision in Nijinsky. Scandal is an aesthetic rather than contingently cultural circumstance in Nijinsky's work. It is not, then, a question of tracing the specific "scandals" to which his works famously gave rise but rather of understanding the function of scandal itself in his choreography—a "dis-graceful" aesthetic, so to speak.

Girard's ethical concept of the mimetic will be transformed, as I hope to show, into an aesthetics of the icon. What exactly is the role, then, in Nijinsky's choreography of the skandalon that is otherwise presumed to be so inimical to the very aesthetic principles of the dance? To answer this question, let us begin with the performance noted by Frank Bidart in the epigraph to this chapter. It is the evening of Nijinsky's last public performance: his "marriage with God" on 19 January 1919 at the Suvretta House in St. Moritz. Teetering on the brink of insanity, Nijinsky seeks to represent to the well-heeled audience of this Swiss spa town the horrors of war by dancing among them and around them—by completely confronting them with his dance. As the dancer notes in The Diary of Vaslav Nijinsky, the audience is clearly terrified; which is for the best, as "God wanted the public to be in a state of excitement" (139). Nijinsky's own fevered mental state both facilitates communication and is itself that which is communicated: "The public understands me better when I am vibrating" (139), he will claim. Contrary to Riviére's assertion that Nijinsky's choreography excised all "vacillation" from the dance, Nijinsky himself characterizes his very mode of communication—alienating him from any fixed notion of self and, finally, from sanity itself—as a self-differentiating "vibration." Scandalously, as he begins his dance Nijinsky stumbles and bloodies his foot, but "the audience did not care because my dancing was beautiful" (139). The aesthetic lapse and the establishing of the very possibility of beauty seem inextricably linked through the moment of this stumble. In order that the dance communicate, two things are necessary: an aesthetic "lapse" —the stumble—and an injury to the dancer's body, an injury that foregrounds the body itself as a signifying medium. It is through this slip that a specifically iconic representation is opened up—the dancer's bloodied foot stands in for (or, indeed, does not stand at all, but rather "stumbles for") the maimed and bloodied soldiers of the war. This is an aesthetic lapse that establishes meaning. Meanwhile, the entry of meaning into aesthetic performance results in a materialization and maiming of the aesthetic vehicle—the dancer's body. A horrified member of the audience looks: "I showed her the blood on my foot—she does not like blood. I made her realize that blood is war and that I do not like war" (139-40). The dancer's body is sacrificed to the representation of a greater sacrifice—war. This representational logic of sacrifice is at the same time a logic of substitution. Nijinsky stands in for the bloodied, maimed, and murdered soldiers of World War I: the substitution is iconic. Violence is the condition not only of war but of representation itself—Nijinsky's self-sacrificial commitment to the obligation of signification. Violence is performed on the body in order that it be subjugated to the task of representation." Simply, a certain violence is practiced on the self-enclosed aesthetic itself: Nijinsky slips. Nevertheless, he asserts: “My dancing was beautiful.” The slip that establishes the chain of sacrificial signification—his bloodied foot for their bloodied corpses—at the same time becomes a precondition of beauty. Unlike the self-erasure of the “work” of dance that Riviére saw in Nijinsky’s performance of Fokine, Nijinsky’s own choreography foregrounds both work and violence as the preconditions of the male body’s act of aesthetic representation. “Beauty” itself—as the seamless, symbolic meeting of signifying body and signified spirit—is called into question as an aesthetic category.

The male body cannot claim to “embody” truth and beauty without displaying the violence that such concepts necessarily introduce into the social realm and the violence that this task of representation necessarily enacts on the dancer’s body. This one incident effectively captures the crucial questions I wish to treat in this chapter. First, the question of Nijinsky’s communicative vibration—which one might in other ways easily reconcile with theories of kinaesthesia central to modern dance both then and now—raises the question of stability: the stability of representation and the stability of identity. Paradoxically, it is only when he stumbles that Nijinsky recognizably “stands for” something. His “vibration” both destabilizes and yet fixes and circumscribes the space of the subject.

But vibration is also linked to the question of movement and signification. To make the link explicit: vibration would be the movement of paradox implicit in the very notion of a semiotically “motivated” sign. In the language of the study of signs, a “motivated” sign is one in which—contrary to structuralist notions of pure difference—there is some necessary relation between signifier and signified. The “motivated” sign, in semiotic terms, is in a sense fixed because the relation between signifier and signified is a necessary one. Yet a motivated sign might also be thought of a sign that moves—a fugitive sign exemplified by the movement of dance, a sign that resists any fixation.

What I am suggesting here is that Nijinsky’s choreography for the male body brings to the fore certain problems inherent in any notion of cultural and semiotic “motivation.” While the element of necessity inherent in the motivated sign guarantees some fixity, the motivated sign is also a sign that has been set in motion, that cannot be fixed. The attempt to introduce order into signifying practices introduces at the same time movement and temporality, the possibility of slippage. The tension between these tendencies, I will argue, results in Nijinsky’s “vibration”—a play of movement and stasis—and the eventual fall into representation; the bloodied foot for the bloodied soldiers. Nijinsky serves as icon—and serves, ultimately, as an icon of the icon (his sacrifice to representation is, after all, a representation of sacrifice). Thus he obliges us to consider a counterpraxis of modernism that challenges the hegemonic discourse that takes abstraction, textual play, and indeterminacy as organizing categories.

The next question to consider is the specific mode of motivation in Nijinsky’s performance at the Suvretta House: blood for blood. In terms of the semiotic system elaborated by Charles Sanders Peirce—which I treat more extensively below—this is an example of iconic representation. This category of the icon, I will suggest, is important in several ways. First, as we have seen, it suggests a certain mode of representation—motivation as something paradoxically fixed and shifting. Second, the very representationality of the icon suggests an aesthetic in which the moment of figuration and mimetic representation has been—contrary to prevailing accounts of modernism—not only retained, but made the essence of the aesthetic system. Third, Nijinsky's self-sacrifice is also self-reflective in that it signifies sacrifice—the sacrificial slaughter of the soldiers. In other words, it is not simply a question of one bloody signifier necessarily linked to one bloodied signified: there is an iconic homology of modes of signification also. My sacrifice is an icon of their sacrifice; and I sacrifice my sacrifice to theirs in order to represent it: thus, the iconic here thematizes itself.

Turning, now, to a dispassionate formal analysis of the icon as semiotic modality, let us not forget the violent material implications of iconic representation for the body of the dancer. The semiotic notion of "motivation," the possibility of a necessary and logical link between signifier and signified, introduces causality into the signifying process. It suggests the possibility of prediction and necessity, and yet does so through the medium of movement (motivation) and temporality.

In order to understand the icon in some sense historically—as indicative of a historical shift in signifying practices and as the basis of an aesthetic that would challenge prevalent notions of modernism—I offer here a rudimentary presentation of Charles Sanders Peirce's tripartite theory of the sign. Peirce characterizes three basic categories of sign as follows:

A sign is either an icon, an index, or a symbol. An icon is a sign which would possess the character which renders it significant, even though its object had no existence; such as a lead-pencil streak as representing a geometrical line. An index is a sign which would, at once, lose the character which makes it a sign if its object were removed, but would not lose that character if there were no interpretant. Such, for instance, is a piece of mould with a bullet-hole in it as a sign of a shot; for without the shot there would have been no hole, whether anyone has the sense to attribute it to a shot or not. A symbol is a sign which would lose the character which renders it a sign if there were no interpretant. Such is 170 Social Choreography any utterance of speech which signifies what it does only by virtue of its being understood to have that signification."

These rational forms—these forms, indeed, that for Peirce constitute rationality itself—also suggest divergent theories of aesthetic form. Particularly striking in light of the "catachretic logic" I have invoked throughout this study is the definition of the icon as "a sign which would possess the character which renders it significant, even though its object had no existence." This icon renders visible a purely logical possibility, the idea of its referent, but cannot be thought of mimetically because its very visualization risks obscuring the idea beneath the tracings of the pencil. The iconic and the mimetic modes cannot be collapsed into each other—and it is through this space of difference, I contend, that Nijinsky's choreography slips. Sticking with Peirce's own presentation for the moment, however, let us make explicit certain aspects of the argument perhaps obscured for those unfamiliar with his terminology. The iconic sign refers to a thing or idea, but is not materially dependent on the existence of the thing it represents. The icon is "disinterested" in the sense that it represents something notional, not the result of a traditional motor process of cause and effect. The index, on the contrary, is a representation materially produced by the thing it represents, motivated by the existence of its signified. The symbol is of interest because it has enjoyed a privileged aesthetic status within modern, post-romantic aesthetic theory, especially in studies of dance.

Peirce's identification of the symbol with the "name" suggests an ideal of Adamic language familiar from 18th-century language debates, hinting at the operation of some inner, unfathomed necessity. By contrasting the symbolic structure of "names" with the logic of the Peircean icon, we can challenge the way we understand the function of cultural "icons" such as Nijinsky.

The common assent necessary to the establishment of an "icon" in this strictly symbolic sense is also a culture-forming moment. It is this common understanding of the icon—this confusion of icon and symbol, in fact—that I challenge here.

Beyond the tripartite taxonomy of signs, Peirce also examines the modality of the sign's operation—likewise divided into three moments. These related notions of firstness, secondness, and thirdness are characteristic of all signs and cannot be mapped directly onto the homologous division of icon, index, and symbol (or name). The three sign forms nevertheless seem to be distinguished by their relative reliance on these functions of firstness, secondness, and thirdness. One might think of icon (or likeness), index, and symbol (or name) as forms of the sign in which the characteristics of firstness, secondness, and thirdness have, respectively, become the dominant. In Peirce's presentation, secondness as a quality of the sign would be "some real connection with the thing it signifies" (141) and thirdness the limitation that "it is necessary for a sign to be a sign that it should be regarded as a sign" (142). The symbol foregrounds thirdness, for example, because it is a sign only for the community that recognizes it as such. The index clearly entertains "some real connection with the thing it signifies." The icon lends a "material quality" (for example, "a lead-pencil streak") to an idea (“a geometrical line") and thus enjoys a privileged relation to the category of firstness as glossed by Peirce. In other words, the icon insists on the materiality of the signifier—the materiality of the body—in ways that run entirely counter to a symbol- ist aesthetic of the body's putative disappearance into the dance (as in 172 Social Choreography Mallarmé's presentation of Fuller).

Simply to insert Nijinsky into a narrative linking dance and its literary figurations—from Fuller, via Duncan—is to preempt precisely the semiotic and aesthetic shift that Nijinsky in fact represents. He does not simply represent something different from Fuller; he represents differently, iconically. Peirce's presentation of "firstness," the function of the sign fore- grounded in the icon's "material quality," questions certain essential assumptions of symbolist aesthetics. He glosses "firstness" as follows: "In the first place, like any other thing it must have qualities which belong to it whether it be regarded as a sign or not. Thus a printed word is black, has a certain number of letters, and those letters have certain shapes. Such characters of a sign I call its material quality" (141). This foregrounding of the materiality of the signifier suggests an aesthetic alternative to the communitarian metaphysics of the symbol.

Thus, for example, the "significant" moment picked out from Nijinsky's perfor- mance at the Suvretta House was the moment of injury in which the aesthetically self-containing performance was interrupted by a stumble signifying the bloodletting of the war. This slippage materialized the signifying medium of the dancer's body. Rather than taking this stum- ble as an isolated aesthetic faux pas, we need to locate the radical break marked by Nijinsky's choreography in a foregrounding of the mate- riality of the signifier at precisely the moment where the body itself is subjugated, or sacrificed, to representation.

Aesthetically, an insistence that the sign display its own qualities— firstness—translates in Nijinsky's thought and practice to a refusal of perfection, a refusal of the signifier to disappear into its own signifying function. Thus, the bloodied foot—reminding us of Nijinsky's perform- ing body and of the work or representation—becomes a precondition of the "beauty" of his performance at the Suvretta House precisely be- cause he seeks to represent the way in which bodies—as representatives of nations—are being forgotten.

While Nijinsky's avoidance of perfec- tion foregrounds the materiality of the signifier—and thereby under- mines the complete subjection of the signifying moment to its refer- ent—we need to note that it is, paradoxically, a scandalous aesthetic failure that makes the signification possible in the first place. It is only because Nijinsky stumbles and bloodies his foot that the significant linkage to the war and bloodletting is established. Thus, imperfection is not simply a failure of the signifying process but one that makes signifi- The Scandalous Male Icon 173 cance legible in the first place. We might see the semiotic and the aesthetic in a compensatory relation here—the significance of the work is established at the cost of an aesthetic flaw: the semiotic slippage is at the same time a dancer's slip. The scandal that Girard opposes defini-tional-ly to the grace of dance has become the very principle of Nijinsky's aesthetic rather than a question of merely contingent taste. At the same time, however, we need to recall from Peirce's presentation that "the Icon does not stand unequivocally for this or that existing thing, as the Index does. Its object may be a pure fiction, as to its existence" (252). The fact that "the Icon does not stand unequivocally" is marked in Nijinsky's performance both by the quite literally equivo-cal physical "vibrations" and by his body's eventual collapse in the dance. However, and this is crucial with respect to this iconic aesthetic, the body that is foregrounded in its materiality by virtue of the dancer's injury is not some kind of prelinguistic, "natural" somatic body, as Riviére claimed. Nor is it a body such as Duncan's that can take pain as the measure of truth and falsehood. The pain of an injury is, for Nijinsky, the very precondition of a body's access to truth—the representation of the senseless bloodletting of World War I.

In a nutshell, Duncan effectively argues for an aesthetic purity grounded in nature: if it feels unnatural, if it hurts—as ballet does—then it is wrong. Nijinsky, by contrast, grounds his aesthetic in the moment of inevitable rupture with nature: unless it hurts, so runs the logic, he cannot know true from false. Whereas the dancer understood from a symbolist position performed the disappearance of her own body into the rhythm of the dance itself, any iconic understanding of the dancer would necessarily "knock up against," to use Peirce's terms, the materiality of the bodily signifier.

In an aside that allows us to introduce the reality of performance into the otherwise systematic presentation of semiotics, Peirce observes that "an occurrence is something whose existence consists in our knocking up against it." The shock of performance, semiosis in action, is a physical one: the sensation of knocking up against the "material quality" of the sign, a bloodletting. Nijinsky's works are scandalous not merely because they offend a certain historical taste—as the scandalous and violent opening nights of L'après-midi d'un faune and Le sacre du printemps make clear—but also because they stage the moment of shock itself, where aesthetic meaning "knocks up against" and brutalizes the 174 Social Choreography body of the dancer.

The fact that the icon "does not stand unequivocally" further suggests, I think, a privileged status for the dance as an aesthetic form that also "does not stand"; that displaces bodies through time and space. The "pure fiction" of the icon's referent, however, potentially obliterates the reality of the referent by making it a mere "logical possibility." In other words, the bloodied foot that allows us to make the link to the bloodied and maimed bodies of the soldiers might also prevent us from making the link by engaging our solicitude for the present, the moment of performance. The icon makes thinkable what might not be thinkable otherwise—to the point, even, where we might suspect that it conjures into existence what it supposedly only represents. In other words, the iconic dance covers over its referent as it traces it—like writing or, to use Peirce's own very apt analogy, a diagram, "a lead-pencil streak . . . representing a geometrical line." By making visible and overt the idea of a geometrical line, the pencil streak not only marks out but covers over the spatial possibility it renders visible. Made literal or material, the trace covers its traces. Whereas the index depends for its existence on the existence of its referent, as the bullet hole depends on the bullet, in the iconic the possibility arises that the referent might, in fact, depend for its very existence on its representation. When the icon conjures something up, we cannot truly know if what it conjures up is, in fact, there. Something is created, or at least made visible, but something is sacrificed and hidden also.

My aim in this chapter has not been to examine the various and specific cultural phenomena of which Nijinsky served, in his own time and since, as icon. Important work has been done on Nijinsky both as a fashion icon and as the icon of a homosexual sensibility that has otherwise been ruthlessly eradicated from the modernist aesthetic canon.

I have been suggesting, however, that his iconic aesthetic was necessarily linked to the performative parameters of the male body at the time and to an acknowledgment of violence, pain, and sacrifice over and against an aesthetic of taste that asserted the seamless interpenetration of body and spirit, signified and signifier, and so forth. To this extent, then, we cannot abstract this aesthetic paradigm shift from the question of gender and, indeed, sexuality (as a deployment of gender). Nijinsky’s performance of masculinity asserts the culturally masculine recoding of performance through a foregrounding of pain, sacrifice, the materiality of the signifier.

With regard to the genealogy of modernist aesthetics, I argue here that Duncan’s innovations—acknowledged as crucial, often grudgingly, by practically all participants in the Ballets Russes—could nevertheless be squared with a gender binarism dictating that men “know” truth while women “embody” it. Nijinsky both queers this tradition—his is a male embodiment, of course—and yet helps re-establish a male-oriented canon of modernism; one that foregrounds, through the operation of the icon, those moments of pain, suffering, discordance, work, and the like that have become commonplaces in our vocabulary of the self-reflexive modernist artwork.

If the female performer held open the possibility of an embodied aesthetic truth, Nijinsky demonstrates the violence that must be done to the body in the name of such embodiments. What is “queer” about this aesthetic is its refusal of a simple dichotomy of the natural and the constructed body, a foregrounding of the “work” that underpins the mythic cultural idylls that form the backdrop to Nijinsky’s choreography.

By taking as our model Peirce’s example of the pencil mark that visibly designates a geometrical line—even as it, in a sense, traces over and obscures the notional line it represents—we arrive at a play of iconic signification finely balanced between the overt and the covert. The pencil mark makes overt an otherwise merely notional line, but in its overt depiction it covers over something essential as well. This iconic play of overt and covert is surely reminiscent of that epistemology of the closet elaborated by both D. A. Miller and Eve Sedgwick in their presentations of the fictions of homosexual identity, and invoked elsewhere by Michael Moon in his citation of Nijinsky as the cultural bearer of the “open secret” of homosexuality at the beginning of the century. We need to address these questions of truth and deception raised by the icon, whose access to truth seems to lie across the way of deception. If Nijinsky, as a homosexual icon, evokes the "logical possibility" of a homosexual identity—an important cultural function in this historical setting—does he not also foreground the very physicality and materiality of the signifying function?

We read in many anecdotes about Nijinsky's slightly freakish physicality offstage, as if observers were surprised that anything material could be left of him after he had performed the work of representation onstage. Others, indeed, comment that very little was left of him, that he was personally totally unremarkable, and we might even take his madness as the effacement of personal identity in the face of the work of aesthetic representation.

In reinscribing in explicitly sexual terms the question of "sacrifice" implicit in all semiotic substitutions, Jean Cocteau observes in his diaries that Nijinsky "gave himself to Diaghilev as a means of carrying out his mission. A sort of sacrifice à la russe." Nijinsky's own conception of his relationship to Diaghilev, which Cocteau is merely reiterating and commenting on here, places sexual identity itself as the sign of a sacrifice à la russe.

Here we face the questions of causality, motivation (in the semiological sense) and temporality in the icon. Is the "homosexual" subject—"Nijinsky"—that which is produced by the icon? Or is it instead that which is forfeited according to the iconic logic of sacrifice? Michael Moon has written in this context about the "strain of being a visible and intensely mystified embodiment of the open secret of male homosexuality in Paris and London in the decade or two after the epochal downfall and death of Oscar Wilde" (29).

I wish to suggest that the specific sexual content of the icon "Nijinsky" is structurally related to the very form of iconic representation that his choreography foregrounds, with its play of overt and covert. Nijinsky's "stress," as Moon phrases it, is his sacrifice, but it is perhaps not too tortuous to recall here those etymologies cited by Lincoln Kirstein in the opening pages of his history of dance, which include, among other things, the notion of stretching—of stressing or tensing—concepts that acquire a new cultural significance in the context of Nijinsky's career.'°

I am suggesting here that the specificity of Nijinsky's "stress" derives as much from the task of "bearing a sign" as it does from the content of the sign itself, and that this burden is, indeed, intrinsic to his notion of choreography. The violence done to Nijinsky as the icon of a radically modernist aesthetic constituted a stress, a tensing, a queering that depended less on the specific sexual identity of the performer—he seems to have been only opportunistically homosexual—than on the representational limits of the iconic male body, to which cultural "embodiment" was both dictated and foreclosed. Nijinsky's "queer" aesthetic consists not in the expression of a sexual identity but in the performing of an iconic male body.


MASS CULTURE AND GENDER PANIC

In tracking cross-cultural phenomena through dance, it is tempting to divide the "Americanization" of European culture into two broad, and roughly sequential, periods. The first consists of the response, both in literary circles and in the popular psyche, to the wave of women dance pioneers such as Isadora Duncan and Ruth St Denis. Certainly, the central European tradition of Ausdruckstanz would find its precedent and inspiration in the second period, characterized by reactions to the newly efficient and "Taylorized" body of the American production line. This period represents two seemingly contradictory impulses: toward expressive freedom, on the one hand, and rationalization, mechanization, and standardization, on the other.

The response to American social experiments in acceptable gender roles was particularly pronounced in Germany, where the absence of any serious ballet tradition allowed progressive thinkers to respond much more enthusiastically and unequivocally to Duncan than was the case in neighboring France, where ballet—however decrepit—had an institutional history.

Germany's late emergence as an industrial nation meant that enthusiasm for the forms of American mass culture, such as the Tiller Girls, resonated with an indigenous national project of rapid and belated modernization in ways that would have been difficult elsewhere in Europe. As early as 1902, Arthur Moeller van den Bruck, the gadfly Nietzschean intellectual, would refer to the Germans as "Americans with a Greek heartbeat" and argue that "if any poet is to succeed in harnessing the international katharsis unleashed by the modern variety theater and in our multifaceted modern-day existence within the conflictual structure of tragedy or comedy, that poet will be a German."

In simple terms, in this chapter I examine how new models of mass cultural identity emerged in interwar Europe as a result of the importation of American theatrical dance forms. In this chapter, I focus on different registers of theater dance rather than popular social dance trends, which I touched on briefly in the introduction. I further wish to demonstrate how debates about gender and cultural hierarchies helped shape each other. My critical intention is not simply to trace a history of cross-cultural reception but to demonstrate how an inability to account for imported cultural phenomena within the existing cultural logic for the first time effectively necessitated the development of a critical conception of social choreography as a means of analysis.

The predominance of performative, ritual, and choreographic modes of social cohesion in a given society does not necessarily lead to the emergence of a critical vocabulary for articulating or critiquing that society's choreography. Indeed, it seems that some distance—the distance of cross-cultural transmission and translation, perhaps—is necessary if such a critical discourse is to arise. To argue that specific societies are highly aestheticized (either in their self-conception or in their de facto practices) is not the same thing as arguing that such societies produced a sociological discourse of “social choreography” adequate to the elaborate forms of performance that imbue them. Quite the contrary; it is only when a certain choreography breaks down, in periods of transition, that the operation of choreographic norms and conventions becomes explicit and a critique of social choreography becomes retroactively possible.

In the preceding chapters, I demonstrated how questions of both gender and sexuality were crucial to the aesthetic and cultural processes of modernization. Critical attempts to establish an abstract modernist aesthetic emptied out of the contingencies of age, sex, race, and the like inevitably “knock up against” the realities of gendered bodies in both theatrical and quotidian performance: dancers stumble and vomit. As an aesthetic genre, dance had been almost unique in the central role it reserved for the figure of the woman—even though, as feminist scholars show, the crucial distinction of choreographer and performer served to dislodge women from the central aesthetic position by rendering them mere executors rather than creators of dance. As we saw in the case of Duncan, however, even where the “genius” of the dance was indisputably female, the ideological “significance” of her performance was still very much at stake.

The emergence of the female body on the stage—and even its deployment on the dance floor, as illustrated in the introduction—corresponded to shifts in the understanding of ideology. Rather than ideology being a rational system of belief that put bodies in motion, the bodily presence itself, in the “hysterical” mode outlined with respect to Duncan, became the guarantor of the immanence and truth of an ideological construct. In this chapter, I move from the realm of a self-policing “high art” to the realm of popular culture in interwar Germany to show the progression of this shifting relation of ideology to body. In its most lapidary form, it is a shift away from the figure of the Woman to the figure of the Girl—that American hybrid that so fascinated German audiences and German intellectuals in the period of relative economic stability from 1924 to 1929. In this concluding chapter, I will examine both theoretical and popular critical responses to the importation of American culture into Weimar Germany in order to suggest that one of the crucial responses to the breakdown of a homogeneous national culture lay in a redeployment of the gendered terms in which concepts of “mass” culture had heretofore been understood. In brief, I will trace a shift within a consistently feminized mass culture away from the figure of the alluring fin de siècle "Woman" to the new, rationalized and hygienic persona of the American "Girl." It has become commonplace to note the identification, both then and now, of an aesthetically and socially stigmatized mass culture with the feminine "other" of a rational, modernist, masculine high culture. By taking the example of Weimar Germany, I will demonstrate that a simple gendering of existing binaries of (masculine) high and (feminine) low culture fails to take into account important differentiations existing at the time within the stereotypes of each gender and cultural stratum.

In earlier chapters, I examined some of those shifts as they affected the body's perceived ability to embody ideas (of nationhood, for example) and concentrated on the iconic function of the male figure. In this chapter, I focus on popular cultural codings of femininity in the period immediately preceding and following World War I. Specifically, I will argue that in the shift from a figure of Woman to the figure of the American Girl, so ubiquitous in Weimar cultural criticism, we encounter not simply a shift in ideologies of gender but a radical shift in the understanding of mass cultural modernity itself. The Girl is not simply one part of a broader phenomenon of cultural "rationalization": rather, she is the emblematic figure of that process and, in many ways, the figure that brings it about in the popular imagination.

The examination undertaken here occupies a mid-space between cultural-historical analysis and abstract aesthetic theory in order to elucidate the ways in which social choreographies are produced in the translation from one level or realm of culture to another. Taking my cue from Siegfried Kracauer's analyses of the Tiller Girls—the most famous of the drilled female chorus lines that visited Germany at this time—I will focus on the aesthetics and politics of the revue form, which was generally understood by German intellectuals as the primary example of the Americanization of European culture.* While dance pioneers in Germany and America alike were keen to dissociate themselves from the tradition of the music hall, the variety theater (variété), and the revue, it was precisely the revue format that seemed to exercise the greatest influence on a huge swathe of intellectuals in Germany from the late nineteenth century on. In their writings, the aesthetic implications of the revue would be worked out alongside, and often explicitly in opposition to, an earnest, metaphysically laden tradition of modern dance in Germany.

It is important to read the revue as a cultural form that not only incorporated choreography as one element within a broad range of entertainments, but—with its loose organization of a series of acts or "turns"—also suggested new modes of aesthetic structure, new possibilities of a social choreography beyond the footlights. Traditional, cohesive principles of theatrical organization were thrown out in this new form of entertainment, which was predicated solely on the stringing together of diverting acts or turns. This new freedom, and this hegemony of the amusia that had so troubled Ruskin, in turn suggested new modes of atomized social organization. In taking the "low cultural" revue as a prism through which to focus on changing social choreographies in interwar Germany, therefore, I wish to challenge readings of the cultural process of modernization that have focused solely on the unquestionably important tradition of modern dance in Germany. Any account of modernism, modernity, or modernization that fails to take into account debates about popular culture at the time ignores the very arena in which the terms were being defined, and from which German artists and intellectuals—such as Brecht and Kracauer, to name just two—so often took their central concepts and practices. The enthusiasm for a rationalized popular culture cut across traditional political boundaries of Left and Right. Walter Benjamin's celebration of mass reproducibility, for example, is but one theoretical formulation, however equivocal, of a more general enthusiasm among both intellectuals and the consuming public in Germany for the liberating effect of industry in the cultural realm.

For these reasons, however, we cannot understand German enthusiasm for emerging American cultural forms at this time as a simple cultural capitulation. Clearly, the realignment of gender and cultural hierarchies that the reception of these forms implied had been prefigured in earlier debates within the mainstream of German culture. As the cultural critic and sociologist Fritz Giese states in his definitive study of so-called Girlkultur: “It was not a German mentality trained in the tradition of Turnvater Jahn that was receptive to this new dawn and to woman. Rather, it was a free America that first arrived at this new physical culture—first in ideal and theoretical terms, and then in a practical and applied form.” This new American phenomenon of physical culture supplemented a perceived lack in the Germans’s historical sense. If American body culture represented something new, it was, nevertheless, something for which Germans—with their nineteenth-century ambitions for national unification so closely linked to questions of physical regeneration and drilling—felt a particular affinity. Thus, Giese contrasts American industrial rationalization, which respects the rhythms of the body, with the military rationalization and subjugation of the body identified politically in Germany with the figure of Turnvater Jahn. Nevertheless, a traditional focus in German thought on the necessity of healthy bodies to the well-being of the state at least provided a frame of reference for his assessment of this new form of body culture.

In his magisterial study Berlin Cabaret, Peter Jelavich demonstrates certain crucial shifts in popular mass culture from the pre- to the post-World War I era in Germany. In the prewar era, when Berlin was one of the fastest-growing cities in the world, the theme of modernization—so crucial to the revue—was one that allowed for a foregrounding of Berlin itself as a national exemplar of modernity. The characteristic elaborate reviews at the Metropol Theater that began in 1903 carried titles such as “Get the Latest!! The Very Latest!!” (“Neuestes!! Allerneu- estes!!”—1903), “You Gotta See it!” (“Das muss man seh’n!”—1907), or “Chauffeur—In’s Metropol!” (1912), which aimed to put on display the modernity of Berlin as well as the phenomenon of the revue itself as an exemplar of that modernity. This cultural self-confidence diminished considerably after the war, according to Jelavich; the prewar exuberance of a growing nation was replaced by an attempt to cast modernity in specifically international and cosmopolitan terms. In its postwar forms, the Berlin revue aimed to prove its modernity by offering up acts of international quality that had earned a reputation elsewhere on the stages of the world. Modernity is now measured not simply in terms of relative national cultural production (a kind of cultural gross domestic product) but in terms of possibilities for consumption and the ability of urban cultural entrepreneurs to bring international cultural goods to the marketplace. Specifically, of course, it was America that came to stand for all things modern and that came to be showcased on the Weimar revue stage.

The revue itself changed as a mode of production. Under the aegis of figures such as Erik Charell (1894-1973), James Klein (1886-1940s), and Herrmann Haller (1871-1943), the monumental entertainments of the prewar period were replaced by the kinds of mega-spectacle that prompted theorists such as Kracauer to develop ideas of the “mass ornament” to account for such new forms of entertainment. On a given night in the peak season of 1926-27, Berlin’s competing revues collectively seated upward of eleven thousand people. As the title of Charell’s 1924 revue indicates, this form of entertainment was intended For Everyone! (“An Alle!”).

Perceived cultural sophistication consisted less in the judgment of an elite, social or cultural, but in the very operation of the market itself, in its ability to match what was on offer elsewhere and to disseminate the goods to a mass public. Cosmopolitan sophistication and mass dissemination went hand in hand. In tracing these shifts, Jelavich focuses on concerns about public decency and highlights various attempts to regulate public nudity—female nudity, that is, of course—in the face of a relaxation of laws of preliminary censorship after the war.

To this extent, his study of the variety theater turns on questions of the legitimacy or illegitimacy of its content. I argue, however, that the “promiscuity” of these new forms of entertainment was not simply a question of what was put on show, but rather now seemed embedded in their very mode of production. Whereas the prewar Metropol revues were generally authored by a single person or a team of musical and lyrical collaborators, the new mass spectacles were cobbled together from any number of pieces in a random organization that seemed to reflect the arbitrariness of life in the modern urban milieu.

Moreover, unruliness and cultural decay seem measurable now as a principle of production rather than as a matter of what, precisely, is exposed on stage: the unmotivated leap from one turn to another is itself unseemly. The temporal organization of the form—not just the type of music it showcased—seemed radically syncopated. As one observer quoted by Jelavich noted: “Just as operetta is defined musically by the three-quarter time of the waltz, the revue is characterized by two-quarter time, and more precisely by syncopation. A revue without syncopation seems almost unthinkable to us today.””

“Syncopation” functions in the critical discourse of the time as a kind of code word for cultural disruption—think of Adorno’s later, much- maligned essay “On Jazz.”* It stood for a distortion of the very parameters of temporality necessary to the establishment and transmission of any consistent and meaningful cultural narrative. Syncopation occupied a singular position in the debates concerning rhythm that I outlined in the introduction. On the one hand, it clearly disrupts a measured and established social Takt—but it was precisely the reduction of primal rhythm to such rationalized Takt that the vitalists rejected. Thus, the culture of syncopation imported from America was particularly threatening, for it demonstrated how modernity could generate, from within itself, its own counterdiscourse. Rigid and reified social conventions of tact could be opposed not only by a return to a vitalistic Körperkultur but also by passage through the very process of rationalization itself. Nevertheless, there is something paradoxical in the writings of the time in this notion of a syncopated mass culture, for syncopation seems to deny the common ground, a historical place, within which a mass might find itself. Despite focusing on the question of decency, when it comes to a consideration of the chorus line Jelavich is obliged to note the almost fetishistic recurrence of a rhetoric of desexualization.

If the revue was constructed according to the principles of what we might call a “formal promiscuity”—the potential movement of parts or acts from one place on the program to another, the equivalent of Benjamin’s photographic notion of “reproducibility”—the Girl reintroduced an element of propriety. Studies such as Fritz Giese’s Girlkultur took readers behind the scenes of the girls’ routine—as, indeed, did many Hollywood films of the era—to emphasize the hard work and gymnastic training that left the sexy starlets little time for romantic dalliance. The Girl signified work not (sexual) play.

If, as Jelavich convincingly argues, the immediate postwar concern was with reestablishing some parameters for the acceptable public display of female nudity, the subsequent growth of the revue as a mass form of entertainment in the 1920s seemed to bring with it different concerns. What, then, is the relationship of the growth in popularity of the new Girl—specifically, the chorus girl—to the displacement of overt sexuality as the central concern in discussions of popular entertainment? If the body of woman serves in popular cultural form as that which might be revealed—and that which, through revelation, might show us more than we can handle—the Girl no longer poses that threat. Her ideological function is entirely different from that of the woman, the concerns about her performance almost unrelated to the concern with sexuality and nudity that had swarmed around even figures such as Duncan.

The influential reviewer Herbert Ihering argued that “the American Girls are a sight worth seeing and a standard to follow. Beauty on stage, not through nakedness, but through motion.” Though still a spectacle, the girls have become normative, a “standard” rather than a sexual promise of happiness. In Thering’s opposition of spectacular nakedness and a new kind of “motion” we begin to sense the larger philosophical questions that framed the intellectuals’ reception of American popular culture at the time. His opposition depended on an underlying binary of “vital” and “static” culture that was a commonplace of the Lebens-philosophie of the time.

The irrationalism and vitalism of Lebens-philosophie provided a crucial ideological underpinning to the choreography and writings of the practitioners of Ausdruckstanz of the period—an attempt to capture in dance primal forces threatened by the alienating and inevitable process of social rationalization. The dance historian Claudia Jeschke has encapsulated the common cultural cause of Lebensphilosophie and Ausdruckstanz as a “cultural space . . . nurtured by a variety of philosophical, even cosmological, ideas about nature, body, rhythm and women, which, as early as the second half of the nineteenth century, were meant to help overcome social alienation. Within this "cultural space," Ihering's pronouncement is important, for Girlkultur does not simply oppose the primal "rhythm" as a cultural value. Instead, it dances to the even more powerful rhythm of capitalist production, undercutting simplistic oppositions of organic/rhythmic and mechanical/arrhythmic cultural values, vital and moribund social orders. It rendered the phenomenon of cultural rationalization attractive to the German intellectuals of the period. As if fulfilling Moeller van den Bruck's 1902 prediction, the girls transformed rational, agnostic modernization into a mythic logic of its own, reconciling the organic and the mechanical, the rhythmic and the rational. They became a potent symbol for a generation of intellectuals fluent in the critical vocabulary of Lebensphilosophie.

I wish to focus on the interplay and opposition between the two modes of embodied culture suggested by Ihering—nakedness and motion—to argue that the shift from the former to the latter, both within Ausdruckstanz and, in different and antipathetic ways, within revue culture, marked a shift in the function of ideology. This shift is not a clean break because nudity was always a central component of even the most sophisticated mass revues, but it is a shift in the significance of the woman's body. It is a shift from truth as a referent, something to be displayed or laid bare, to truth as something dynamic, to be performed and brought into being.

Truth and nakedness can no longer be unproblematically and rhetorically linked as they were for Duncan. If, as we shall see, it is Kracauer who has become synonymous with the examination of Girlkultur as a form of cultural "display," Fritz Giese is, in fact, closer to the mark with his observation of the girls that "they weren't just a spectacle, they were an achievement (Leistung)" (17). While I would not wish to argue that the pre/post World War I divide is marked by the erasure of all display, it seems clear that for intellectuals of the time, the original thrill of seeing something displayed is replaced by seeing something in motion, performed or, in fact, produced. Truth is no longer something extrinsic that needs to be displayed (as in a sexual revelation) but rather is something that has to be performatively produced: it is, indeed, the very fact of production, its inexorability, that is the truth. Performativity, here, needs to be understood not in terms of a playful questioning of the absoluteness of truth but as cultural work, the work of the production line that the girls brought to the revue. Truth no longer lies in the Schillerian realm of play—whereby an individual freely reconciles himself with the dictates of a choreographic necessity—but in the impersonal dictates of a system of mass production that nevertheless taps into a primal force greater than the contingent historical subject herself. We also need to note the implicit gendering of this shift from revelation/display to performance or Leistung. Film theorist Steve Neale has noted how, in filmic representation, femininity can be laid bare, or visualized as a secret to be revealed. The female body often serves a self-referential fetishistic function, symbolizing the hidden, and what is hidden most often is the secret of female sexuality. The male body, in contrast, is shown in close-up only during a test or special performance. This gender ideology can be applied to the analysis of interwar popular culture, dating back to the nineteenth century. Ausdruckstanz and Girlkultur are marked as feminine, but they are in radical opposition to each other. Girlkultur, with its fetishization of rhythm, offers a formidable ideological and aesthetic opponent to Ausdruckstanz.

In the 1928 study 'KörperschÃftigkeit und Körperkultur: Sport, Tanz, Gymnastik', Hans W. Fischer notes that the revue's debt to ballet is evident, but the revue has not been fertilized by aesthetic modern dance. The play of liberation and repression in this passage bears further examination, as the revue challenges the primacy of the symbol as an aesthetic and social ideal, contesting those literary historical narratives of "dance in modernism" that eschew the social coordinates of choreography. Rather than transcendence, sublation, order, and resolution in the symbol, we have a purely metonymic chain (of Girls)—a Kette—that depends on the most matrad PU eoeanad cod fundamental human drives. At the same time, however, we have a tension between the structural Szenenkette and Fischer’s strikingly similar imagery of the Tiller Girls, the “string of young girls.” While we have been liberated from the transcendentalism of the symbol, by no means do we have an immediate erotic or aesthetic gratification. The semantic resonance of the “chain” as a model for thinking about the new metonymic structure is all too clear: fulfillment (sexual and aesthetic) is deferred along the endless line of identical legs. (Kracauer, as we shall see, is quite explicit on this point.) The question remains, whether the revue is to be understood as a relief (Auflockerung) from the high seriousness of Kunsttanz or as a mechanization and reification of the aesthetic impulses formerly represented by the ballet. Does the revue prefigure an avant-garde aesthetic of fragmentation, or does it instead lend a false finish and totality to each of its interchangeable fragments, obscuring the possibility of any overarching cultural synthesis? If the latter is the case, I would argue, this reification needs to be understood not simply as a banalization of a high cultural form (the ballet) into a lower one (the chorus line) but, quite literally, as the reinstallation of the artifact at the center of aesthetic concern. For while the revue represents a non-organic, non-narrative principle of aesthetic organization (any act can, in theory, follow or precede any other) in the expertise of each performer (or, finally, in the line of girls) we still encounter a reification: the reduction of the performative and indeterminate moment of Kunst, to the trick, the “schtick,” the “turn,” the Kunststick. The revue, in the advanced form of the Tiller Girls, enacts a social choreography derived from the ballet but rendered mechanical and precise. Despite this rationalization and rigidification of order, however, there is in the revue also a form of “loosening up”—Auflockerung—that can be traced back to the developments in social rather than artistic dance. In Fischer's presentation, Gesellschaftstanz and Kunsttanz stand on the side of a certain social and aesthetic Auflockerung, ballet on the side of strict order, while the revue—torn between these poles—nevertheless offers the possibility for a radicalization and mechanization of strict order. Clearly, with the globalization of the culture industry and the parallel emergence of a fully autonomous aesthetic sphere, the terms of Schiller's cultural and political analysis (elaborated in the introduction) have been complicated. Without wishing to homogenize the thought of intellectuals often in intense and polemical debate with each other, we might schematize the field of choreographic analysis for Weimar cultural critics as follows:

Countering the rationalization and commodification of performance, or “turn”—in the revue, we also find precedents for a looser, “metonymic”—rather than symbolic or organic—social choreography. First, there is the non-organic arrangement of “turns” that can be shuffled and reorganized in any succession throughout the evening's entertainment, and in the performance itself, we have the metonymy that is amply suggested by the line of Girls' kicking legs. In the study of Kérperschén-heit by Fischer cited above, we find the following assessment of the variety theater: “Variété demands the finished product; it rejects anything that is still in flux. For this reason, it can tolerate art only when it has become artifice [artistisch]. In this regard, it resembles the ballet, which also prizes a dazzling but entirely insignificant pirouette more highly than any expression of emotion that lacks the necessary effortless technical mastery” (207).

Fischer's lumping together of the variety theater and ballet—an association, we should note, that was not without some institutional justification because Diaghilev's dancers often appeared in nontraditional venues in the years when ballet had to reestablish its cultural credentials in the West—reflects his allegiance to Ausdruckstanz and to Lebensphilosophie's privileging of a formative "becoming" over fixed states of "being." What the girl challenges, though, in her allegiance to the variety theater's demand for "the finished product," is an entire ideology of gender that held that women do not produce objects, or works—that they are themselves their own objects.

To quote again Hans Fischer—this time from his Tanzbuch of 1924 (although his assessment might have been culled almost at random from among similar contemporary pronouncements on gender in relation to cultural production): "Man stamps his essence upon works that exist outside of him: he is a creator. Woman, by contrast, is above all a creature; her essence, her highest value remains closed within her." In contravention of this cultural scheme, Girls are not creatures, they are creators, emblems of the very principle of capitalist mass production. But herein lies the snag. Just what do they create? As synchronized performers—whose rigor seemed to stand in opposition to an increasing and disturbing cultural syncopation—they are not individual objects of feminine display in the traditional sense. And yet there is no actual object or work to which we can point as the result of their cultural Leistung. They are a conundrum: they produce, yet they produce no thing. They are not "femininely" self-centered and self-centering because their entire performance relies on a synchronization with others. Just what, then, is a girl? Or, rather, what does she do?

It is in the essay "Girls and Crisis" by Siegfried Kracauer that we find the beginnings of an answer to this question—an essay written quite some time after his famous essay on the mass ornament that has cemented our understanding of his response to the popular culture of his time. "Girls and Crisis" is a review of the Jackson Girls, whose performance Kracauer attends after the 1929 Wall Street crash and the resulting economic collapse. He seems to be seeing through his own earlier naive celebration of the Tiller Girls when he bewails: "One doesn't believe them any more, those rosy Jackson Girls!" A simple histori- cization of Kracauer's observation might lead us to reconstruct the following logic to his argument: Prior to 1929, when the American economy was, indeed, the engine of world prosperity and the very epitome of modernization, the Girls really did stand for something. Then, we could believe in them. Now that the economy has stalled and the Girls just keep on dancing, we can no longer believe in them. It was always just an illusion after all. Ramsay Burt effectively makes this case when he writes that for Kracauer "in the light of the economic depression and the rise of fascism, the mass ornament appeared to him a delusion. "What earlier had been described with an avant-garde sensibility was now described with a witty cynicism. In fact, I want to argue—with respect to those respective 'truths' of nakedness and motion—that this is not the crucial point. Kracauer's very premise—'one doesn't believe them any more'—marks not a loss of ideological faith but a passage beyond the necessity of belief as a guarantor of ideological fidelity. This realization crystallizes a crucial move beyond the metaphysics of cultural conservatism that still marks Kracauer's writings up until the mid 1920s.

I wish to suggest that one can best elucidate the development of Kracauer's responses to mass culture—as well as the shift in the very functioning of ideology at this particular historical juncture—in terms of a refocusing of mass cultural critique away from the figure of Woman to the Girl, from the promise of a laying bare (a 'nakedness') to the exhibition of female motion itself as a place where material production and ideological reproduction meet. The girl, we might say, becomes a motif in the sense of motivum. In this new configuration, ideology is no longer a system of belief that holds at its core a (sexual) truth that can be laid bare. It has become a function, a system of deferral that keeps disbelief in motion.

The shift from woman to girl, I will argue, is a shift from ideology as a system of belief to ideology as a self-sustaining and 192 Social Choreography self-legitimating social function, a shift from the promise of revelation to the reality of mere motion or function. The figure of Woman as emblem of mass culture (examined in detail by critics such as Andreas Huyssen and Tania Modleski) relied on the fantasy of a physicality and fleshliness that threatened to engulf the male consumer. Woman figured an organic unity that promised an enfolding cultural totality in the face of modernist, masculine rationalization, but her sexual allure potentially disempowered the male viewer, subjugating him to that mythic totality. She was, in archetypical terms, the siren whose story one could hear only at the cost of one's life.

Thus, nineteenth-century responses to emergent mass culture often pick up the rhetoric of contemporary mass psychologists such as Le- Bon, according to whom the mass or mob was feminized and irrational. 'If the mass can be seduced and led like a woman,' the argument would go, 'its cultural forms might in turn seduce and engulf you like a woman.' The ideology of the Girl has given up on this all-engulfing totality as its referent, and thus cannot present even the female performer herself in a cohesive bodily form, as Kracauer observes: 'The Tiller Girls cannot be reassembled retrospectively into human beings; the mass gymnastics are never undertaken by total and complete bodies, whose contortions defy rational understanding. Arms, thighs and other parts are the smallest components of the composition' (MO). The Girl offers neither the threat nor the promise of a reintegrated organic culture because she herself is inorganic.

With respect to the female body and popular culture, then, I wish to argue that critics of an emerging mass culture were caught between the observation of the new phenomenon and the absence of new tools of analysis for its comprehension. Thus, the 'mass' of mass culture would first be grasped in terms of a nineteenth-century tradition of social theory exemplified by figures such as LeBon—as something irrational and primeval, intrinsically feminine." The figure of the Woman negates all difference and mediation by offering a satisfaction—a revelation, a nakedness—that simultaneously threatens. The Girls—as another critic, quoted by Jela- vich, notes—by contrast “are a so-called plurale tantum. That means that the concept appears linguistically only in the plural.” In other words, they perform the opposite function to Woman, parsing out into metonymic seriality the concept of the mass that the Woman still managed to embody in a total or symbolic form. Whereas the Woman figured male anxiety at the potential loss of identity in a newly emerging mass culture, the Girls are themselves disembodied and disseminated. Their seriality entails a whole new notion of the mass and a whole new notion of truth in ideology. There is no longer a truth to be revealed as something primal and hidden, and the Girls are quite up-front in revealing that there is nothing to reveal. Truth is of the nature of function not revelation. Benjamin makes this clear in his foray into the genre of what we might call Girlkritik: “The revue caters to the bourgeois desire for diversity, more in terms of number than in the nature and arrangement of its presentations. It will soon exhaust its store of inspiration. Ever since it undressed the female body to the point of total nudity, its only available mode of variation was quantity, and soon there will be more Girls than spectators.”* Ideology lies now in the realm of consumption, and mere nakedness—the ideological promise of ideology’s unveiling—has lost its novelty value. We have entered a realm of cynicism.”* In Benjamin’s presentation, this new ideological configuration will be complete only when we have all become Girls, when we all perform and produce in the social and economic realm according to the “standard” set by the Girls on stage. While the kinds of metonymic social connectedness suggested in the revue intrigued two generations of intellectuals who confronted American popular culture in the early twentieth century, we find again and again that such challenges presented by American cultural exports are recontained within an existing regime of cultural literacy. One form of this recontainment accepts the traditional gendering of mass culture as feminine and resists the figure of the Girl in the name of Woman, as a central cultural fetish. The figure of the revue girl as vamp that Marlene Dietrich has so embedded in our cultural memory of the Weimar Republic is in fact a hangover from an earlier cultural constellation that was about to be eclipsed (The Blue Angel, after all, was the film of a Heinrich Mann novel satirizing the moral hypocrisy of pre-World War I Wilhelmine Germany). Typical of the ways in which those in the community of Ausdruckstanz trotted out traditional gender stereotypes in an attempt to reconcile the radically new phenomenon of Girlkultur with pre-World War I feminizations of mass culture is an article of 1926, in which the author argues that the revue offers particular aesthetic and social challenges “because its overriding principle is the negation of all symbol, allegory, dilemma—even the most primitive narrative—all of which are sacrificed to an ordering of scenes determined by the drives alone.” The passage goes on to argue, however, that precisely because the revue represents the chaotic and asymbolic “it places at its center the symbol of the non-symbolic, the allegory of chaos, the primal image of the non-logical, the beautiful, merely beautiful, sensuous animalistic woman. Once the revue's resistance to a symbolic, harmonious social and narrative structure is itself reinterpreted symbolically—through the figure of Woman—as a "symbol of the non-symbolic," grounds for a more traditional ideology are re-established. At the heart of this ideology, moreover, is the "beautiful, merely beautiful, sensuous animalistic woman." The feral woman—a femme fatale in whom the danger of structural aesthetic collapse is presented as a form of sexual release—emerges as a vitalistic force of nature only by virtue of a rhetorical doubling: the recuperation of the asymbolic as something that can and must be symbolized. Fascinatingly, binaries of gender are reimposed—through the established figure of the beautiful woman—precisely in order to reestablish a symbolic order that is under threat and to code that threat as feminine. Although the femme fatale (think of Wedekind's Lulu) represents cultural collapse, she at least represents it in some legible form. She is still readable, still this side of the cultural collapse she symbolizes. The girl, on the other hand, represents a cultural and gender shift that cannot simply be reinscribed in terms of traditional female threats to the rationality and cohesion of culture.

It is always facile to posit absolute cultural breaks in history, yet I do think it is possible to posit a fairly abrupt shift in both the popular and critical cultural discourse of this time away from the figure of the organic Woman to that of the rational Girl. The transitional period of that shift is broadly contemporaneous with a move within high culture toward the so-called new sobriety (Neue Sachlichkeit) that concerned itself with the concrete problems of modern urban existence rather than with the metaphysical and humanist preoccupations of Expressionism. We need to ask ourselves what maneuvers are possible between this ideological manipulation of the figure of Woman and the new cultural paradigm of the Girl that emerged in the 1920s as the lynchpin of the vital new Girlkultur. Does the Girl resist this sexual recuperation of primal disorder or simply rationalize it further? I want to argue that the crucial break that needs to be acknowledged with respect to the reception of Girlkultur—as opposed to earlier forms of "Anglo-Saxon" popular culture such as the music hall—is the specific coding of the female body and the rejection of Woman in favor of Girl. I will argue that the Girl as figure breaks with an earlier model of the feminine as symbol of the asymbolic; that she breaks with a regime of legibility that could find a place more readily for earlier versions of the femme fatale.

What makes Weimar Germany a particularly fascinating study for any analyst of the transmission of early global mass culture is the porous boundary within the critical discourse of the time between day-to-day feuilleton journalism and the highly sophisticated elaborations of aesthetic theory in the work of figures such as Siegfried Kracauer and Ernst Bloch. Journals of the time, such as Querschnitt, enjoyed a large readership and provided a forum in which poets could write about boxers and painters about acrobats—and boxers, indeed, about poets. Rather than simply parsing out high and low culture and developing a vocabulary suitable to each, critics of the time in Germany tended to draw broad-ranging sociological implications from their exposure to mass culture and to reflect back the lessons learned onto their analyses of so-called high culture. In brief, we can distinguish between those for whom dance figures a displacement and instability (both physical and metaphysical, as we have seen in the course of this book), and those for whom it figures as either stasis or silence; a more essential language, movement itself as a self-defining principle. Kracauer’s theoretical breakthrough consists in finally overcoming a conservative cultural critique that divides metaphysical and profane choreographies to see that the operation of the profane is not simply a mimetic displacement of thwarted metaphysical desire.

The existential starting point for dance criticism at this time—and it is remarkable to think that the complex arguments of figures such as Kracauer and Bloch were available to large audiences thanks to the proliferation of reviews and the tradition of the feuilleton—was the belief that any analysis of choreography departs from the existential experience of “an empty space” (MO 129) or a Hohlraum (Bloch). For Kracauer this experience is the result of Enlightenment disenchantment and a form of “exile from the religious sphere” (MO 130). To this extent, Kracauer's work would not be distinguishable from that of any 196 Social Choreography number of (predominantly conservative) cultural critics of his own time—or even of our own.

As a forerunner of the Frankfurt School, Kracauer utilized choreography to analyze a new mass cultural phenomenon that seemed of itself to demand a reintegration of philosophical analysis into the contingent critique of modern social forms. The idea of a social choreography becomes useful precisely at the point—and I am arguing that Kracauer's critical legacy marks that point—where we no longer simply read back from cultural production to its socioeconomic base. To simplify, in social choreography we are obliged to see not so much a “working through” of social reality in aesthetic form but rather an “acting out” that blurs the distinction of aesthetic and nonaesthetic (when is a movement a dance?) and demands a new critical method and vocabulary for the analysis of ideology.

Kracauer was for a long time best known for his work on film—specifically for his study on Weimar cinema, From Caligari to Hitler, in which he sought to demonstrate an ongoing aesthetic obsession with auratic power in German film; an obsession that would find a resolution in the aestheticized politics of fascist spectacle. Recently, the translation of a collection of Kracauer's writings, The Mass Ornament, has revealed to an English-speaking readership the author's percipient analyses of mass culture, situating him as a forerunner of the Frankfurt school in many important ways.

Notably, the most famous of Kracauer's essays are those that deal with both cinema and dance as forms of mass entertainment. His interest in the phenomenon of the Tiller Girls, though, to take just one example, was far from idiosyncratic: Weimar intellectuals were obsessed with the development of Girlkultur and with American cultural imports. The most remarkable work on this question is, perhaps, Fritz Giese's Girlkultur. Kracauer's reflections on a certain form of dance as mass entertainment have become well-known, entering into a field of debate on aesthetics and mass production long identified with Benjamin's essay “The World of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.” This dissemination of Kracauer's work is rather selective, however, and does not take account of his ongoing fascination with social choreography. In short, Kracauer's argument regarding social choreography is best represented in his 1925 essay "Travel and Dance" from "The Mass Ornament." Kracauer examines the post-World War I growth of the travel industry and the simultaneous proliferation of ballroom dance forms. He views these phenomena as profane expressions of spiritual desire for what lies beyond our reach. Kracauer focuses on popular dance, arguing that the "bourgeois" society's enthusiasm for travel and dance surpasses that of previous epochs. He dismisses sociological explanations and claims that the desire for metaphysical transcendence has been vulgarized into a profane desire for "another place" or "another time." Kracauer sees travel and dance as creating time and space as deferrals, provoking movement out of ontological time and space into historical and geographical coordinates. Kracauer's analysis of dance foreshadows the concept of social choreography, where dance creates the sphere in which it is located, rather than being reducible to its social determinants. Kracauer concludes that modern dances brand the transformation of space and time itself as an event, which is crucial in understanding the significance of a reemerging dance aesthetic for a broader social choreography in the early years of this century. To reduce the analysis of such phenomena to their socio-historical determinants—to “events that happen to unfold in space and time”—would be to miss the radical thrust of Kracauer’s analysis of shifts in the experience of time and space. Choreography does not simply operate within time and space (and is, therefore, not reducible to historical determinants) but rather “transforms” both time and space and brings into existence a “world,” a realm of the nontranscendent profane. Kracauer explains the profane rationalization that takes place in travel and dance as a parsing out of the immanent and self-enclosing Ineinander of religious experience—the dialectical transcendence and negation of our personal spiritual experience—into a banal sequential Nacheinander—the mapping out in profane temporal and spatial sequence of those very experiences that were aimed at the transcendence of spatial and temporal specificity. However, one can trace over the course of Kracauer’s writings on the question of social choreography a development away from such notions as he begins to examine more fully the implications of the choreographic. At this first stage, he begins from a position easily reconcilable with the cultural conservatism of many of his contemporaries.

“The real person,” he writes, who has not capitulated to being a tool of mechanized industry, resists being dissolved into space and time. He certainly exists in this space here, yet is not utterly dispersed in it or overwhelmed by it. Instead, he extends himself across latitudinal and longitudinal parallels into a supra-spatial infinity that should not in any way be confused with the endlessness of astronomic space. Nor is he circumscribed by time experienced as expiration or as measured by the clock. Rather, he is committed to eternity, which is different from an endless extension of time... Thrust into a spatio-temporal life to which he is not enslaved, From Woman to Girl 199 he orients himself toward the Beyond in which everything in the Here would find its meaning and conclusion. (MO 68) Kracauer here defends a traditional idealist, transcendental subject— “the real person” —against its dissolution into the contingencies of time and space. Ignoring, at least in these earlier writings, the worldliness of Schiller’s insistence on “annulling time within time,” the early Kracauer sees in the sequentiality of dance only a relativism that traps man in the spatio-temporal, when he is—or should be—“committed to eternity.” A reading of this essay from 1925 certainly yields a more conservative Kracauer than the better-known celebrant of mass culture who would author the essay “Mass Ornament” in 1927.

To dance, at this stage in his writing, is to fall short of (or even refuse) metaphysics—traditional romantic codings of transcendental dance notwithstanding. The liberating potential of such a refusal has yet to be envisaged. To dance is to act out the impossibility of metaphysical self-realization in a reified and mechanized world. The Ineinander and the Nacheinander are implacably opposed. In Kracauer’s earlier writings, the mass threatens to become a collective in which difference becomes indifferent, and yet it already offers the possibility for new and progressive cultural formations. It is not until the famous essay “The Mass Ornament,” however, that Kracauer will begin to elaborate such a progressive critical possibility. Distinguishing between his own notion of the ornament and more conservative völkisch ideologemes, Kracauer observes that: “The bearer of the ornaments is the mass not the people [Volk], for whenever the people form figures, the latter do not hover in midair but arise out of a community. "A current of organic life surges from these communal groups—which share a common destiny—to their ornaments, endowing these ornaments with a magic force and burdening them with meaning to such an extent that they cannot be reduced to a pure assemblage of lines" (MO 76). Here, Kracauer draws a distinction between two forms of ornament: the communal, organic, volkisch, and magical ornament, which is burdened and always lands somewhere—on a ground; and the ornament of the masses, which "hovers" and is "a pure assemblage of lines."

Clearly, the organic ornament stands in a tradition stretching back to William Morris. In such a presentation, the ornament is a positive and vital expression of the very excess that 200 Social Choreography makes a culture into a culture. The prevailing aesthetic ideology of modernism has taught us to read ornament as disguise—as an excess that masks a fundamental weakness in the artifact's formal structure."* In an alternative modernist narrative, meanwhile, William Morris's organic ornament was the very expression of a cultural excess—the excess that is culture—displaying itself by the very detail that ob- scures. While there is a note of nostalgia in Kracauer's presentation for grounded ornament (as there is in Benjamin for the auratic work of art), he acknowledges the historical necessity of the ornament that "hovers.""?

The relationship of the mass ornament to its particular society is harder to pin down—precisely because it hovers. The organic ornament is "grounded" in its social context—this is what makes it "magical." To this extent, Kracauer seems to be linking magic to mythic structures, to the possibility of a grounding of reference as opposed to the indetermi- nate "hovering" of the mass ornament. While it is possible to read mimetically—and mythically—from the organic ornament to its refer- ent and ground, the mass ornament has been emptied out of content to become, implicitly, a "pure assemblage of lines." This image of the line appeals because we will encounter it again and again in the writings of Kracauer and his contemporaries in the form of the high-stepping chorus line. Almost paradoxically, the chorus girls will come to stand symbolically for the end of grounded symbolic reference. Their line symbolizes the linearity of metonymy and deferral that seems to char- acterize the mass ornament. To this extent, as we shall see, they stand at the very threshold of legibility as cultural phenomenon. They do not represent the end of representation as the crucial term in a critique of ideology—they perform it. Similarly, the mass does not represent itself in its ornamentation—it performs itself. "The Mass Ornament" of 1927 marks a critical breakthrough that moves beyond the more traditional critiques of alienation and rational- ization toward a realization that capitalism "rationalizes not too much, but rather too Jittle" (MO 81) and that the process of radically self- negating rationalization "leads directly through the center of the mass ornament, not away from it" (MO 86). Although the central figures of the "Mass Ornament" essay are the famous Tiller Girls, Kracauer in- sists that the ornamental be read at two levels: on the one hand as the spectacle provided by the girls themselves; on the other as the config- From Woman to Girl 201 urations, or "stars," that such performances produce from the audi- ence, from "the masses, themselves arranged by the stands in tier upon ordered tier" (MO 76). This too is characteristic of social choreography as I have conceived it in this book: an altered relationship of the audience to its acknowledged representation. It figures the distinction between what I earlier called the integrative (or performative) and the mimetic forms of social totality. On the one hand, the Girls perform an ideal of absolute integration and coordination reminiscent of the effortless grace of Schiller's English dancers. But Schiller, we will recall, could observe that self-enclosing unity only from the gallery, and only across the distance that separated absolutist Germany from nominally democratic England. In this radicalized and updated form, the Girls have now become absolute spectacle. Indeed, Kracauer's theory of the mass ornament holds that ultimately the ideological unity created by the spectacle is to be sought not in the technocratic coordination of the Girls but in the reactions of the fascinated audience. United in its exclusion from the cultural display, the audience is paradoxically included in the realm of the aesthetic as an autonomous aesthetic construct.

The implicit weakness in Schiller's presentation—the disavowed recognition that the ideal of social choreography could only be an aesthetic construct predicated on forms of spectatorship and exclusion—has now become the very principle of the mass ornament. The material on which ritualization and rationalization operate in Kracauer's analysis is primarily erotic. In the mass ornament, Kracauer maintains, the same principle of bodily display underpinning the ballet is maintained, but there is nothing left to display other than the mere "locus of the erotic."

We might elucidate the newly performative ideological function of the Girls here by means of a contrast with Freud's treatment of sexual display and genital revelation in dreams. The descriptions Kracauer offers of feminine "display" are reminiscent of those moments in Freudian dream interpretation where the form and content of dream signification coincide. Freud talks of incomplete dream narratives where the analysand will break off his recounting and say "and then there is a gap." For Freud this narrative gap is not, in fact, a gap in narrative, but rather the displaced narration of another "gap," the narrative recuperation of the vaginal gaps, or "genital apertures," that the child has seen but cannot acknowledge having seen. In other words, the form is really disavowed content.

The formal narrative gap, for Freud, is really a "gap" at the level of content: something that cannot be acknowledged at the level of content or substance is displaced into the very structure of narrative but remains an empty space. We have here a logic of inverse fetishization, where an unacknowledged thing is displaced not only onto another thing but also onto the very logic of narrative. Invoking Marx's analysis of the fetish—whereby a thing stands in for a relation, a commodity for labor—here we have instead a relation standing in for a thing. In ideology, this secondary relation is the very act of "relation" that constitutes narration itself—the failure, in fact, to "relate" what has been observed. Kracauer's Tiller Girls reverse this process, providing a model of the kinds of interpretation of ideology I am trying to get at here. There is no explicit gap in narrative. But the "gaps" that one sees as the Girls kick their legs (or that one never quite sees, of course) are the gaps in a coherent historical narrative. In this case, the content that one never really does see is, in fact, form—the breakdown of ideological narrativization. Whereas in Freud the narrative “gap” in fact itself continued to signify the unavowed display of female “gaps,” in the Tiller Girls the promise of a display of female gaps seeks to hide, through display, the fact that narrative structures no longer hold. What is displayed is a vacuum of meaning—or the very mechanisms of meaning’s erstwhile production. If the logic of Freud’s dream gaps might be called inversely fetishistic (we get a break in narrative instead of the unacknowledgable “thing,” the traumatic feminine “gap”) Kracauer's logic is fetishistic in a more traditional sense. He implicitly acknowledges that breaks in narratives of social cohesion might be more traumatic than the mere display of a “gap-object.” Although the Girls cleverly do not offer an erotic display, they indicate in what they do not show the fact that a “locus” of the erotic exists. The “display” of the Tiller Girls, then—the simultaneous splaying of the legs, the revelation of the locus of the erotic—is a semiotic display. Sign collapses into soma as the putative “locus of the erotic.” Rather than a traditional displacement from sexual object to object fetish, this gap as the “locus of the erotic” stands in for the erotic experience itself. In other words, in the girls' display the female “gap” becomes a simulacral fetish of itself. There is a certain cynicism or irony to this ideological performance—as if the very brashness of the display were itself enough to excuse the From Woman to Girl 203 taboo on the thing displayed—the ideological “gap.” What I present here as a process of cultural fetishization is linked to a recodification not simply of gender but of the entire technology of the sexual during this period. Certainly, as far back as the 1902 study on the variety theater by Moeller van den Bruck the reorganization of sexual relations and the reorganization of cultural hierarchies had been linked. Thus, in a passage strangely close to Kracauer's later observations about the transformation of the erotic under the aegis of Girlkultur, Moeller observes of that same can-can that so profoundly—and, perhaps, so rightly—disturbed John Ruskin: “The wilder dances of other races are nothing more than their folk dances reduced to the most expressly sexual form . . . In the Can Can the first stirrings of the mass take shape, the desire to transcend everyday reality for something higher” (159-60).*° Already in 1902, Moeller sees emerging from within the sexual and choreographic realms a distinction of Volk and Masse. The mass is not at all a merely quantitative phenomenon, and it marks not the disruption of transcendence but, by its demand for standardization, a movement toward the transcendance of individualized sexual desire. Its very libido operates in a different way. The ascendance of Girlkultur, in which a principle of systemic efficiency replaces all phallic guarantees, should not be read as simply the replacement of one gendered cultural paradigm by another—a feminized mass culture displacing an obsessively masculine high culture. Girlkultur demonstrates the importance of narrative as a ritual act of social cohesion rather than as a mythic reference to communal values. Rationalization is the modality rather than the referent of the Girls' performance. To demonstrate the kinds of shifts in critical thinking necessitated by the girl, I wish now to move to a later piece by Kracauer that demonstrates most clearly the reasons why a critical move to social choreography is, in my opinion, necessary as a move beyond more traditional models of “reading” ideology. Having argued that we cannot simply read from the Tillers Girls for an interpretation of their time, Kracauer in a later essay seems to do just that. In "Girls and Crisis," writing about the Alfred Jackson Girls in 1931, he observes how "the effect achieved by these girls has to be termed ghostly." He adds: "They seem like a remnant from long-lost years rising now at an inopportune time, their dances montages emptied of a former meaning. What is it that they, like an image become flesh, embody? 204 Social Choreography The functioning of a flourishing economy . . . They were not merely American products, but a demonstration at the same time of the vastness of American production" (566). The Girls are no longer timely—they are spectral because they suggest the functioning of an economic miracle machine that has meanwhile ground to a halt by 1931.

What, and how, do these girls represent? They are "emptied of meaning," a "montage"; they "embody," yet they are "ghostly." They are a "remnant," and yet their meaning—"the functioning of a flourishing economy"—is directly tied to their specific historical context. There is something wrong in the persistence of representation even as its historical referent—the booming economy—has become obsolete. However, as we shall see, it is precisely because the Girls did not signify in any referential way that the death of the putative referent—the economic miracle—does not impact their performance.

On seeing the Jackson Girls, Kracauer retroactively realizes that his original analysis of the mass ornament was insufficiently radical. While Kracauer always read Girlkultur as a performative ritual—as something shorn of any "legible" mimetic meaning and, therefore, necessitating a new mode of critique—his earlier writings nevertheless tied that shift in reading paradigms to a specific historical moment: the globalization of American production techniques and American culture. To this extent, his earlier essays attest to a unique and rather paradoxical historical moment: namely, the moment at which one can historically determine that it is no longer possible to determine historically the "significance" of a cultural artifact in a purely referential (let us say, base-superstructure) manner.

If the fetishization of production in American cultural exports (the machinic chorus line, for example) marked a shift away from reference and mimesis, it was still possible, at that last moment, to provide a mythic narrative—history—that accounted for that shift. Nevertheless, the shift is real, and the fact that it can itself be "read" does not alter the fact that it has subsequently disabled any simple reading strategy for the critique of ideology. We are in the realm of ideology as performance. Thus, it is entirely fitting—and "proof," indeed, of Kracauer's thesis—that the Jackson Girls continue to "simulate" production even though the miracle of production has apparently ceased. They need no referent because the whole paradigm of production has shifted. No slowdown in production need affect the rituals of reproduction once the mythic link to a putative historical referent has been severed. At this stage of capitalism, the twin imperatives of commodity production and ideological reproduction have become uncoupled, and the ideological has itself become an autonomous mode of production—exemplified by the Girls. In fact, in this anachronistic display, the Girls demonstrate how the putative social referent of all aesthetic performance is itself a catachretic function, rather than an origin, of mimesis. In the shift from woman to girl, we have a move from symbolic to asymbolic cultures, from reference to performance. Kracauer observes that modern mass society can no longer transform itself into powerful symbolic forms, as it could among primitive peoples and in the era of religious cults. The mass ornament no longer represents symbolically the collective that produces it, but rather produces a spurious collective that it is incapable of representing. Kracauer reminds us that the analysis of social choreography now needs to look beyond a simple sociological reading that links aesthetic expression to social structures.

The Tiller Girls become the model for Kracauer's notion of ornament not because of what but because of how they do (or do not) represent. The legs arrayed as "a pure assemblage of lines" are abstractions rather than representations. Any mimetic reading of the Tiller Girls—for example, a base-superstructure analysis of their representation of relations of production, or a sociological analysis of their enactment of rationalization—would miss the point.

If, as Kracauer seems to indicate, they mark the loss of a mythic cultural and aesthetic significance, we cannot simply "interpret" them as if that loss were itself "significant" in any unproblematic way. For all that we might "read" Kracauer as an early cultural critic and analyst of the turn from verbal to visual culture, any such reading will be anachronistic, ignoring the very turn to the visual that we are proposing. Kracauer's concept of the ornament obliges us to rethink, as I have attempted to do throughout this book, the sociological process of rationalization through the prism of the aesthetic.

Although prevailing models of aesthetic modernism present rationality and rationalization as demanding the obliteration of all ornament as artifice and excess (or in terms of the architect, Adolf Loos's famous essay, as a "crime"), Kracauer's analysis of Girlkultur demonstrates the metaphysical underpinnings of any such minimalism. The desire to strip away from the art object all that is extraneous to it assumes a notion of cultural essence—displaced into the putative "integrity" of the materials—that can no longer pertain at a certain historical juncture. Girlkultur does not demand belief in its putative referent (the marvels of an inexhaustible capitalist economy): it merely fascinates.

Whereas the figure of the femme fatale suggested the hidden existence of an irrational, sexualized, subterranean realm, however, Girlkultur demonstrates instead the inseparability of the rational and the irrational. The moment of "truth" in their performance—a revelatory mimetic relation to certain sociohistorical conditions—is itself extraneous. As ornament they reveal by their very excess, by their final untimeliness or belatedness. This, finally, would be the "spectral" nature of the Girl. What the Jackson Girls make possible for Kracauer is what Slavoj Zizek has likewise proposed, namely "a reading of spectrality as that which fills out the unrepresentable abyss of antagonism, of the nonsymbolized real." "The social choreography of the girl reconfigures ideology. Ideology no longer operates through the symbolic figure of the 'beautiful, merely beautiful woman' (no longer, that is, as a falsely symbolic resolution of the 'empty space' that existentially motivated cultural criticism in this time) but rather in an entertainment, a performance of the very antagonism that ideology would normally be thought to conceal. This is why—despite my demonstration of a shift in the theory and practice of the revue theater away from revelation toward truth as the very fact of motion itself—the category of display remains crucial in Kracauer. 'Display' would be the mode of cultural performance in which it is revealed that nothing is to be revealed.

As Zizek notes in his essay 'Fantasy as a Political Category': 'What we are arguing is not simply that ideology permeates also the alleged extra-ideological strata of everyday life, but that this materialization of ideology in the external materiality renders visible inherent antagonisms that the explicit formulation of ideology cannot afford to acknowledge. It is as if an ideological edifice, in order to function 'normally,' must obey a kind of 'imp of perversity,' and articulate its inherent antagonism in the exterior of its material existence.'

From Woman to Girl 

Zizek's location of ideology in reality itself, rather than in the discourses on it, is precisely what we have seen intimated at strategic moments throughout this book. Thought in terms of performativity rather than referentiality, the operation of ideology cannot be reduced to a regime of misrepresentation or false consciousness. This by no means suggests, however, that there is no outside of those narratives (that is, that 'history' is all just 'text'). Indeed, it is above all the recent overreliance on tropes of cultural 'textuality' and 'reading' that an analysis of social choreography must serve to counter.

The model for a critique of ideology, therefore, would not be, on the one hand, that 'ideology says things work this way when really they work that way.' Nor, on the other hand, can we capitulate critically by insisting that ideology is a narrative that gives the impression that things 'work' at all, when really they don't. This would be the critical response suggested by a simplistic—base-superstructure—reading of Kracauer's Jackson Girl essay.

The operation of ideology we can derive from Kracauer's analysis of social choreography holds that things work in the way they do because we misunderstand them. Our 'false' narrative is part of their 'true' operation. Thus we are back at Balzac and the inadequacy of any positivist notion of vrai and faux with respect to ideology. Or at Bergson, whose description in Laughter of 'purely material sincerity' as the condition of the ideologue's operation is quoted by Zizek in 'Fantasy as a Political Category' (91) as a precursor of his own reformulation.

What I am proposing beyond Zizek's reformulation of ideology, however, is that this ideological function of 'display' now exists within the compensatory relation of high and low culture. Whereas Kunsttanz still sought to exclude or resolve its own ideological contradictions (i.e., it understood ideology in traditional terms of obfuscation or false resolution), the girls turn ideology into performance and 'display.' To illustrate: think of the difference between the Freudian dream narrative that transferred onto the level of narrative itself the 'gap' that could not be narrated, on the one hand, and the 'display' offered by popular culture, on the other." In the former case, we have what Frederic Jameson in "The Political Unconscious" has called "the ideology of form" and posited as the final hermeneutic horizon of interpretation. A displacement, that is, of awkward or unrepresentable material into the very formal principle of the work. With a much less rigorous formal imperative—a mere Szenen-208 Social Choreography kette—the popular cultural forms deriving from a vaudevillian tradition do not effect such a displacement. What I am calling their "compensa-tory" ideological function lies precisely in their performance of the ideological contradictions that must remain unacknowledged or unresolved in high cultural production.

Inverting Jameson's formulation, the Girls do, indeed, perform the very "form of ideology." We need to ask how far we have really come from the "CanCan of Hell" that so disgusted Ruskin to the Jackson Girls in 1930s Berlin. Ruskin was horrified at a certain "proficiency in evil" that the can-can girls represented—something "worked" that should not have. Similarly, Kracauer realizes that something works that should not—the performance still works in the absence of its mimetic referent. Ideology no longer exists in a series of (mis)representations of a putative referent (the post-World War I boom), but in the "purely material sincerity" of a performance. The Girls demonstrate how ideology has always func-tioned in capitalism.

What they allow—and what retroactively justifies my category of social choreography as a method—is the "rereading" of symptomatic understandings of ideology. Kracauer lays bare the mech-anism of social choreography, thereby revealing not so much a historical rupture (i.e., a new functioning of ideology) as an interpretive rupture. Now we can read how ideology has always functioned as per-formative—at least since the institutionalization of the break between high and low culture that I have elaborated in this book through a reading of Ruskin (but that could perhaps be traced elsewhere or earlier in the nineteenth century).

When Kracauer writes of "Girls and Crisis" he discovers that he writes not of a crisis of capitalism but of the crisis that is capitalism. Although I take Kracauer as that moment in the process of rationaliza-tion when the Zizekian reframing of ideology becomes thinkable, and as the moment where it passes into popular cultural entertainment, such a method was clearly presaged in Balzac. We need to recall Bal-zac's distinction—drawn at a moment where Théorie de la démarche shifts gear from mock encyclopedia to fashion plate—between a false movement (mouvement faux) in which is revealed "the nature of the character" and the mouvement gauche resulting from habit.** The for-mer, we will recall, denoted a body and its falsehood as referential (it reveals something "false" in the character), whereas the latter was per-formative and aesthetic, finally; its falsehood is an effect (produced on From Woman to Girl 209 the observer) rather than a cause. An attentiveness to the aesthetic, I have argued throughout this book—an attention that is, to the gauche rather than the faux—necessarily reveals the ways in which ideology lies in practice (habitude) rather than just in representation. Histor-ically then—at the level, that is, of the history of method—we need to read the latter part of the nineteenth century as a retreat from this insight; as an attempt to restore the regime of reference and to charac-terize ideology in terms of (mis)representation through an insistence on the primacy of "reading" (physiognomies, etc. What interests me about social choreography as a critical method is its acknowledgment that the work of aestheticizing the individual and the work of aestheticizing the collective are supposed to be one and the same. This, precisely, was the thrust of Schiller’s seminal observation: “It is all so skillfully, and yet so artlessly, integrated into a form, that each seems only to be following his own inclination, yet without ever getting in the way of anybody else. It is the most perfectly appropriate symbol of the assertion of one’s own freedom and regard for the free- dom of others.” My reason for privileging the aesthetic, as a tool for the critique of ideology, however, is precisely not because it performs the ideological and material work that Schiller reserves for it, but because, as we have seen throughout this book, the aesthetic sense of self—once developed as a function of choreography—serves always to mark the threshold over which we stumble in our entry into society. For this reason, the essay on the Jackson Girls is of particular importance, offering as it does an apparent disjunction between the functioning of the girl contraption and the collapse of the economy. If the girls help us understand the function of ideology, what they finally make apparent is that its function, tautologically, is to function come what may.

The imperative of production theatricalized by the Jackson Girls returns us to the question of method and the status of social choreography as a tool for understanding cultural production. Although I have been arguing in this book for a historical movement toward performative rather than “literate” or referential models of cultural and national identity, Kracauer’s observations serve at the same time to hold us back from too ready an embrace of “productive” models of cultural analysis. Thus, at first sight, the churning of legs in the chorus line long after the economy has ground to a halt clearly choreographs the expanded “relative autonomy” of the cultural sphere in late capitalism. But that autonomy, of course, renders problematic any reduction of the cultural phenomenon to the historical moment (“late capitalism”).

What Kracauer realizes on seeing the Jackson Girls is essentially what Zizek argues when he writes: “This is exactly how capitalism differs from other, previous modes of production: in the latter, we can speak of periods of ‘accordance’ when the process of social production and reproduction goes on as a quiet, circular movement, and of periods of convulsion when the contradiction between forces and relations aggravates itself; whereas in capitalism this contradiction, the discord forces/relation is contained in its very concept.”* This break in the operation of ideology (away from the cycle of “accordance” and “convulsion” that determines a base-superstructure relation) entails a break with an episteme of representation and a movement toward a new configuration of ideological performativity. In Zizek’s terms from the same essay: “Ideology is not simply a ‘false consciousness,’ an illusory representation of reality; it is, rather, this reality itself which is already to be conceived ‘ideological’ — ‘ideological’ is a social reality whose very existence implies the non-knowledge of its participants as to its essence . . . ‘Ideological’ is not the ‘false consciousness’ of a (social) being, but this being itself in so far as it is supported by ‘false consciousness’” (305). This "non-knowledge," I argue, has been deemed the function of low culture precisely insofar as its "cult of distraction" eschews cognitive claims at a time when high cultural forms such as Ausdruckstanz were beginning to claim a privileged embodied "knowledge" of some ecstatic beyond. This is not to claim, of course, that low culture is somehow "ideological" in a way that high culture is not. As both Adorno and Žižek would argue, ideology is (in) the rupture. However, the historical emergence of popular culture as a commodity (no more or less than the high cultural commodity) with its own institutional spaces necessarily changed the configuration and operation of ideology in culture.

Whereas the ideological function of high culture might previously have been "affirmative" in Marcuse's sense of the word—the false aesthetic resolution of unresolved social antagonism—this function changes when high culture operates in tandem with low cultural forms. Precisely that reconciliation of body and spirit that was traditionally associated with dance within modern poetics must be reread from the perspective of a critique of ideology as false transcendence. But this is not the point.

By hypostatizing the choreographic experience as the locus of a knowledge beyond knowledge—a knowledge of the (metaphysical, or even mere anthropological) "beyond"—early modern dance necessitated a realm of non-knowledge—a realm of "display" to which the contradictions have been banished. I have been tracing through this work a double history: a tentatively sketched history of specific, sequential, and often overlapping social choreographies on the one hand, and a history of method on the other.

This second history of method demonstrates not only how the content of ideological structures changed, but how the very operation of the ideological shifted from an essentially "literate" to an embodied and performative experience. My claim has been that the performative nature of choreography necessitates a shift in our understanding of ideology. The two histories—a history of method and a history of social choreographies—rejoin each other at the moment where the specific "historical" choreographies produce and necessitate a new critical method.

In other words, social choreography cannot be understood as a self-evident category of analysis for all societies. Rather, it becomes apparent and manifest only at a certain historical point as a way of retrospectively rethinking social structures. Ideology, then (pace Marx and Althusser) does indeed have a history that is not merely the history of its successive forms, but of its functions and functioning.

My two narratives are reconciled in the answer to a question: At what point within the first narrative of specific social choreographies is the category of social choreography, as I have been using it, produced as a critical possibility? At what historical point, in other words, does this notion of choreography emerge as a model for "rereading" historical social structures? Kracauer, I argue, bears witness to precisely that historical moment, and he thereby allows us to read the nineteenth century also through the prism of social choreography. This is the significance—if we may still use the word—of the Jackson Girls: although they are themselves a historical phenomenon, they demonstrate to us, through Kracauer, the need for new modes of cultural analysis that move beyond models of interpretation based on the experience of "reading." As they grind on with their dance, the issue is no longer what the Girls represent but the imperative that they represent. Thus, we cannot simply take our thesis regarding the emergence of new "performative" cultural paradigms to mean, as it might in the context of traditional histories of modernism, that we have moved somehow "beyond" representation and figuration. The "pure assemblage of lines" produced by the Jackson Girls needs to be thought not simply in aesthetic terms as a move beyond representationalism into abstraction. Indeed, the problem the Girls pose for Kracauer—and for us, methodologically—is precisely that they persist in representing even when the object of their reference no longer pertains. The "postliterate" episteme I have been proposing, therefore, needs to be thought not in terms of a simple move beyond representation but as a reinvestment in it—a refunctioning of representation as ritual rather than myth. When the machines of production grind to a halt, the cultural machines of ideological reproduction slip into overdrive in order to reaffirm the reproductive imperative.

If in his essay "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction" Benjamin famously plays off the aesthetic aura against technological reproducibility, the spectral presence of the Jackson Girls, by contrast, demonstrates the auratic value of reproducibility itself—the awful truth that reproduction must go on. Writing at a time of economic crisis, Kracauer was finally led to generate an analysis of social choreography as a response to this historical moment, in which the very relation of cultural artifacts to their putative historical determinants shifts. When ideology reveals itself to have a history after all, an analysis of social choreography would be the critical method that asks not what things stand for but how they stand at all.


It is necessary at this early point to take note of what might seem an omission in the discussion of performativity in this book, namely the absence of a detailed discussion of the widely circulated usages of the term deriving from Judith Butler, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (New York: Routledge, 1990). My primary reason for this omission is the misuse of the term in debates that claim to draw on Butler. Specifically, the notion of performativity that Butler proposes has been refashioned to support “post-modern” or ludic notions of identity formation that stress in an almost voluntarist fashion gender as construction. In subsequent cultural studies Butler’s argument for social construction has either been re-situated (by the implicit reinsertion of a “performer” into the otherwise non-grounded episteme of performativity) or radicalized into some version of the primacy of discourse or “textuality.” Given that in the next chapter I attempt to uncover a certain genealogy of the ludic or Schillerian “play,” it clouds the issues to invoke Butler at this stage.

Further, Butler works with a notion of gesture that needs further historical elaboration (such as I attempt in chapter 2) when she argues that “acts, gestures and desire produce the effect of an internal core or substance, but produce this on the surface of the body, through the play of signing absences that suggest, but never reveal, the organizing principle of identity as a cause. Such acts, gestures, enactments, generally construed, are performative in the sense that the essence of identity that they otherwise purport to express are fabrications manufactured and sustained through corporeal signs and other discursive means (136).” The function of gesture shifts historically in a way that makes it impossible to posit the Foucaldian play of identities and acts in anything other than a historical context. In other words, it is not simply a question of a shift from performative to ontological and back to performative identities: the very binary is itself the historical phenomenon.

The sense in which performativity as utilized here does correspond to Butler’s usage is in its insistence on performativity as “constituting the identity it is purporting to be. In this sense, gender is always a doing, though not a doing by a subject who might be said to preexist the deed” (25). As Butler rightly notes, this is a problem of ontology, but by concentrating in this book on moments of stumbling, of the gauche, or of bodily convulsion I want to examine the question less in terms of the crisis of the subject than in terms of the crisis of socialization. It is not my aim here to reiterate the various positions within the ideology debate in materialist criticism. This work is admirably undertaken in what is still the most notable mapping of the various possibilities: Fredric Jameson, The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic Act (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981), 7. Marx notes that “Balzac was compelled to go against his own class sympathies and political prejudices, that he saw the necessity of the downfall of his favourite nobles, and describes them as people deserving no better fate” (Marx and Engels on Literature and Art: A Selection of Writings, ed. Lee Baxandall and Stefan Morawski (New York: Telos, 1973), 92). Louis Althusser reorients Marx’s formulation in his “Letter on Art in Reply to André Daspre,” by insisting: “I do not believe one can say, as you do, that he 'was forced by the logic of his art to abandon certain of his political conceptions in his work as a novelist.' On the contrary, we know that Balzac never abandoned his political positions. We know even more: his peculiar reactionary political positions played a decisive part in the production of the content of his work . . . The fact that the content of the work of Balzac and Tolstoy is 'detached' from their political ideology and in some ways makes us 'see' it from the outside, makes us 'perceive' it by a distantiation inside that ideology, presupposes that ideology itself. It is certainly possible to say that it is an 'effect' of their art as novelists that it produces this distance inside their ideology, which makes us 'perceive' it, but it is not possible to say, as you do, that art 'has its own logic' which 'made Balzac abandon his political conceptions.” (Louis Althusser, “Letter on Art in Reply to André Daspre,” in Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays |New York: Monthly Review Press, 1971], 221-27, 222-23). In other words, we need to beware of arguing for a determining autonomy of what we might call 'the aesthetic imperatives of his realism.' My argument would be that the 'aesthetic imperatives' are dictated not by an external logic of 'art,' but by the structure of a political fantasy and its need to close around a coherent narrative. It is precisely—as Althusser points out— because such narratives attempt not to 'see' that they reveal an ideology’s blind spots.

Jürgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society, trans. Thomas Burger with the assistance of Frederick Lawrence (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1991) (hereafter cited in the text). For a Frankfurt school consideration of dance and the regulation of the body under European absolutism, see Rudolf zur Lippe, Naturbeherrschung am Menschen, 2 vols. (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp 1974). For a more detailed consideration of the ideological status of dance in the baroque period, see Mark Franko, Dance as Text: Ideologies of the Baroque Body (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).

"Die Blüte des Balletts fiel in eine Periode, in der in Europa eine einsichtige, verbildnerische Geistigkeit ihren Héhepunkt erreicht hatte und doch innerlich bereits die Reaktion des Materialismus vorbereitete. Das Kérpergeftihl war völlig erstorben und eben deshalb verehrte man in geradezu rührender Weise auf der Bühne ein Ideal dessen, was man nicht mehr besaß. Der träger gewordene Organismus des Bürgers wollte sich durch die auf erste Méglichkeit einer ihm selbst versagten Befahigung faszinieren und in seinen verkiimmerten Instinkten aufpeitschen lassen" (Hans Brandenburg, Der moderne Tanz [Munich: Georg Müller, 1913], 90).

Carlyle's translation of "play" as "sport" was but the first step in a radical reevaluation of dance that would—by the end of the nineteenth century—lead to its identification with a problematic of work and labor. Schiller privileges play because he bases his aesthetic on a classical precedent that has no model for noble work; thus, the concept becomes problematic when adopted by the aesthetic socialists. Fourier's fantasy of travail attrayant (developed in Le nouveau monde industriel et sociétaire [Paris: Bossange Pére, 1829]) first exemplifies a tendency taken up by Carlyle's claim in Past and Present that "all work, even cotton-spinning is noble; work is alone noble. . . man perfects himself by working" (quoted in Alasdair Clayre, Work and Play: Ideas and Experience of Work and Leisure [London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1974], 64). Schiller's reasoning would resonate throughout the nineteenth century in interesting ways as far as dance was concerned. Owen, for example, takes Schiller's notion of play as a model, instead, for labor. As one historian of Social Radicalism and the Arts has noted, unlike Morris, Owen “required the individual producer, making things with his own hands, to be replaced by collaborating groups of producers who, for good results, must work together in a humanly and humanely designed harmony with certain restrictions on machine production . . . It was characteristic of Owen as a utopian socialist to emphasize, together with the need for social harmony in an industrial age, the arts of music and of social dancing, because music, of course, connotes harmony, and the cotillion harmonious co-operation among its participants” (Donald Drew Egbert, Social Radicalism and the Arts: Western Europe [London: Duckworth, 1970], 385-86).

Dance's role is highly interesting in this configuration, shifting in ways that help explain what I see as its subsequent fall from grace. It now figures not the immanent social relations between men (or men and women) but rather those relations as mediated through labor and production. In other words, it loses its pretensions to aesthetic immanence and becomes the aesthetic medium for rethinking social order—social “grace”—in terms of relations of production. Music as the force of “social harmony” and the model of law goes back to Plato, of course, but now dance is invoked as the passage of this law into action. Consequently, dance's reconfiguration of potentially alienated labor might be taken as a symptom of the aestheticization of the condition of alienation itself. In Owen, the personal grace of the limbs has been displaced by the social dispositions that dance makes possible. Further work on this question in Owen and others is to be found in Chris Waters, British Socialists and the Politics of Popular Culture: 1884-1914 (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1990).

If Schiller represents one key moment in the emergence of choreography as a paradigm for the conflation of cultural and social modernity, it is more usually Baudelaire—a more recognizably “modern” figure—who is cited as the source of that same tradition. As one astute critic notes, quoting Baudelaire's famous formulation: “La modernité, c’est le transitoire, le fugitif, le contingent.” The quotation outlines both the criteria necessary for a definition of the modern, and the fundamental elements of the dance: the transitory and the fleeting are the essential properties of dance when played out as one form of the performing arts: and after the break with the balletic aesthetic paradigm, contingency too becomes a specific criterion of free dance: specifically, in the foregrounding of chance and improvisation, and in the presentation of the moving image as a “spontaneous” emotional expression. Thus, dance embodies a basic model for the modernist aesthetic and steps out from its supporting role in the hierarchy of the arts into the very center. It becomes a symbol of modernity and the key to all the arts, which attempt to reflect the new technical age as an epoch defined by movement. In chapter 1, I already begin to examine how the Schillerian ideal of free "play" would be displaced by a growing tendency over the course of the nineteenth century for critical reflections on dance to liken it to socially useful "labor." Belinda Quirey, Steve Bradshaw, and Ronald Smedley, May I Have the Pleasure? The Story of Popular Dancing, ed. Libby Halliday (London: Dance Books, 1976), 70 (hereafter cited in the text).

"Die große Tanzepidemie, die durch den Krieg nur unterdrückt wurde, nach seiner Beendigung aber um so stürmischer ausbrach, hat etwas von der melancholischen Verwegenheit, die alle sterbenden Zeiten durchtrankt" (Hans W. Fischer, Das Tanzbuch [Munich: Albert Langen, 1924], 16).

"Der Rundtanz bedeutet den eigentlichen Verfall der Tanzkunst, wofern wir eine solche als bis hier vorhanden annehmen wollen. Jedenfalls war selbst in der Gesellschaft die Tanzbewegung noch so lange ein Schauspiel gewesen, wie sie von wenigen Begabten ausgeführt wurde. Nachdem aber im Rokoko zum letzten Male, wie in der Antike und der Renaissance, ein einheitlicher Stil eine ganze Zeit durchdrungen hatte, begann die Epoche der Literatur, der Wissenschaft und Technik und der Verbrecherlichung, und die zunehmende Vergeistigung schaffte die Phantasie des Körpers ab." Der Tanz suchte jetzt nicht mehr die Allgemeinheit erhoht, sondern wurde zu einem allgemeinen geselligen Vergniigen” (Hans Brandenburg, Der moderne Tanz, 23-24). A similar degeneration is traced by Huizinga in his famous study Homo Ludens, where he argues that “the supersession of the round dance, choral, and figure dances by dancing a deux, whether this takes the form of gyrating as in the waltz or polka or the slitherings and slidings and even acrobatics of contemporary dancing, is probably to be regarded as a symptom of declining culture. There are reasons enough for such an assertion if we survey the history of the dance and the high standards of beauty and style it attained in former ages, and still attains where the dance has been revived as an art- form—e.g. the ballet. For the rest, however, it is certain that the play-quality tends to be obscured in modern forms of dancing” (J. Huizinga, Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture [Boston: Beacon, 1955], 189). As Huizinga also observes, rather pessimistically, “the nineteenth century seems to have little room for play . . . These tendencies were exacerbated by the industrial revolution and its conquests in the field of technology. Work and production became the ideal” (218).

The distinction between the merely authoritarian and the more insid- iously totalitarian nature of modern existence forms the basis of the analysis in Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno, The Dialectic of Enlightenment, trans. John Cumming (New York: Continuum, 1987).

Fredric Jameson lays out this question of potential “homologies” of ideological material in his consideration of Althusser in The Political Uncon- scious. Critiquing the kinds of loose homology he identifies with Lucien Gold- mann, Jameson at this point supports Althusser (whom he otherwise cri- tiques): “The true target of Althusserian critique would seem to me. . . the structural notion of homology (or isomorphism, or structural parallelism)—a term widely in use in a variety of literary and cultural analyses . . . in which it is affirmed that at some level of abstraction the ‘structure’ of the three quite Notes to Introduction 223 different realities of social situation, philosophical or ideological position, and verbal and theatrical practice are ‘the same’” (43-44). By contrast, Jameson argues, what Althusser offers is an analysis in which the monadic autonomy of each of the terms of the homology is fissured by the fact that the terms are themselves related within the social fabric in precise and concrete and institutional ways: “Althusserian structure, like all Marxisms, necessarily insists on the interrelatedness of all elements in a social formation; only it relates them by way of their structural difference and distance from one another, rather than by their ultimate identity, as he understands expressive causality to do. Difference is then here understood as a relational concept, rather than as the mere inert inventory of unrelated diversity”.

Writings both on the waltz and on the early-twentieth-century dance craze bring us back to an all-pervasive ideology of "rhythm" that became the leitmotif of a broader cultural modernism around 1910, permeating both aesthetic and social discourse. While it is not my objective in this work to offer a whirlwind intellectual history of early-twentieth-century Europe, we might by way of shorthand identify the newly hegemonic choreography with the popularization of vitalism and Lebensphilosophie in the early part of this century. From the perspective of a revitalized and newly vitalistic culture that stressed spontaneity, animal force, and the body as the conduit for the release of psychic energy into the phenomenal world, the historically legitimate ideological critique of ballet degenerated into a programmatic demand to "break out of a century whose ugliness could only be experienced as inimical to the body, in order to ... 'embody in the flesh a more beautiful image of man'” {aufzubrechen aus einem als haflich und korperfeindlich empfundenen Jahrhundert und ein . . . 'schöneres Menschenbild im Fleische vorzuzeigen'} (Gumpert, Die Rede vom Tanz, 7; the quotation is from the Marxist cultural critic Ernst Bloch). If ballet were to be rejected for its falsity and anachronistic aestheticization of the human body, then it was necessary to posit a non-anachronistic, historically legitimate aesthetics of the body; a Kérperkultur or body culture. This question of rhythm is extremely important for any analysis of the tempo of modernity. As one important champion of modern dance observed at the time: "The search for rhythms characterizes our age. Social life, art, even science echo the call. It is in rhythm that we seek new models for linguistic expression (the chorus), for the theater (in space and movement), for social dancing (the hegemony of syncopation), for the streetscape (traffic problems in the cities) and for industrial production (rhythmic approaches to work)" [Das Suchen nach Rhythmus ist eine charakteristische Erscheinung unserer Zeit. Das soziale Leben, die Kunst, selbst die Wissenschaft von heute widerhallt von diesem Ruf. Man sucht den Rhythmus in neuen Formen des sprachlichen Ausdrucks (Sprechchor), der Bühnenkunst (Raum, Bewegung), des Gesellschaftstanzes (Herrschaft der Synkope), des Strafsenbildes (Verkehrsprobleme der Großstadt), der industriellen Produktion (Rh______ Dr. Paul Stefan [Vienna: Universal Edition, 1926], 40-41, 40). It is important to note how the all-encompassing trope of rhythm allows for a social vision that unites such disparate elements as jazz dance, traffic problems, and theater reform. The perception of rhythm as a central issue of modernity led not only to different conclusions about the world, but to a different conception of how that world was integrated. This insistence on rhythm introduced new aesthetic—one might say antiaesthetic—elements into social choreography by insisting on the presocial provenance of aesthetic forms. It excises any notion of aesthetic competence—the footwork equivalent of “handicraft” in traditional object-oriented modes of aesthetic creation.

Feminist scholars working with this narrative have nevertheless pointed out how the downgrading of dance as an art form marked a devaluation of what was, effectively, one of the only aesthetic spheres in which women were predominant. The distinction that developed between aesthetic conception and performance, it has been argued, allowed for the emergence in the early twentieth century of the (male) choreographer as a heroic figure at the expense of the (female) performer. See Amy Koritz, Gendering Bodies/Performing Art: Dance and Literature in Early Twentieth-Century British Culture (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995).

Gabriele Brandstetter has elaborated on this feminist critique to demonstrate the formal impact of emerging female dance celebrities at the turn of the twentieth century. Whereas anglo-American feminists have pointed out the way in which the emergence of the choreographer as a key figure—in the Ballets Russes for example—serves to downgrade the female dancer to mere executant, Brandstetter argues that a newly emerging notion of celebrity actually unleashes through these feminine figures the full potential of what I term social choreography as something that cannot be limited to the strictly aesthetic realm:

“The distinction between a ‘role’ and the ‘actor’ interpreting it—characteristic for drama as well as for the ballet—became obsolete with the appearance of Loie Fuller, Isadora Duncan, Ruth St Denis and their successors. The habitus of individuality that had become programmatic aesthetically and ideologically in expressive dance—along with a marked resistance in almost all cases to any documentation, sketches or even notation of their dances—renders the conventional concept of the ‘work’ of art obsolete” [Die Trennung zwischen ‘Rolle’ und interpretierendem ‘Akteur,’ die nicht nur für das Schau-spiel, sondern auch für das Ballett charakteristisch ist, wird mit dem Auftreten von Loie Fuller, Isadora Duncan, Ruth St Denis und ihren Nachfolgerinnen aufgehoben. Der zum asthetischen und weltanschaulichen Programm herobe-gene Habitus des Individuellen im freien Tanz—gekuppelt mit einem nahezu bei allen Vertreterinnen ausgepragten Widerstand gegen Dokumentation, Skizzen oder gar Notationen ihrer Tanze, laft den konventionellen Werkbe-griff in diesem Kontext obsolet erscheinen] (Gabriele Brandstetter, Tanz-Lektiiren: Korperbilder und Raumfiguren der Avantgarde [Frankfurt: Fischer, 1995], 25.)

For an elaboration of this scheme of analysis, see A. J. Greimas and Francois Rastier, “The Interaction of Semiotic Constraints,” Yale French Studies 41 (1968): 86-105. I should stress that I use Greimas in the same way that Jameson does in The Political Unconscious (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981); that is, not as an undialectical structure of binaries adequate to ideological analysis but as reflecting in its very rigidity precisely the structures of closure necessary to a coherent fantasy structure. In Jameson’s terms: “The semiotic rectangle becomes a vital instrument for exploring the semantic and ideological intricacies of the text—not so much because, as in Greimas’ own work, it yields the objective possibilities, according to which landscape and the physical elements, say, must necessarily be perceived, as rather because it maps the limits of a specific ideological consciousness, and marks the concep- tual points beyond which that consciousness cannot go, and between which it is condemned to oscillate”.

At this point, however, Ruskin has to acknowledge his departure from the classical system most fully schematized by Aristotle; for in Aristotle we en- counter five, not three, terms: phronesis (sense or prudence) and sophia (wis- dom), as well as techne (art), nous (wit), and episteme (science). “But how of the sense and the wisdom?” Ruskin asks. Perhaps “we ought to have two additional schools, one of Philosophia and one of Philophronesia?” (22: 130). No, he argues, for sophia is a modality of the operation of the first three faculties (I leave aside, for the moment, his treatment of phronesis as common sense). In other writings we will see how the practice of sophia is identified with poetry, as for example in the passage from Modern Painters where Rus- kin seems so radically to question traditional ut pictura poesis terminology: “Painting,” he writes, “is properly speaking to be opposed to speaking or writing, but not to poetry. Both painting and speaking are methods of expres- sion. Poetry is the employment of either for the noblest purposes” (5:31). This identification of sophia with poesis is, of course, highly significant in terms of Arendt’s distinction of (poetic) work and labor.

Adopting a taxonomy from the Nicomachean Ethics and the Eudemian Ethics, Arendt demonstrates how the Greeks' disdain for the necessities of life and their insistence on freedom as freedom from the necessities of work and labor led to a privileging of activity as the truly human political condition. While her study might be read as a plea for a return to such ideals of political activity and as rejecting the reduction of all activity to the status of calculable labor that it has acquired both in capitalism and Marxist critiques of capitalism, Arendt also demonstrates a dialectic within Greek thought that paves the way for the denigration of the very values on which that thought was based.

By the time of Augustine, she argues, with his celebration of the vita contemplativa, "the term vita activa lost its specifically political meaning and denoted all kinds of active engagement in the things of this world" (Arendt, The Human Condition, 14). Clearly, the Christian privileging of eternity (as a metaphysical concept) over Greek notions of "immortality" as an endurance in and against historical and worldly temporality means that such an "engagement in the things of this world" will acquire a negative value. Consequently, as Arendt notes, distinctions crucial to the Greek worldview are lost. However, "it does not follow that work and labor had risen in the hierarchy of human activities and were now equal in dignity with a life devoted to politics. It was, rather, the other way round: action was now also reckoned among the necessities of earthly life, so that contemplation (the bios theoretikos, translated into the vita contemplativa) was left as the only truly free way of life" (14).

The Achilles heel of the Greek system is the concept of shkole, which was taken up in Roman civilization as otium. This concept expands the concept of "freedom from" to include freedom from the time-consuming activities of political life. At a certain point, freedom to engage in politics is eclipsed by a freedom from politics—and Christianity's privileging of unworldly eternity over worldly Greek notions of immortality further facilitates this shift.

In transporting Arendt's framework to the nineteenth century, I would like to suggest that some troubling of this framework does, in fact, take place—but not necessarily in the places one might expect. By suggesting that these questions of work and performance are intrinsically poetic questions, I wish to suggest a slightly different way of understanding the relation of poetics to history. In looking here at questions of work and idleness, I do not reduce them to "historical" referents drawn from capitalism in an age of growing unemployment, but propose instead to read "history" through these aesthetic—poetic—issues.

In Arendt's narrative, Christian otherworldliness builds on a Greek disdain for the necessities of life, work and labor, in order to develop a blanket condemnation of worldliness that will subsequently consume even the Greek ideal of political activity. Arendt contends that the subsequent privileging of contemplation and theoria "has not been changed essentially by the modern break with tradition and the eventual reversal of its hierarchical order in Marx and Nietzsche" (17). If, as Arendt argues, the Augustinian shift toward a vita contemplativa implied a denigration of all activity as an engagement in worldliness, it nevertheless also provides new models and legitimations for action. "Only homo faber," Arendt writes, "conducts himself as lord and master of the whole earth. His productivity was seen in the image of a Creator-God, so that where God creates ex nihilo, man creates out of given substance" (139). William Morris, "Art and Labour," in On Art and Socialism (London: John Lehmann, 1947), 95. Subsequent references to this collection are noted in the text.

In a letter, Ruskin comes closest to a strictly classical view of the pedagogical value of music when he writes: "No nation will ever bring up its youth to be at once refined and pure, till its Masters have learned the use of all the Arts, and primarily of these; till they Again recognise the gulf that separates the Doric and Lydian modes, and perceive the great ordinance of Nature, that the pleasures which, rightly ordered, exalt, disci- pline, and guide the hearts of men, if abandoned to a Dis-order, as surely degrade, scatter, and deceive alike the passions and Intellect" (34: 530).

That the ut pictura poesis debate acquired a newly pressing cultural significance in the nineteenth century (as opposed to its more limited semi- otic significance in the eighteenth) should be clear from even the most cur- sory glance at Nietzsche’s Birth of Tragedy, where "through Apollo and Di- onysus, the two art deities of the Greeks, we come to recognize that in the Greek world there existed a tremendous opposition, in origin and aims, be- tween the Apollinian art of Sculpture, and the nonimagistic, Dionysian art of music" (Friedrich Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy and the Case of Wagner, trans. and commentary by Walter Kaufmann [New York: Vintage, 1967], 33).

Assuming the reversibility of this equation, it would appear that the dis- tinction between the musical and the plastic arts serves as a touchstone for social questions that would come to a head in the writings of Nietzsche but that can be traced across European cultures throughout the century. The ut pictura poesis debate has been transformed into a debate between the Apolli- nian and the Dionysian culture-sponsoring values. Returning to Ruskin, though, we realize that within this transformed ut pictura poesis debate there operates a more limited debate about music in which it is Marsyas, not Di- onysus, who is the antagonist of Apollinian values. If Nietzsche highlights in pointed terms the stakes of the debate, perhaps the illumination he throws on the questions serves to blind as much as it does to enlighten. What will have become, in Nietzsche, an opposition of Apollinian and Dionysian is recon- ciled, in Ruskin’s presentation, as a narrative of maturation. 31 This question obviously goes back beyond Ruskin. One of the most relevant and suggestive contexts in which the question was addressed was in Shelley's "Notes on Sculptures in Rome and Florence" (probably written in 1819), which are so reminiscent of that key text for the eighteenth-century ut pictura poesis—Gotthold Ephraim Lessing's Laokéon. Confronted with a grotesque sculpture of a flayed Marsyas, Shelley asks: "Is it possible that there existed in the same imagination the idea of that tender and sublime and poetic and life-giving Apollo and of the author of this deed as the same person? It would be worse than confounding Jehovah and Jesus in the same Trinity, which to those who believe in the divinity of the latter is a pretty piece of blasphemy in any intelligible sense of the word" (Shelley, Complete Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley, 10 vols. [London: Benn, 1965], 6: 307-32, 325). Of course, Shelley's surprise is itself a little surprising; the result, perhaps, of his rather benign presentation of the sublime in this passage as "life-giving." The sublime, here, lies with Marsyas—and the aesthetic offense lies in his plastic representation. The Marsyas-Apollo distinction retains its significance for the intellectual tradition I have been foregrounding right into the twentieth century. Thus, we read in Huizinga's Homo ludens: "In few human activities is competition more ingrained than in music, and has been so ever since the battle between Marsyas and Apollo" (188).


“AMERICA MAKES ME SICK!”

Martin set up a general model that America seems to defy. Just as, for example, he insisted that art becomes universal by observing its local geographic specificity, so it becomes eternal by insisting upon its own historical situation: "The vainglorious attempt to belong to the ages defeats itself, for unless the artist so merges himself in his own age as to become of its very stuff, history is unlikely to carry him along in any specifically contrived individual compartment of immortality" (AD 68). Martin's aesthetic criteria are not—in Hannah Arendt's sense of the word—"eternal" and metaphysical. They are "immortal"—that is, they transcend their own mortality by acknowledging the human condition. Just as American dance, unlike Italian opera or Greek sculpture, will become specific by being general (rather than general by being specific) so it must resist any temporal fixation implicit in the "modern." Indeed, Martin's problem with Wigman and with Duncan's imitators is precisely their attempt to codify as a metaphysic the choreography of the modern. Ballet, likewise, can only be "modernistic" in the sense of an "aping of the legitimately modern" (AD 77). Once again, however, Martin will claim that the distinction of American dance is not an idiosyncrasy of American idiom but rather the realization of something intrinsic to dance as genre: its temporal immanence. If dance and America are "here," they are also "now."

Amy Koritz argues with specific reference to the career of Martha Graham that her early dances were an attempt to work out and work through an exoticist, international "other" inherited from her early career at Denishawn. Only then could she return to the nativist discourse we examine later in this chapter (Koritz, "Re/Moving Boundaries: From Dance History to Cultural Studies," in Moving Words: Rewriting Dance, ed. Gay Morris [London: Routledge, 1996], 88-103). Ramsay Burt, Alien Bodies: Representations of Modernity, "Race," and Nation in Early Modern Dance (London: Routledge, 1998), 16. Susan Manning, Ecstasy and the Demon: Feminism and Nationalism in the Notes to Chapter Three 239 Dance of Mary Wigman (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993) (hereafter cited in the text as ED). Sigmund Freud, "Hysteria" (1888), The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, 24 vols., ed. and trans. James Strachey (London: Hogarth, 1953-74): 1: 39-59. Subsequent references to this work are noted in the text. The vexed historical relationship of dance to hysteria and other forms of medical pathology is examined in Felicia M. McCarren, Dance Pathologies: Performance, Poetics, Medicine (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998). For an elaboration of the sense in which I am treating "historical trauma," see the account of the concept elaborated in Kaja Silverman, Male Subjectivity at the Margins (New York: Routledge, 1992). After using cultural, racial, and national stereotypes to describe the different eras and modes of dance through history, Shawn's study The American Ballet seeks to characterize America's characteristic dance form. The "first and voluntary answer" is jazz, but "jazz as the expression of America in the dance is a lie. Jazz is the scum of the great boiling that is now going on, and the scum will be cleared off and the clear fluid underneath will be revealed" (AB 7-8). Martha Graham, "Seeking an American Art of the Dance," in Revolt in the Arts: A Survey of the Creation, Distribution, and Appreciation of Art in America, ed. Oliver M. Sayler (New York: Brentano, 1930), 249-55, 254. Entertainment is a form of distraction, a distraction from being. (We can trace a similar logic in Ruskin's rejection of amusia.) This radical, rather than relative, distinction of popular from aesthetic dance sets up some of the terms crucial to my study, in the final chapter, of American choreographies as read in Europe. It allows us to rethink the strain of exoticism and orientalism in early modern dance as something other than just a novelty—as a reflection, in fact, of the shifting strata of culture at the time. Orientalism in modern dance figured both the desire for an "integrative" culture and the subjection of that desire to the "disintegrating" forces of popular fashion. (Kracauer, as I show in the concluding chapter, would offer the best articulation of this paradox.) By shifting from a referential to a performative model for understanding ideology, we can see that while orientalist dance is ideological in its appropriation and misrepresentation of putatively "integrative" indigenous cultures, in its playing out of "high" against "low" cultural forms it confronts the ideological impossibility of projecting one's essence into the other. In other words, the striking prevalence of forms of exoticism in American modern dance of the time—for example, the orientalism of Ruth St Denis—is not fortuitous: entertainment is always and structurally exoticist in its cult of distraction, in its deflection of contemplation from the self. The exotic is not simply one form of entertainment, then; it is its very definition. Thus, a 240 Notes to Chapter Three confrontation with low culture will necessarily involve a confrontation with the exotic—and vice versa. 19 While the Native American offers Graham an insight into the pos- sibility of an “integrative” national culture that would oppose the forms of “entertainment” necessitated by immigration, she finds further inspiration in the very geography of America itself: “So the answer to the problem of the American dance on the part of the Individualists who point the way is, “Know the land”—its exciting strange contrasts of barrenness and fertility—its great sweep of distances—its monstrous architecture—and the divine machinery of its invention. From it will come the great mass drama that is the American dance” (“Seeking an American Art of the Dance,” 255). The reflexive “know thyself” of the philosopher has been replaced by a new dance exhortation, “know the land.” This shift, I will argue, fuses exoticism and ontological thinking: the physical topography of America becomes the (literal) ground of a metaphysics. The geographical physicality of America mirrors the pas- sage of art into the realm of the nonideological, the physical. Whereas ear- lier dancers turned to an anthropology of some putative racial and cultural “other,” Graham’s exhortation posits the American landscape as an external that must be known, and yet as something intimately related to the self.

Daly argues that Graham’s focus on landscape derives from popular tropes in the work of Frederick Jackson Turner, The Frontier in American History (New York: Henry Holt and Co., 1920 [1893]). She is wrong, however, in failing to dif- ferentiate between Graham’s rejection of “Negro” culture and her embrace of the Native American. 20 Ted Shawn and Gray Pool, One Thousand and One Night Stands (New York: Doubleday, 1960), 11. 21 Julia L. Foulkes, “Dance Is for American Men: Ted Shawn and the Intersection of Gender, Sexuality, and Nationalism in the 1930s,” in Dancing Desires: Choreographing Sexualities on and off the Stage, ed. Jane C. Desmond (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2001), 113-46. 22 Ted Shawn, “A Defence of the Male Dancer,” New York Dramatic Mirror, 13 May 1916, 19. 23 Susan Leigh Foster, “Closets Full of Dances: Modern Dance’s Perfor- mance of Masculinity and Sexuality,” in Desmond, ed., Dancing Desires, 147- 208 (hereafter cited in text). 24 Berliner Tageblatt, 4 May 1931. Collected in “Scrapbooks of Ted Shawn and His Men Dancers,” at New York Public Library for the Performing Arts. 25 Don Ryan, “Should Men Be Graceful?” in “Scrapbooks of Ted Shawn,” New York Public Library for the Performing Arts. Shawn is being paraphrased here. 26 Lucien Price, “All-Man Performance,” Atlantic Monthly, November 1936, in “Scrapbooks of Ted Shawn,” New York Public Library for the Performing Arts. Notes to Chapter Three 241 27 Atlanta Journal, 11 December 1933, “Scrapbooks of Ted Shawn,” New York Public Library for the Performing Arts. 28 In an article for the Berkshire Evening Eagle 27 June 1936, Shawn writes: “We work with pick and shovel, with scythe, axe, two-man saw and crowbar. Then when we come into the studio to create a Labor Symphony, for instance, it is no mere abstraction—the sweat of these forms of primitive manual labor is on our backs, our muscles are sore with it and our hands calloused with it” (‘Scrapbooks of Ted Shawn,” New York Public Library for the Performing Arts). 29 More broadly considered, dance history has demonstrated how this shift to a thematics of labor itself became a crucial______ For an elaboration of this question with respect to the questions of race being raised here, see Mark Franko, “Nation, Class, and Ethnicities in Modern Dance of the 1930's (Historicizing Bodies),” Theatre Journal 49, no. 4 (December 1997): 475-92.

Ann Daly has contested the claim that Duncan represents a new democratic form of dance. Acknowledging that Duncan questioned the ideological significance of ballet as a socially rooted form of aesthetic violence, Daly nevertheless claims that Duncan left in place more fundamental structures that reinforced the division of high and low culture, seeking as she was to gain legitimacy for dance by linking it to existing high cultural forms. Significant in Daly's critique of this traditional scenario is the equation (or is it a conflation?) of work as social practice (work, let us say, as production) and work as aesthetic phenomenon (work, we might say, as reproduction). Duncan's aesthetic, Daly will argue, is repressive to the extent that it elides the specificity of work in the artwork: “By constituting a “natural” body as the basis for dance practice, Duncan effectively removed from it any vulgar requirement of labor, which would have smacked of the working class; instead, it could be imbued with an aura of the innate—of good taste, which is, by definition, effortless. Something that ballet, constituted as it was by its demanding technique, could not claim” (Daly, “Isadora Duncan and the Distinction of Dance,” American Studies 35, no. 1 (spring 1994): 18.) While there are similarities in this argument to the tradition of Morris—in the insistence on work—the difference, of course, lies in Daly's desire to see work as effort, as the marker of pain. In Morris, work was that which expressed the joy rather than the pain in labor. In effect, Daly posits an opposition of taste and labor that cannot simply be grafted onto the American scene. As the example of Shawn demonstrates, the conflation of aesthetic and moral purity meant that it was often necessary for American dancers to justify the status of their “work” (particularly in the activist period of dance in the 1930s).





=======================\n\n\n





Music and Trance: A Theory of the Relations between Music and Possession

Gilbert Rouget


Arab Musicolog______ Back in his village, he told his father about it: “There was an enormous crowd. You would have thought it was a king’s funeral or something. People were seated in tight rows, around a huge empty plot of grass. After a while, a troop of twenty men or more came running in. They scattered and stood there for a moment. One of them put a round ball down on the earth, right in the center of the green. Suddenly someone blew a whistle. A chap rushed forward and kicked the ball away with his foot. Immediately the rain started to pour down.” His father replied: “These big white rain makers! Their medicine must be very strong!” Now what about those black drummers who can make people fall down and faint on the spot? Their music must be very strong too! Both are cases of what could be called an ethnology of the cause-and-effect relationship.

If by virtue of its topic this book leads us into the very heart of ethnology, it does so for another reason as well. It happened to be written in French by a native of Paris. But most of the data gathered in the following pages concern other ethnic groups belonging to other parts of the world, speaking other languages that express other systems of thought. Now that this work is presented in English and meant to be read by natives (not only those of the British Isles) whom the author did not originally have in mind, one may ask whether the reader will get the right idea of both the ethnological facts cited and the theory proposed to interpret them. A question of translation? Of course! But translation is par excellence a matter of ethnology.

I will not linger on the ethnographic data that constitute the raw material of this book. They raise the ordinary problem of compilation. Suffice it to say that the ethnographers’ texts have always been strictly respected and quoted as fully as it seemed necessary. Of course, whether the authors correctly reported the native thoughts or not still remains to be seen. This is the usual—and central—problem of ethnology (others would say of cognitive anthropology, but this does not matter).

What I will linger on is my interpretation of those data, such as it is now presented to the reader, in English and translated from the French. However cosmopolitan one may be, one is always to some degree a native (if not on occasion, even nowadays, an aboriginal). I do not escape the rule. The only difference between me, the author of this book, and all the anonymous people whose notions and behavior are its very substance, is that, contrary to the latter, who were not asked their opinion about the way their words and gestures were reported by foreign observers, I was given the chance of checking what had become of my writing once it was translated into a foreign language and of defending my own train of thought.

Since each language is a particular organization of meaning, translating a text implies a change of organization. The relative flexibility of the latter allows the change to be more or less important depending on the type of translation required. In the present case, I wanted it to be as slight as possible—which of course was not always obtainable. Revising the translation first made of this book, Brunhilde Biebuyck and I tried to keep the English as close as possible to my personal way of thinking, a way which is, nolens volens, a French one. To achieve an acceptable result, we had to work in close cooperation since it was necessary to adjust not only the expression to the thought but sometimes also the thought to the expression. 

Naturally, this procedure may have resulted at times in a rather marked literalness. I hope the reader will be ready to accept it. I would like to add that if in a number of places a French phrasing was preferred to an English one, in return the final formulation chosen for the American version quite often proved to be better than the original one and induced me to revise it. If some day there is a new French edition of this book, I do hope it will take advantage of these improvements. My lifelong faithfulness to the practice of ethnology would find in this its best reward.

No one could have carried out the exercise of gobetween required by this revision with more competence, more talent and more gentleness than Brunhilde Biebuyck. I am glad to express all my gratitude to her.

Because of editorial constraints, the preface Michel Leiris kindly wrote for the original edition of this book has not been reproduced here. I regret it deeply, not only because the presence of a text by Leiris at the beginning of this work did me great honor, but also because his views on trance and on music would have interested the reader all the most since they are those of an author well known both for his studies on possession—among the very first ever made—and his literary writings.

For this American edition, I have brought certain corrections to the original French version. A few additions have been made as well. But the only change of some importance concerns the chapter on Greek antiquity, which has been somewhat augmented and reshaped. Photographs have also been added.

The trance state, a phenomenon observed throughout the world, is associated most of the time with music. Why? That is the question this book will attempt to answer. “Why? people will no doubt ask. Quite simply, because it is music that throws people into a trance! There is no need to look any further. Now what if things were not in fact quite so simple? Looking at them a bit more closely is enough to show that the relations between music and trance could not be more changeable or more contradictory. In one place music triggers it; in another on the contrary, it calms it. Sometimes thunderous drums send the subject into trance; at others, it is the very faint susurration of a rattle. Among certain people a musical instrument is said to produce this effect, whereas among others it is the human voice. Some subjects go into trance while dancing, others while lying prone on a bed. Under these conditions, one asks oneself, How does music act?

Plato attributed the trances of the Corybantes to the effects of the aulos, Aristotle to those of the Phrygian mode. From the very beginning the facts have given rise to the most opposed theories. To use Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s words, is it a physical effect or a moral one that is at work? In the twelfth century, among the Arabs, Ghazzali upheld both possibilities, and as proof of mu- sic’s physical effects he advanced the case of camels driven into a frenzy by the cameleer’s singing. During the Renaissance, the poets and musicians of the Pléiade believed that music was capable of its greatest effects only through its union with poetry. Rousseau, who constantly took a great interest in the problem, hesitated a long time before categorically siding against the theory of “the physical power of sounds.” A few years ago, Andrew Neher, an American neurophysiologist, proved—or rather thought he had proved—that, on the contrary, the “mystery” of the effects of drums on trance was due simply to the purely neurophysiological action of the sounds of that instrument. A fair number of ethnologists and ethnomusicologists at present accept this theory as a given. Twenty years earlier, Melville J. Herskovits advanced another very different thesis explaining the effects of music on trance as the result of conditioned reflex. Some years later, Roger Bastide took up this last theory again, but added to it the notion of an overall situation, without which the reflex in question would not come into play.

If we now leave possession, which was Herskovits’s and Bastide’s concern, to turn to shamanic trance and Shirokogoroff's renowned description of it, we find what could be called, ultimately, a theory of the emotional power of music. In yet another and totally different view on the effects of music on trance, Alain Danielou, an “ethnomusicologist of worldwide reputation,” wrote quite seriously in a recent number of The Unesco Courier that “in all regions of the world the rhythms employed [to produce trance states] are always odd, in 5, 7, and 11 time.” And he added, unabashed by the contrary evidence of a thousand examples, “square rhythms in four or eight time have no hypnotic effect.”

As we have just seen, we do not lack explanations. Apart from Daniélou's, which is pure fantasy, and Neher's, which is false, each has some truth to it; yet none is completely satisfactory. The truth is that the facts are so varied and so complex they evade any single explanation. In a general way, all—or almost all—those who have dealt with trance believe, more or less unconsciously, that music has the secret power to trigger it, and that it does so all by itself, by the interplay of its own properties. They then go on to call upon either the power of the rhythm, which is the most frequent argument, or the magical effect produced by chants, as in the case of that otherwise admirable scholar, Jeanmaire, who, when speaking of the “possessed person thrown into a trance by the demonic call of incantatory melody,” attributes to music qualities which it by no means has. These are received ideas that do not stand up to examination.

Demystifying the conception, too often adopted, of the role played by music in inducing trance states will be one of this book's aims. The importance of music will not be diminished for as much; quite the contrary. Music will ultimately appear as the principal means of manipulating the trance state, but by “socializing” much more than by triggering it. This process of socialization inevitably varies from one society to another, and takes place in very different ways according to the systems of representations—or, if one prefers, the ideological systems—within which trance occurs. In each case, a different logic determines the relationship between trance and music. It is this logic that I shall try to elucidate. Although trance is a quasi-universal phenomenon, it is nonetheless a practice much more widespread among those peoples constituting the very object of ethnological research than among others. This book is a book of ethnology, or more precisely, ethnomusicology. Consequently, there will be almost no mention of trance states observed in the modern Western world, whether among European or American Christian sects, devotees of pop music, or bioenergy adepts. Not that I regard such phenomena as less interesting, but a line had to be drawn somewhere. In addition, especially in the last two cases, information is rather scarce.

This book had its origins in my long-term interest in the music of possession cults practiced in the People's Republic of Benin (formerly Dahomey), a stronghold of trance, the country that gave birth not only to Haitian voodoo but to a great many other Afro-Cuban and Afro-Brazilian cults. Ten or so periods of varying length spent in that country allowed me to attend—usually in order to record music—a fair number of ceremonies directly connected with possession among the Gun, the Fon, and the Yoruba.

But my first encounter with the trance state dates to a day in 1946, during a visit to the Congo, when right before my eyes a Babinga Pygmy was suddenly entranced in the very midst of a hunting dance, whose music my companions and I were recording. Two years later, in Bahia, Pierre Verger introduced me to the candomblé of Nuestra Senhora on the occasion of a beautiful nighttime ceremony for the water of Obatala, which was followed on the next day by a feast during which a number of possessions occurred.

On various occasions I have been fortunate enough to attend other such rituals elsewhere: in Dakar, in particular, where in 1952 I was a wide-eyed spectator at a mdép ceremony which I shall never forget, and several days later a witness—and one who was somewhat too roughly handled for my taste—to a "devils" ceremony among the Sarakole. Twenty years later, in Niamey, having providentially missed my plane, I was able to attend, in the company of Jean Rouch this time, the ritual enthronement of a holy daughter among the Songhay. However superficial they may have been, these contacts with other aspects of possession have been extremely instructive for me.

In recent years, and with this book in view, I have organized my readings around these direct observations of the relations between music and trance; they have progressively extended themselves to other regions of Africa, then the Mediterranean world, Asia, Indonesia, and from there, through shamanism, to Indian America. Quite arbitrarily, and in order to limit the already broad scope of my research, I have excluded not only China and Japan but also Polynesia and Melanesia.

I must also add that even within the boundaries just indicated, I do not in any way pretend to have exhausted the available literature, which I have only gleaned. Immense lacunae remain. Nevertheless, I do feel that the sample cases I present here are representative enough and that the different types of relations that emerge from them are to be seen as a valid basis for further research. If this proves to be the case, this book will then have amply fulfilled its aim.

I hope I may be permitted one last observation. This work covers too many different domains not to be vulnerable—abundantly, I fear—to criticism from the specialists concerned. It is the overall picture that is important, however. If it finds favor in their eyes, then I trust they will consider that the weaknesses of detail are the inevitable price to be paid for such an enterprise, and that they should be weighed accordingly. Trance and Possession

PART ONE

1. Trance and Possession

Trance will be considered in this book as a state of consciousness composed of two components, one psychophysiological, the other cultural. The universality of trance indicates that it corresponds to a psychophysiological disposition innate in human nature, although, of course, developed to varying degrees in different individuals. The variability of its manifestations is the result of the variety of cultures by which it is conditioned.

A state of consciousness, trance consists, for the subject, in a particular experience composed of a series of events that can only be described by those who have lived through them. Although it constitutes the very essence of the phenomenon, for all sorts of reasons I shall not make use of such subjective experience in order to delimit the concept of trance. Instead, I shall define it by referring to its external manifestations, the context in which they can be observed, and the representations of which they are the object.

However, those who have dealt thus far with trance have not always used the same vocabulary to identify the same manifestations, associated with similar contexts and representations among different populations. Sometimes, in fact, the very same author uses two or three different terms to refer to one and the same phenomenon. It is important at this stage to unify our terminology, since otherwise we will not know what we are talking about.

The first point to be clarified relates to the use of the words "ecstasy" (extase) and "trance" (transe). I shall deal with the word "crisis" or "fit" (crise) later.

Trance or Ecstasy?

In French, the word transe is often used in ethnological literature as a synonym for extase. In everyday usage, however, the two words signify very different things. The same holds true in English, with the one exception that whereas "ecstasy" and "trance" stand in more or less the same opposition in medical and colloquial usage, their usage is the reverse of the French.

Two quotations, both from medical dictionaries, make this clear. The English work? defines trance as "a sleeplike state, as in deep hypnosis, appearing also in hysteria and in some spiritualist mediums, with limited sensory and motor contact, with subsequent amnesia of what has occurred during the state." The French work? defines extase as "a mental state characterized by profound contemplation accompanied by a loss of sensitivity and motricity." Thus one calls transe what the other calls ex-tase.

Let us now shift from medicine to social anthropology, beginning with English. The word "ecstasy" does not appear at all in the index of Jane Belo's work, Trance in Bali (1960). Both "ecstasy" and "trance," on the other hand, occur in I. M. Lewis's Ecstatic Religions (1971), which begins with a chapter entitled "Towards a Sociology of Ecstasy." One would expect the author to define ecstasy, but he only proposes a definition of "trance" (taken from the Penguin Dictionary of Psychology, and very close indeed to that from Taber quoted here above), a term that, as he says, he uses in "its general medical sense" (1971, 38). In the course of his book he certainly uses "trance" most frequently, but this does not prevent him from using "trance" and "ecstasy" as if they were absolutely synonymous. In the volume of collected papers edited by Beattie and Middleton under the title of Spirit Mediumship and Society in Africa (1969), one might search in vain for the word “ecstasy,” which does not appear in the index either: “trance” is used throughout. On the other hand, the Arabic word wajd, which among the Sufi denotes a state that both British and French ethnologists would indisputably render today by the word “trance” or transe, was invariably translated as “ecstasy” by Macdonald in his 1901 translation of Ghazzali's well-known book.

In his work on Sufi sects, Trimingham (1971) remains faithful to this tradition throughout, with one very significant exception. When he needs to describe precisely what the wajd con- sists of in practice (1971, 200), he introduces the word “trance,” and uses the terms “ecstatic trance” or “ecstasy or trance-like state.” Lastly, Erika Bourguignon (1965, 1968, 1973, 1976), to whose works on possession I shall often refer, constantly uses the word “trance.” On rare occasions she also uses “ecstasy” in order to denote the paroxysm of trance. We can thus see that the meaning assigned to the words “trance” and “ecstasy” poses a very real problem.

Finally, I should point out that neither “trance” nor “ecstasy” figures in the general article on possession published in the Encyclopaedia of Religions and Ethics of 1918 (the first of its kind?). There are several references to “nervous crisis.” “Ecstasy,” on the other hand, does appear in the articles dealing with possession among Greeks, Muslims, and Christians.

In French, the situation is just as complicated. When dealing with possession among the Ethiopians of Gondar (1958), Michel Leiris more often than not uses the word crise (crisis), but he sometimes also uses transe, particularly with reference to dancing, a “classic means of inducing trance” (1958, 18), and occasionally speaks of “ecstatic techniques” (ibid., 93). The same terminology prevails in the work of Andras Zem- pléni (1966). When describing possession ceremonies among the Wolof in Dakar, he generally uses crise, like Leiris, but in the context of dancing, he also makes use of transe (1966, 408) and refers elsewhere to /a transe ex- tatique (ibid., 434).

In her contribution to research on the Hausa bori cult in Niger, Jacqueline Monfouga-Nicolas (1972, 177 ff.), on the contrary, constantly uses the word transe, never uses extase at all, and scarcely ever uses crise except to designate a very specific case of profane possession in- duced by drugs (ibid., 198-99). To provide a final example, not itself African but at least of African origin, when describing the Brazilian candom- blé in Bahia, Roger Bastide (1958) uses transe and extase as practically synonymous. Moreover, although his chapter devoted to this aspect of the cult is entitled “La structure de l’extase” (ibid., 173 ff.), the same phenom- ena are examined under the title “La transe” in a later collection of articles (1972) entitled Le réve, la transe et la folie. \t is true that the four cults I have just mentioned, the candomblé in Brazil, the bori cult in Niger, as well as the rab cult in Senegal and the zar cult in Ethiopia, do display a cer- tain number of differences. But all four are cults of possession and, except for the degree of violence involved, they are comparable not only in their manifestations but also in the conditions under which they occur and in the ideas associated with them. As we have seen, what one writer calls a "crisis," another terms "trance," and the third "ecstasy." Let us now move on to two equally renowned works, both very different from those already mentioned: Jeanmaire's Dionysos and Mircea Eliade's Le Chamanisme, both of which appeared in 1951. Although the second of the two is subtitled "Les techniques archaiques de l'extase" (Archaic techniques of ecstasy), the word transe is nevertheless employed almost of-ten as extase. We read, for example, that among the Samoyeds "great shamans undertake the ecstatic journey in a trance." Jeanmaire, for his part, uses transe much more frequently than extase, but when referring to the dithyramb, for example, he speaks of "collective ecstasy" (1951, 248), and often resorts to the adjective extatique, particularly in the phrase transe extatique (ibid., 252). The same use of extatique can be found in Luc de Heusch (1971), in which we find "ecstatic religions," "ecstatic crisis," and "ecstatic theater" side by side with the word transe on its own, which he uses far more frequently than extase. (It should be noted that the frequent use of extatique by so many authors can clearly be attributed to the fact that this word is an adjective. If there were an adjectival form of transe, the authors I have quoted would in many cases undoubtedly have preferred it.) One final word on the interchangeability of extase and transe: in the collection Les danses sacrées, published in 1963 by a group of orientalists, numerous passages are specifically devoted to trance; under the term transe in the index, however, one is referred to extase.*

6 CHAPTER ONE

This brief summary of the use of the words transe/trance and extase/ecstasy in modern ethnology clearly demonstrates that their usage is very inconsistent.® The two words are never used to establish an opposition between two different states. Yet, as we shall see, this opposition does exist, and it is essential to convey it. Within the perspective of this book, it is even more indispensible to make this distinction since trance and ecstasy each stand in very different relationships to music. We will, therefore, have to establish the distinction between them clearly, so that we can put an end to the confusion and agree upon exactly what we will mean from now on by the words trance and ecstasy.

Everyone will admit that in French it is the word extase that springs to mind when we think of the mystical experience described by Saint Teresa of Avila, and it is this very word (Spanish extasis) that she herself uses in her writings. But she is careful to make a distinction between its two aspects: "union" (union), which constitutes the weaker form of ecstasy, as it were, and "ravishment" (arrobamiento), which "goes far beyond union," "produces much greater effects,"'° and thus corresponds to ecstatic plentiude. "Union," a frequent state with Teresa of Avila, can be achieved under almost any circumstances. "Ravishment," on the other hand is linked, as we shall see, with silence, solitude, and immobility. Before describing her famous vision of the angel, which recurred on several occasions, Teresa of Avila analyzes her state as it comes to her: "The whole body is broken and can move neither feet nor arms; if it is standing it collapses as though drawn downward by some great force and can scarcely breathe."!! So much for immobility. As for solitude and silence, we all know they are the rules that she herself wanted for all Carmelites. Speaking of a cloister dear to her heart, she writes: “Those who seek solitude in order to enjoy Christ, their Husband, have every possibility of living constantly in his company.” Silence, solitude, immobility, three conditions that represent the exact opposite of those required by the shaman when he officiates or by the possessed person when he dances. In these two cases, an altered state is achieved in public, accompanied by music, and manifested, often very violently, by dancing, chanting, or both—in short, by the very opposite of immobility.

I could cite such other examples as Dionysiac dances in ancient Greece, the Haitian voodoo cults, the brotherhoods of the Maghreb, such as the ’Aissaotia, Gnawa, or others, the tarantula victims in southern Italy, and, lastly, the shamanic curing ceremonies, be they Siberian, American Indian, or Eskimo. All these examples involve noisy, more or less frenzied behavior, and call for a greater or lesser degree of physical agitation. There could thus be no greater dissimilarity between these two types of behavior, that of Teresa of Avila on the one hand and of the shaman or possessed person on the other.

In current French usage, the term "extase" rather than "transe" is applied to the first, and "transe" is more frequently used than "extase" for the second. Considering the primary meaning of these words, this is hard to justify. The Greek "ekstasis" signified first and foremost "the action of moving through space, displacement, deviation." Hence "disturbance, agitation, wandering as applied to the mind."'* (One might have expected Plato to use it in the context of mania, but he never does. In fact, the word did not figure in his vocabulary at all.'* It was only fairly late that "ekstasis" acquired the meaning it still has today in the vocabulary of mysticism.)

On the other hand, "transe" also designates a change of state, but of a different kind, originally related to the act of "transir," that is to say of passing away, and thus of entering into a state of definitive immobility. (It should be noted additionally that death—as a transition—is very often accompanied by agitations of greater or lesser degree, by convulsions. For this reason, "trance" is doubly suited to a description of states of possession, since such states often entail a convulsive stage, and in numerous cases are linked to symbolic death.)

It was apparently spiritism that first gave the word "trance" the meaning it currently has today in the anthropology of religion. It was used in the late nineteenth century to denote "the state of the medium when depersonalized, as though the visiting spirit had taken him or her over."'* But the life of words is not governed solely by the logic of their etymologies. If "trance" has gradually replaced "ecstasy" in descriptions of possession states, it is perhaps because, in both English and French, the word "trance" in some way evokes both trembling and dancing, and so summarizes, or better yet (like Lewis Carroll), telescopes the two aspects that are particularly characteristic of such states.

Whatever the case may be, it is evident that despite certain hesitations and some inconsistencies associated with using the adjective "ecstatic," the tendency today in both languages is to use "trance" to designate, in a general way, the agitated states I just mentioned, and to use "ecstacy" less and less. Personally, I would be in favor of specializing the use of the two terms, of using "ecstasy" solely to describe one particular type of state—altered states, let us say, attained in silence, immobility, and solitude—and of restricting "trance" solely to those that are obtained by means of noise, agitation, and in the presence of others. In order to demonstrate the distinction between ecstasy and trance, we have referred to several examples of ecstasy: the state sought by the early Church Fathers in the deserts of Egypt, the one pursued by certain Tibetan monks in their walled-up solitude, and that still practiced in Senegal by the Wolof "marabouts" who withdraw into grottoes to seek divine visions or jenneer. We also include the state of annihilation in God (fana) sought by the Sufis, the state of samadhi achieved by Indian yogis, and the one attained by Japanese mystics through nembutsu.

In his comparative study of mystical practices centered on dhikr, Louis Gardet, subsequent to Louis Massignon, stresses the shared aspects of Sufi and yoga experiences in their quest for fana (annihilation in God) and samadhi (abolition of all action). These experiences, however, occur within different general conceptions of the world. Jean Filiozat, commenting on samadhi, said that the "true nature of this state" consists not in "being ravished out of oneself" but in stabilizing "one's thoughts and latent psychic tendencies" and succeeding in discarding "all representation."

The Teresian state of ravishment, fana, and samadhi can all be seen as ecstasies, but they are three very different forms of ecstasy. Mircea Eliade suggested using the word "enstasis" to designate the state of samadhi, precisely to distinguish it from ecstasy. This word has been used since, notably by L. Gardet.

From the viewpoint of this book, enstasis and ecstasy must be seen as forming a category distinct from that of trance. The states we are dealing with are achieved in solitude. Gardet defined fana as "loss of everything by means of radical withdrawal and aloneness." He also wrote that samadhi is achieved "when the accent is placed on aloneness, solitude filled with self in self." The solitude sought by the marabouts of Senegal, Tibetan monks, and Japanese mystics seems to be a necessary condition for the blossoming of or preparation for ecstasy. Trance, on the contrary, usually comprises a convulsive stage, accompanied by cries, trembling, loss of consciousness, and falling. Nothing of this order occurs in fana, samadhi, or in the weak form of Teresian ecstasy. There is also another, Trance and Possession, even more important difference: ecstasy is a keenly memorable experience which one can recall and ponder over at leisure and which does not give rise to the dissociation so characteristic of trance. The great Christian mystics, Saint Teresa of Avila, Saint John of the Cross, Saint Ignatius Loyola, and many others, have abundantly commented on their ecstasies. The same is true of the Church Fathers and of Indian ascetics. Trance, on the contrary, be it of a possessed person or of a shaman, is characterized by total amnesia. The relationship of the self to the trance state is, in this respect, diametrically opposed to that of the self to ecstasy. Oesterreich (1927, 23-24) perceived this essential difference between possession trance and states of ecstasy. “On the latter,” he wrote, “we possess a host of autobiographical sources. . . .Descriptions of possession by those who have experienced it are, on the contrary, extremely rare.” And he added: “This scarcity of accounts by those who have undergone the experience has a profound psychological explanation that stems from the very nature of the state of possession. We are dealing in part with states that entail more or less total post facto amnesia, so that, generally speaking, the majority of those who are possessed are in no position to describe their condition.” He does nevertheless cite a few exceptions—including some very noted ones: Sister Jeanne des Anges, the most famous of the Loudun nuns, and Father Surin, one of her exorcists who in turn became possessed,—in whom the state of possession remained, to use his expression, “lucid,” meaning that the subject was conscious of being inhabited by the “demon” (since he usually is concerned) and subsequently recalled that state. In these cases, we are dealing exclusively with a type of possession I shall subsequently term “reprobate” to distinguish it from “cultivated” possession, the kind that will primarily concern us in this book. This being so, the exception represented by this “lucid form of possession” as opposed to what Oesterreich calls the “sleepwalking form,” which is always followed by amnesia, does not invalidate the rule. The latter, which has been described numerous times, states that the possessed person never, in principle, remembers anything about his trance following his return to consciousness. One may question the sincerity of this forgetfulness or wonder about the mechanism at work, but this would change nothing. The same holds true of the shaman, as is evident from many examples, including what G. Morechand says in his study of shamanism among the Hmong of Laos (1968, 202): “No Hmong shaman will ever admit to remembering the trance he has just experienced, or ever agree to calmly, ‘intellectually’ repeat any previously experienced trance. . . . This is an absolute rule among the Hmong. No one will ever be able to persuade a shaman to perform his chant outside of the trance itself. Shamans unanimously agree that once they have returned to their normal state, following the trance, they remember nothing. . . .: they have ‘trembled,’ then ‘woken up again,’ and none of them will accept denial of this rupture.” Among the Shakers of Saint Vincent in the Antilles—a Christian sect whose trances belong to the type I shall subsequently term “communial,” since there is no possession in the strict sense—the trance state is similarly followed by amnesia (Henney 1973, 239), even though it is only partial and—significantly enough—relates solely to the context. Still other types of trance are accompanied, usually or partially, by amnesia. Even though it is not possible to say that for all the forms figuring in the general table of trance, amnesia characterizes the principal types of trance strongly enough to justify using it as a distinctive trait differentiating trance from what I propose to term ecstasy. Two further traits can be added to the list of oppositions already cited with a view to distinguishing between ecstasy and trance. The former is frequently accompanied by visual or auditory hallucinations. In the first of his series of three volumes entitled Ecstasy or Religious Trance (a perfect example of what has been said previously about the usage of these two words!), Arbman reserves an important place for visions and hallucinations. These are indeed characteristic of Christian ecstasies, with which he mainly deals in the first part of his work. “The ecstasies of Saint Anthony (... and many others. . .) have explicitly the character of a vision,” we read in the chapter on ecstasy among the Church Fathers in the Dictionnaire de spiritualité (1961, col. 2104). Trance is usually free from such hallucinations. I should also observe in passing that as far as possession trance is concerned—the type that interests us the most here—the absence of hallucination conforms to the very logic of the relations between the possessed person and the divinity possessing him or her. Since the divinity takes the place of the possessed person’s everyday personality, it does not constitute an apparition for the subject, contrary to what often occurs during ecstasy. Finally, ecstasy and trance differ in that while trance is always associated with a greater or lesser degree of sensory overstimulation—noises, music, smells, agitation—ecstasy, on the contrary, is most often tied to sensorial deprivation—silence, fasting, darkness. Nothing could be more striking in this respect than the contrast one can observe among the Wolof of Senegal between the behavior of marabouts who seek out ecstasy in the silence, solitude, and darkness of their grottos and that of the practitioners of the ndép, who enter into trance in the midst of a dense crowd, stimulated by drink, agitated by wild dancing and the din of drums. Ecstasy and trance may therefore be characterized in relation to one another by two series of terms forming the following oppositions:

When all the characteristics in one of these two series are present, we then are dealing with what one might term the full form of either ecstasy or trance. Clearly, however, such completeness is not always realized, or the configuration of features provided by a given state may in fact be composite. In the first case, when we are dealing with full forms, the difference between the two states is quite clear-cut, in the second much less so. Ecstasy and trance must therefore be regarded as constituting the opposite poles of a continuum, which are linked by an uninterrupted series of possible intermediate states, so that it is sometimes difficult to determine which of the two is involved. To cite only one example, that of Teresa of Avila (which, as we have seen, can be justifiably said to provide the very model of ecstasy), in at least one case (albeit a very exceptional one, it seems) we are confronted with what I shall henceforth identify as trance. I refer to the "ecstasy of suffering" that overtook her one evening when "in the company of the sisters. . . , we sang a number of verses about the torments we suffer from living without God." "Since I was already experiencing this torment," Saint Teresa writes (1949, 500), "I was so gripped by it that my hands stiffened despite all my efforts. . . ," and she adds that the suffering, "now so intolerable. . . forced me to utter loud cries that I was powerless to repress." One cannot help but compare this account with other examples mentioned in the chapter on the Arabs, involving the particular form of trance I will suggest we term "emotional." Finally, I would like to observe that trance and ecstasy may both be practiced, albeit within the context of different rituals, by the same individual within the same religious faith. Thus the Shakers of Saint Vincent in the Antilles, who still practice trance as I have just defined it, also attain ecstasy when they withdraw into the "secret room" (Henney 1973, 242-43) in order to weep away their sins. In isolation, immobility, and through corporeal chastisement, they then undertake a "spiritual journey" that is apparently strongly characterized by "hallucinatory activities."

Now that the difference between trance and ecstasy—and also, I hope, the gradations existing between them—have been adequately established, let us move on to that which for us is the essential point: the differences between trance and ecstasy in their respective relations to music. Whereas trance, as we shall see throughout this book, is very frequently and very closely associated with music, ecstasy, as it has just been defined, never makes use of it at all. There is an inherent incompatibility between the practice of ecstasy and music. This is, after all, only logical. Excluding certain deliberately contrived experiences, immobility, silence, and sensorial deprivation are incompatible with music. Indeed, in order to escape from her ecstasies—which were so strong that she succumbed to them against her will (F. Jette 1961, 2147)—Marie de l'Incarnation, more or less a contemporary of Teresa of Avila, would begin playing the spinet. In a quite different form of ecstasy, that of the yogi, it may happen that music does play a role under the form of what Mircea Eliade (1948, 254) calls "mystic sounds," which are heard during yoga meditation. The voice of the divinities heard in such states is said to be "similar to the sound of a golden bell." In other words, the sounds that are heard are auditory hallucinations, and thus a further confirmation of our definition of ecstasy. In her laboratory study of yoga techniques, Therese Brosse (1963, 116) tells us that in bhakti yoga a song is transmitted mentally and silently from guru to disciple as a means of enabling the latter to attain dhyana, the higher stage of samyama, which represents the fullest stage of ecstasy. Here again we may view the music in question as hallucinatory in nature. As we can see, this case does not constitute a counterexample any more than the preceding one; quite the contrary, in fact. To put an end to the debate on the possible relation between music and ecstasy, suppose someone says that a Mozart quartet plunged him into ecstasy at a concert. This is, of course, pure verbal inflation, or, if one prefers, hyperbolic use of language. Besides, how does this ecstasy manifest itself? Not by noise or frenzy, certainly, but rather by a great desire to prolong it in silence. In practice, applause usually brings it to an end. It is, then, trance—or enthusiasm, to which we shall return later—that drives ecstasy away. Ultimately, we could also invoke Scriabin and his Poem of Ecstasy. This would lead us far astray. All this having been said, I shall not return to the subject of ecstasy in this book. The task facing us now is to isolate and describe all the other signs by which trance may be recognized.

But what are the telltale signs of trance? Let us divide them into two categories: symptoms and behavior. I shall term symptoms those signs that constitute merely the simple, unelaborated expression of a certain perturbation experienced by the subject at, let us say, the animal level (being seized by trembling is a sign of great fear in both men and animals). "You tremble, carcass!" Turenne said to himself. On the other hand, the runaway horse perhaps represents the most striking example of what we would call "animal trance." I shall term behavioral those signs that no longer constitute a simple reaction, as do symptoms, but a positive action endowed with symbolic value. (It must be acknowledged in passing that the boundary between these two categories is impossible to draw with any precision. This difficulty, however, is inherent in any, or almost any, attempt at categorization. Such categorization still remains indispensable, however, since without it the multiplicity and diversity of such signs would remain sheer chaos. The choice lies between inevitably arbitrary and reductive categories—which remain open to reconsideration, be it said—and confusion.)

Without attempting an inventory, let me list the principal symptoms of the trance state: trembling, shuddering, horripilation, swooning, falling to the ground, yawning, lethargy, convulsions, foaming at the mouth, protruding eyes, large extrusions of the tongue, paralysis of a limb, thermal disturbances (icy hands despite tropical heat; being hot despite extreme circumambient cold), insensitivity to pain, tics, noisy breathing, fixed stare, and so on. In addition, there are two signs that are difficult to categorize as either purely symptomatic or behavioral. First, the subject gives the impression that he is totally engaged in his trance, that the field of his consciousness has been completely taken over by this state, that he has lost all reflexive consciousness, that he is incapable of coming back to himself (unless enjoined to it by some external intervention); in short, that he is plunged into a sort of bewilderment. It is impossible to attract his attention; if he turns his eyes in your direction he does not see you. Second (somewhat complementary to the first), once the subject has emerged from his trance, he has no recollection of it. As for the behavioral signs, which are even more diverse—not surprisingly so, since in their case the predominant factor is no longer nature but culture—ultimately they all seem to be merely the various "signifiers" of one and the same "signified." One could say that in practice, they always symbolize the intensification of some particular faculty by means of an action endowed with certain extraordinary or astonishing aspects. Thus, trance may be recognized by the fact that one can walk on burning coals without being burned, pierce one's own flesh without bleeding, bend swords one would normally be unable to curve, confront danger without flinching, handle poisonous snakes without being bitten, cure diseases, see into the future, embody a divinity, speak a language one has never learned, swoon or die of emotion, be illuminated by the Eternal, enter into contact with the dead, travel in the land of the gods, confront those gods, emit totally unhuman cries, give acrobatic displays beyond one's normal ability, bend backwards to make a perfect arc, compose poems in one's sleep, sing for days and nights on end without a break, and dance without difficulty despite being crippled.

Trance always manifests itself in one way or another as a transcendence of one's normal self, as a liberation resulting from the intensification of a mental or physical disposition, in short, as an exaltation—sometimes a self-mutilating one—of the self. In the early days of Christianity, people in trances were called energoumenoi since they were thought to be prompted by a supernatural energeia attributed, according to circumstances, to God, the Holy Ghost, or the Devil. The word energuméne was still in current use in seventeenth-century France to designate people who were possessed, notably the nuns of Loudun.

The individual in a trance state is thus recognizable by the fact that (1) he is not in his usual state; (2) his relationship to the world around him is disturbed; (3) he can fall prey to certain neurophysiological disturbances; (4) his abilities are increased (either in reality or otherwise); (5) this increased ability is manifested by actions or behavior observable by others. The picture can obviously be either more or less complete or incomplete depending on the individual case. In case of doubt, the context will indicate whether or not one is justified in saying that trance is involved.

In an article intended to situate his work in relation (and in opposition) to the "human potential movement" in California, Max Pages speaks of trance: "When I conduct a seminar I have no fear of admitting that I am in a sort of secondary state akin to trance," he writes (1973, 171). This "liberation of the body" constitutes the goal of the "new trance groups," especially those stemming from the bioenergy movement, also mentioned by Georges Lapassade (1976, 215). What is there in common between trances of this kind and those I shall examine in this book? We know too little about them to decide on this point. Accordingly, I shall not take them into account, especially since their relation to music seems very uncertain. With reference to the seminars he describes, Pagés (ibid., 170) notes that in the "expressive equipment at the disposal of the participants," there are "rudimentary musical instruments, particularly those requiring no previous training that serve to produce simple rhythms: tom-toms, drums, kettle drums, cymbals, xylophones, flutes. 


Whether one likes it or not, the signs I have listed as characteristic of trance are far too clearly reminiscent of hysteria® to avoid a discussion of this matter here. Nor is it merely hysteria that should be considered. Trance states have also commonly been associated with madness. In his work on the relationship between trance and disease, Luc de Heusch entitles the sequel to his chapter “Possession and Shamanism” “Divine Madness and Human Reason.” “Trance can be seen as the cultural aspect of mental illness or as the ‘madness of the gods,’ as the Thonga put it,” he writes (1971, 256). The title of Roger Bastide’s last work, Le réve, la transe et la folie (1972), is also significant, and although the author actually begins his book by claiming he will not “confuse dream, trance, and madness,” one of the sections devoted to trance is nevertheless entitled “Mystic Trance, Psychopathology and Psychiatry.” Jean Rouch’s most famous film on trance is called Les Maitres fous. Jean Gaborieau entitled the second part of his study, “Ritual Trance in the Central Himalayas,” “Madness, Avatar, Meditation.” And this is by no means the end of the list.

Ever since Plato (and doubtless before him), the question of the psychiatric aspects of trance has caused a great deal of ink to flow, if we may say so. The debate seems to have made little headway, however, and I shall not, of course, enter into it. First, because it is absolutely outside my competence; second, because the only valid way of doing so would require an interdisciplinary approach.

All the same, it is of twofold interest to us. First for its own sake, and because it is fundamental; second, because the psychiatric problem posed by trance is closely linked to that of the relationship between its psychology and its physiology. And it is at the junction of these two components of trance that the problem of the “effects” of music lies, at least in part.

It must be acknowledged that, for an undertaking such as mine, the absence of any general theory of trance as a reference point does not simplify the task. Seen from my perspective, the problem of trance is clearly a “cross-cultural” one, as the Americans say. But to the extent to which they deal with hysteria, the very writings on trance also raise in and of themselves a cross-cultural problem. In the United States, for instance, the words “hysteria”** and, more recently, “neurosis,”*” have been erased from the psychiatric lexicon. Yet in France this is far from being the case; there hysteria as a concept continues to have a healthy livelihood, both in psychoanalysis and in psychiatry.** All the same, opinions on the psychiatric nature of trance could not be more opposed. Subsequent to many other writers, Georges Devereux*® peremptorily declares that there is every reason to “see the shaman as suffering from serious neurosis, or even as a psychotic in a state of temporary remission.” Roger Bastide, on the other hand (1972, 67), supports Herskovits’s thesis “which considers mystic trances as ‘normal’ cultural phenomena in certain societies.”“° I. M. Lewis, for his 16 CHAPTER ONE part, in his chapter entitled “Possession and Psychiatry” (1971, 186, 196) proposes that shamans and possessed persons be classified among “the mass of ordinary ‘normally’ neurotic people.” Is trance a normal phenomenon or a pathological one? Although he has not offered a solution to______ Scarcely abridged, the essential part of what he writes follows. Having observed that “it is convenient to compare the shaman in his trance state, or the protagonist in a scene of possession, to a neurotic,” and that “in societies where scenes of possession are prevalent, possession is a form of behavior open to all . . . ,” he poses the question: “On what grounds may we assert that individuals corresponding to the average of their group. . . and occasionally manifesting a significant and approved form of behavior, should be treated as abnormal?” To which he gives this answer (1960, xviii—xix):

The contradiction I have just spelled out can be resolved in two different ways. Either the forms of behavior described by the terms “trance” and “possession” have nothing to do with those that we, in our society, call psychopathological; or one may regard them as being of the same type, in which case it is the connection with pathological states that must be regarded as contingent, and as resulting from a condition particular to the society in which we live. In the latter case we would be faced by a further choice of alternatives: either so-called mental illnesses, in reality outside the realm of medicine, must be regarded as sociological events affecting the behavior of individuals who have been dissociated from the group in a particular way by their personal histories and constitutions, or we must recognize in these sick people the presence of a state that is truly pathological but of physiological origin, a state that tends to create a terrain favorable, or, if you wish, ‘sensitizing,’ to certain symbolic forms of behavior that still fall solely within the realm of sociological interpretation. A relativist theory, then, and one that moreover leaves open the possibi In ethnology, one may say, evaluating the right or wrong of relegating trance to one or another category of contemporary Western nosography is not of crucial importance. The real interest lies in finding out the category to which the “native” assigns it within his own system of thought. Certainly! But it so happens, first of all, that in the great majority of the cases to be examined here, information on this point is either nil or unreliable. Consequently, any attempt to generalize in this domain would be vain. Second, we shall see right away that even if information is available, and even if it is actually reliable, this does not necessarily help matters. Gaborieau (1975, 165), in his study of trance in the Himalayas from which I quoted earlier, tells us that the possessed person is referred to as the god's "beast of burden," and that to describe the "psychological transformation" he undergoes when he enters into trance "they say that he becomes mad (baulino) or that he is mad (baulo)."*? "A person is referred to as mad," Gaborieau observes, "when he can no longer carry out his familial and social obligations." He then adds: "The same term is applied to the ethnologist who, arriving from who knows where, with no familial or social insertion, occupies the same marginal position as the madmen belonging to the society he is studying." Such information invites us to reconsider the whole situation so radically that we had better forget about it on the spot!

The Representations of Trance: Shamanism and Possession
Although trance can manifest itself in a profane context—and we shall treat such an example among the Arabs in the second part of this book— throughout the world it is usually associated with religion. Religious trance will therefore be our main concern from now on. This said, it occurs in such a variety of forms and is the object of such a multiplicity of representations that it would be impossible to establish its relations with music—or indeed with anything at all—if one did not begin by making a few broad distinctions within such a vast domain.

Everyone will agree that trance is associated, in an overwhelming number of cases, with two aspects of religion: shamanism and possession. But as we shall see later, the relations between music and shamanic trance on the one hand, and possession trance on the other, are by no means the same. It is therefore essential to establish clearly, from the outset, what differentiates the two—and needless to say, to do so without resorting to music since this would make our argument circular. Shamanism and possession have so many points in common—trance, in particular—that the distinction between them is not always self-evident, to say the least. Certain authors—Mircea Eliade (1951), Luc de Heusch (1971)—think it is very important to distinguish between them. Others on the contrary, and most notably I. M. Lewis (1971), think there is no basis for such a distinction and that there is therefore no reason to draw one. Others still—Erika Bourguignon (1968), for example—recognize the distinction but blur it with so many nuances that it almost disappears. In my opinion shamanic trance and possession trance constitute two very different—and indeed opposite—types of relationship with the invisible, and this is why they give rise to manifestations as different from one another as, for example, a shamanic séance in central Asia and a tarantism séance in southern Italy. The following text is from a book:

In the 17th century, the Tungus people, with a population of 25,000, inhabited the vast areas of Siberia, stretching from the Jenissei to the Amur and from Lake Baikal to the Tamir peninsula. The word "shaman" originated from this group and has since been widely adopted in ethnological writings. Its usage, which was initially solely restricted to Siberia, has now extended to Southeast Asia, Melanesia, and even reaches the two Americas through the Arctic. As a result, the term "shamanism" encompasses various religious practices, all with common features.

To better understand these features, we can refer to Mircea Eliade's work on shamanism. Although some parts of his work are disputed, it remains the only available, general synthesis of this vast domain. Examples from his work are used without considering his overall interpretation of shamanism.

In the chapter describing shamanism in central and northern Asia, various words are used alongside "shaman," such as "ecstasy" or "trance," "chant," and "drum." The shaman's trance is conceived as a journey undertaken in the company of the spirits he embodies. The shaman's soul leaves his body and embarks on a journey to meet the dead or spirits. This journey usually involves an "ascent to heaven" or a "descent into hell" or an "incursion into the upper or lower worlds." Among the Xingan Tungus, the shaman indicates his ascension into the upper world by vigorously striking his drum three times and raising it. He strikes it three times and lowers it when descending into the lower world.

Among the Eskimos, the shaman undertakes his journey "to seek out his patient's soul and bring it back to his or her body" in the "depths of the ocean." Additionally, he is a "specialist in magical flight. Some shamans have visited the moon, others have circled the earth." Among the American Indians, shamanism also takes the form of a journey. The same situation exists in Southeast Asia and the Indian archipelago.

In contrast, possession involves a different direction of communication between visible and invisible worlds. The man visits the inhabitants of the invisible world, rather than the latter visiting him.

Please note that I have removed non-essential text, including page numbers and footers, and provided a clean version of the text. Whether we examine menadism in ancient Greece or demoniac possession during the Renaissance, the zar cult of Ethiopia or the rab cult of Senegal, the orisha and vodun cults in the Gulf of Guinea and Brazil, basangu in Zambia or hau bong in Vietnam, or any of the various forms of trance to be found in Bali, nowhere do we find any evidence of trance being viewed as a journey made by man into the spirit world. In every case it is interpreted as involving the arrival of a spirit or a god in the world of men. This difference is a radical one: in the first case we have shamanism; in the second, possession. Since in both cases the event is experienced from the viewpoint of the human involved, in the first case a journey is taken and in the second a visit is received—considerable distinction indeed.

Starting from these two basic schemes, however, many combinations can be constructed. There is nothing to prevent someone, for example, from setting out on his or her journey only after having “incorporated” auxiliary spirits to assist him or her in the other world. This is in fact what happens in shamanism, so that the shaman has sometimes been described as “possessed.” In this case journey and “possession” are combined. Arguing from the fact that shamanism and possession by a spirit regularly occur together, Lewis (1971, 51) is of the opinion that, contrary to the views of Eliade, and de Heusch, the distinction between shamanism and possession is “in fact untenable.” But this ignores the fact that the “journey” component is regularly present in trance manifestations observed among the Asian populations listed earlier and regularly absent from those in my second list. This presence, or absence, is an essential feature, since it is the factor that not only underlies all representations related to trance but also governs most of its ritual and external manifestations.

Flanked by his auxiliary spirits, the shaman—or rather his soul—leaves his body in order to travel to the invisible world and meet its inhabitants. During his trance, he recounts the events occurring during his journey, which is often undertaken with the aim of recuperating a sick person’s soul. “The main function of the shaman in central and northern Asia is magical healing,” Eliade observes (1968, 179). His “journey” is for him the supreme method of exercising that function. His “possession” by his guardian or auxiliary spirits is ultimately no more than a secondary aspect of it.

One may object that there are cases, notably among the Tungus, in which the shaman “incorporates his familiar spirits and undergoes a shamanic trance without going on a journey” (Eliade 1968, 199). In reply, it must be noted that in the functioning of any institution, the logic of things accentuates sometimes this, sometimes that feature. The fact still remains that among such peoples the “descent into hell”—which in their “pusillanimity” present-day shamans “do not dare to undertake” (Eliade 1968, 195)—is the great model of the shamanic adventure.** Laurence De laby, for her part, also stresses “the importance attributed by the Tungus to the perilous journey into the lower world that only the great shamans were able to make” (1976, 130).

Let us now move on to the role played by the incorporation of spirits in shamanic trance, and consider whether this incorporation occurs in the same way in shamanism and in possession. We shall find that it emphatically does not, and that once again the relations involved in the two phenomena are diametrically opposed. How is such incorporation seen in shamanism? A brief summary of what happens among the Gold shamanism provides significant insights. The Gold shaman is a "psychopomp," guiding souls of the dead into the lower world. The funeral ceremony has two funeral ceremonies, with the second being more important and terminating with the soul being led to the underworld. The shaman dons his costume, takes up his drum, and searches for the soul. He captures the soul and brings it back into the dwelling. The feast continues late into the night. The next day, the shaman dons his costume again, awakens the dead person with his drum, and hosts another feast.

The shaman begins chanting, addressing the dead person, and advising them to eat well but drink little, as the journey to the underworld is hazardous for someone who is drunk. The shaman chants, dances, and smears his face with soot. He invokes his auxiliary spirits and asks them to guide the deceased and himself into the beyond. He climbs a notched tree to see the path down to the underworld. Returning to the yurt, he summons the aid of two powerful guardian spirits: buchu and koori. The shaman calls upon the spirits to harness the dogs to the sledge and asks for a "manservant" to keep him company during the journey.

The shaman intones chants, exchanging words with the "manservant," allowing those present to follow his itinerary. They arrive in the underworld, where the dead cluster around and demand to know the shaman's and newcomer's names. The shaman is careful not to utter his real name. He seeks among the crowd for the spirits of the kinsmen who were closest during their lives to the soul he has brought and consigns it to their care. He then returns to the land of the living and recounts his experiences in the land of the dead.

The shaman is in a trance throughout this time, using the spirits he embodies as guides, sitting on one of them, and making them harness his dogs. He returns from the underworld by riding one of his auxiliary spirits as though it were a horse. Among the Ethiopians of Gondar, as well as among the Songhay of Niamey, the possessed person, or "possessee," is the one who is ridden by the genius. As Eliade says (1968, 89), when shamans among the Chukchi, the Eski-mos, the Lapps, and the Semang transform into a wolf, bear, reindeer, fish, or tiger, and imitate these animals' actions and voices, they are not being "possessed by these creatures; rather, the shaman takes possession of his auxiliary spirits: he is the one who transforms himself into an animal, in the same way that he achieves a similar result by putting on an animal mask. . . ." In Africa, the possessee does not imitate the god he embodies, he is that god. In Asia, the shaman coexists with the guardian or auxiliary spirits he has embodied by means of his magic chant, and this is why it is possible for him to converse with them.

Unless I am mistaken, in Africa (at least in all of the cults I have mentioned) such coexistence, within one and the same individual, of the subject in trance and the spirit possessing him, never occurs. The persona of the divinity is substituted for that of the subject but does not coexist with it. Any dialogue between the two would be unthinkable. Possession, or more precisely the possession fit as observed so frequently in Africa (a subject we shall subsequently discuss at length) can nevertheless be found among Siberian peoples who practice shamanism, and particularly among the Tungus. In these cases, we are dealing with disturbances brought about in certain individuals by spirits who torment them. These possessed individuals, who are "for the most part frustrated or disappointed women" on whom the "visitation of spirits" confers "a certain social importance" (Delaby 1976, 28), are not called shamans but something quite different. However, as with the possessed person in Africa, it is frequently through disturbances of this order that the shamanistic vocation first manifests itself, or, more correctly, as Delaby puts it (1976, 37), that the future shaman is elected.

Shamans, "when they begin," thus also fall into the category of the possessee, but "they transcend that category by mastering the spirits that torment them" (ibid., 28). Once embodied within them, the spirit of the shamanic ancestor who has chosen them (ibid., 38) becomes their principal auxiliary spirit. From then on, the shaman is the one who "summons" that spirit, together with all those fellow spirits that ordinarily accompany him, and who embodies him "at will" and expels him "when he has no further need of his services" (ibid., 28).*' Master over the spirits he embodies, the shaman is also in control of his trance, another factor that helps us to distinguish him from the possessee who, as we shall see later, merely undergoes this state. Thus it has recently been proposed that we define the shaman as someone "who can enter at will into a non-ordinary psychic state (in which either his soul undertakes a journey into the spirit world or he himself becomes possessed by a spirit) for the purpose of making contact with the spirit world on behalf of members of his community."* There are cases, however (and the Kahm-Magar in the Himalayas, filmed and described by Michael Oppitz [1981] are an example), in which in the course of the same ritual the entranced person appears sometimes as a shaman who voyages and controls his trance, sometimes as a possessed person who totally submits to the will of the possessing spirit, identifying with him but not mastering him at all, quite the contrary. Shamanic trance and possession trance—this time in the full sense of the word—can thus alternate in one and the same person. Or, if one prefers, one and the same person can undergo in succession these two forms of trance. It seems that no one can experience them simultaneously. The distinction to be made between shamanism and possession, consequently, remains valid. The difference between the shamanic and possession trance rests on three factors: the former is a journey made by a man to visit the spirits, the latter is a visit by a spirit (or divinity) to the world of men; in the former the trance subject gains control over the spirit embodied within him, in the latter the reverse is true; and lastly, the former is a voluntary trance whereas the latter is an involuntary one.

However, here, as in so many other fields, displacements can occur from one model to the other, hybrid forms arise, contacts are made or lost, giving birth to mixtures that are continually done and undone. This is why the configurations of religious trance are so extremely varied, and also why, in many cases, it is difficult to be sure whether one is dealing with shamanism or with possession. In this respect, based on an analysis slightly different from mine, and one to which I do not wholly subscribe, Luc de Heusch®™ described the complexity of this situation very clearly. It is unnecessary to belabor his points here. But even though there are all sorts of possible intermediary forms between shamanism and possession, we must not forget the difference that separates the two. It is fundamental. In my view, I. M. Lewis commits a great error in refusing to recognize this difference.

Let me give a concrete example. In his book* he reproduces a photograph of a priest of Ogun, the Yoruba’s iron god, taken in Dahomey (now the People’s Republic of Benin) around 1950-60. I know the priest in question, having seen him perform his functions on several occasions in 1952 when I was in the company of Pierre Verger, who also published several photographs of the same individual to illustrate his description of the weekly ceremony in which this particular priest was the principal officiant at the time.** The caption to Lewis’s photograph reads: “The god Ogun speaks through the mouth of the shaman who incarnates him, in Dahomey.” Why baptize (if one may so express it) this priest a “shaman”? Among the Yoruba, the trance state associated with the worship of Ogun, the god of iron, has never been regarded as a journey. As depicted, the priest in his trance state is absolutely not recounting what is happening to him in the otherworld. Nor is he imitating one of the guardian or auxiliary spirits whom he has embodied as the result of his summons. Ogun is within him and he identifies himself to Ogun, whose symbols—iron cutlass and bell—he wears, but he is so little master of the god that he is accompanied by a priestess whose function is “to calm Ogun 24 CHAPTER ONE when he becomes too violent (Verger 1957, 151). “Ogun kpele o”— “Ogun gently!” the choir of women sing when the divinity takes possession of his follower too abruptly (ibid., 195). When the shaman in his trance returns from his journey to the underworld, bringing news of the dead he has just encountered there, he, the shaman, is the one who speaks. When the priest of Ogun, as seen in this particular photograph, addresses himself to the people around him, it is not he, the priest, who speaks; it is Ogun. To say in this instance that Ogun “is speaking through the mouth” of the individual embodying him, as Lewis does, is to suggest that Ogun and the priest are coexisting inside one and the same person, as does in fact happen with the shaman. But this is absolutely not the case. The personality of the priest as priest has been totally replaced by that of Ogun. The chorus, which continues its chanting throughout the priest’s dance, sings about Ogun and Ogun alone. To view this priest as a shaman is completely to misunderstand the representations that underlie his trance and to create a wholly unnecessary confusion in a situation that is already quite complicated.

The responsibility for this confusion does not fall entirely on I. M. Lewis, who is only perpetuating that made long before by S. F. Nadel in his well-known article, “A Study of Shamanism in the Nuba Mountains” (1946). Nadel presents the cult he observed among the Nuba of Kordofan as corresponding “in all essentials to the classical shamanism of Central Asia and North West Africa” because, like the latter, “it rests on the belief that spirits may possess human beings and on the practice of establishing communication with the supernatural through human beings so pos- sessed” (1946, 25). In fact, it constitutes a case of possession at the service of mediumship, and conforms in every respect with the case described a few pages further on in this book.

This is not to say that trance in black Africa only has one possible cause, which is spirit possession. In Africa there are in fact trances not attributed to a spirit. Such is the case, for instance, among the Zande, in Central Africa. The witch doctor, “who is both diviner and magician” (Evans-Pritchard 1937, 149) and whose task “in both roles is to counteract witch- craft,” performs these activities in “séances” during which he is entranced (“How Witch-doctors Conduct a Seance,” ibid., 147-82). Evans-Pritchard's description leaves no doubt, even though he himself only dares say, prudently, that the witch doctor “speaks as though in a trance” (ibid., 165) or “is now entering in a trance-like condition” (ibid., 167). To what do the Zande attribute this state? Evans-Pritchard does not provide the answer. Had we not known it was in Africa, however, we would have believed that the séance was taking place in Siberia and that the witch doctor was indeed a shaman. But of course to be valid such an interpretation would require much more information.

Trance and Possession 25 Other forms of trance in Africa raise as well problems of typology. I am thinking here of those associated with various cults in equatorial Africa. (the Mbwiti in Gabon, notably), in which taking hallucinatory drugs plays an important role. But I shall limit myself to mentioning the fact, for fear of being led too far away. Let us now return to the essential point. What we need to remember above all is that shamanism and possession are the products of two quite different ideologies of trance. As we shall see later on, these two ideologies correspond most logically to two quite different uses of music. Possession, Inspiration, Communion: Identificatory Trance

To speak of personality substitution, as I have just done in the case of the priest of Ogun, to see it as a relationship “between a spirit thought of as acting and an individual thought of as acted upon,” as Michel Leiris (1958, 78) puts it with reference to the z@r cult, and to consider that this constitutes a relationship of “possession,” certainly is, as Leiris says, a “reductive qualification.” 

"Nothing could be more hazy, less sharply focused than the concept of possession, so that despite its great convenience it is also the source of a great many confusions. Here again, several broad distinctions need to be made. Jeanne des Anges, the most notorious of the possessed nuns of Loudun, was described by everyone, including herself, as 'possessed.' Jean Cavalier, the famous Camisard, was described by himself and everyone else as 'inspired'—with the exception of the papists, who described him as possessed in order to make people believe that the devil was in fact possessing him. We can apply neither of these terms to the Sufi in trance: 'possessed' would mean that he was so by either God or the devil, which would be erroneous; 'inspired' would imply that his state was due to the presence of the Holy Ghost, which is a religious concept foreign to Islam. He is in the state of having found (wajd) God. Léiris (1958, 78) refers to adepts of the zar cult in Ethiopia as being possessed because the Amharic vocabulary used there does in fact convey 'the very general idea of seizure of the spirit by force—the exact equivalent of our 'possession.' When an adept of the vodun cult in Benin enters into a trance, the vodun is said to have 'come into his head.' In Brazil, the candomble adept is said to be 'in a state of santo.' In the case of the Hausa bori, in Niger, the woman in-trance is said to be the 'mare' of the god, or to 'have the gods on her head,' or again, to be 'in bori,' which is to say in a state of ebullition. The list could be much longer, but let us stop there. The question is to understand how the relationship between the subject in trance and the divinity responsible for that state is conceived.

In the case of a relationship of this kind, however, we must not expect to find very clear-cut notions capable of providing us with precise and clearly defined categories. By definition, we are confronted here with the domain of the unspeakable, the vague, the subjective, and the emotional. Nevertheless, by taking as our base the vocabulary used to designate this relationship, the behavior by which it is expressed, and the internal logic of the religion of which it forms one aspect, we are able to distinguish three broad types of mystic trance. The first is characterized by the fact that, during trance, the subject is thought to have acquired a different personality: that of a god, spirit, genius, or ancestor—for which we may use the general term 'deity'—who has taken possession of the subject, substituted itself for him, and is now acting in that subject's place. In a later chapter we shall return to the manner in which this representation of things is often founded on the idea that an individual possesses several souls, so that, using the bori of the Niger Hausa as an example, there is one soul that 'the gods send away during possession in order to take its place.' For a longer or shorter period the subject then becomes the god. He is the god. We can call this possession in the strict sense of the word. In the second category, rather than having switched personalities, the subject is thought to have been invested by the deity, or by a force emanating from it, which then coexists in some way with the subject but nevertheless controls him and causes him to act and speak in its name. The most frequent example of this relationship is that found in trances attributed to the Holy Ghost. I shall refer to this category of trance not as possession, but as inspiration. In the third category, the relationship between divinity and subject is seen as an encounter, which, depending upon the individual, is experienced as a communion, a revelation, or an illumination. Unlike the previous two relationships, this one does not involve embodiment of any kind. I shall refer to the trance state brought about by wajd, and achieved by the practice of dhikr, which will be described in the second part of this book, as communion or "communial" trance.

For a Sufi, or for any Muslim, there can obviously be no question of embodying Allah, or identifying oneself with him. Having defined these three categories—not as abstract models but on the basis of concrete examples—let me hasten to add that, in reality, things are not always as simple as this division might suggest, and that it is often difficult to know with which of the three categories one is dealing.

To return to the case of the Sufi, it can happen, contrary to all the principles of the Muslim faith, that it does take the form of an indisputable embodiment. Among other examples, there is this description of a dhikr séance by a Fez derqwa votary in which, speaking of God (Allah), the trance subject cries out: "He is in me! He is in me! Huwa! Huwa! [meaning He! He!]" Many people would say that this, whether one wishes to accept it or not, is purely and simply a case of possession. For my part, I shall say that it is inspiration, but that in any event more than mere communion is clearly involved, contrary to what the logic of Sufism might lead us to expect.

In other cases, the distinction I have suggested between "possession" and "inspiration"—which implies a differentiation between two different modalities of embodiment—will not seem either self-evident or necessary to everyone. The Shakers of Saint Vincent in the Antilles regard their trances as resulting from the presence of the Holy Ghost. They say they are "shaken" by him (Henney 1973, 238), but they do not identify themselves with him in any way. Jeannette Henney nevertheless explains these trances as resulting from possession by the Holy Ghost.

Further justification of my point of view is therefore necessary, and this brings us back to the identificatory aspect of possession. Let us take the case of the candomblé, practiced in Bahia, Brazil. The divinities (orixd) venerated there form part of an extremely populated pantheon; Roger Bastide (1958, 141) names ten without claiming his list is complete, and each of those on the list is plural. Each of these deities (all of African origin), Ogun (god of iron), Yemanja (goddess of fresh and salt water), Shango (god of lightning), and so on, is capable of incarnating him or herself into an adept, and thereby bringing on the trance state. The adept then identifies himself with the divinity and manifests this identification by carrying the deity's symbols (a double-headed ax for Xango, a sword for Ogun, an articulated fish for Yemanja, and so on), by assuming his or her humor, by imitating his or her behavior, and by executing dance steps expressing the deity's individual characteristics. Identifying the spirit or divinity responsible for the possession occupies a very important place in the initiation rites of these cults: unless one knows to which deity any particular possession should be attributed, how is one to address him, make the correct sacrifices, and generally behave in the appropriate manner? In the case of tarantism—which is not, properly speaking, a cult—identifying the particular spider whose bite is responsible for the trance state constitutes a crucial moment of the ritual, since here again there are several different spiders that may have bitten the sick person. The first thing to do, therefore, is to ascertain which one is involved (a process carried out with the aid of music). Moreover, one of the dance figures through which the trance is expressed consists in imitating the spider by walking, if that is the right word, on all 28 CHAPTER ONE fours with one’s back to the ground. So there are trances whose ritual is identificatory in nature, and in a double sense, moreover: on the one hand it is essential, before anything else, to identify the deity responsible for the perturbation, and on the other, once this has been done, it is then necessary to become identified with him or her. I shall say, therefore, that there is possession when the ritual is identificatory, and only in this case.

Nothing of this kind occurs in what I have proposed we call inspiration or communion trances, even though in one of them there may be embodiment (as in possession) and not in the other. When the dervish, as a result of dhikr or sama‘,”' falls into a trance and dances, he is not identifying himself in any way with Allah, even when—an extreme case inadmissible to the purists—he cries out “He is in me!” Neither (on the orthodox side) the followers of the Shlustes (a Russian flagellant sect),’* who dance in a trance induced by the presence of the Holy Ghost, nor (on the Protestant side) the Camisards of the Cevennes (France), who are moved to prophesy by inspiration, identify themselves with God or the Holy Ghost. The latter causes them to shake and dance, or talks through their mouths; but those he inspires do not in any way imitate him. Would imitating Allah, Jehovah, or the Holy Ghost be conceivable? The same may be said of Eli- sha’s trance in the Bible, when he feels the hand of Jehovah upon him be- fore he begins to prophesy (2 Kings 3:10-15): he senses the presence of God upon or within him, but there is no question of identifying with Him or imitating Him. Thus nonidentificatory trance inspiration or communion trance appears to be characteristic of Islam, Christianity, and Judaism. In other words, it seems to be linked with the logic of religions of transcendence. It nonetheless signals the presence of a divinity. It is an epiphany, and in this respect it should be ranked alongside possession, even though the latter is identificatory, rather than alongside shamanism, even though shamanism is also nonidentificatory. We shall see later that identificatory and non- identificatory trances each make very different use of music. This is why I have insisted on the importance of making this distinction.

Divinatory Trance and Mediumship Shamanism, possession, and inspiration have in common the fact that they all—each in its own way—usually lead to divination. Divinatory trance is not their prime goal, but it does constitute a natural extension of such states. Shamans are not specialists in divination, any more than those who are possessed or inspired, but while they are in a trance, they are asked questions, their advice is solicited, and they are requested to predict the future. Besides this kind of trance in which divination occasionally figures, there is also another type in which divination is the sole purpose. I shall label this type mediumistic trance or mediumship. Trance and Possession 29

Mediumistic trance also manifests itself in numerous ways. In Greek antiquity, the most famous example was the Pythia of Delphi. As we know, she was inspired by Apollo, but her trance did not in any way involve identification with or imitation of the god. People came to consult her, and she simply delivered her oracles. In Tibet, the so-called government oracle has a comparable function, but in this case, the trance is triggered and manifests itself in a very different way; I shall have occasion to refer to it several times later. There also are numerous examples of mediumistic trance in both Africa and Asia. Since by its very function, it is triggered on command (frequently at close intervals), it is only logical that it would often manifest itself in fairly nonviolent ways, and that on occasion, it would occur so discreetly as to be imperceptible. This is the case among the Mofu of Cameroon, for example, where one finds both male and female soothsayers. J.-Fr. Vincent (1971, 108) writes that the women "identify with their genius to the point of saying 'I' or 'we' instead of using the third person." Their trance manifests itself in an extremely reserved manner. The men, who practice divination in what one might call a more professional way, are described as being "inspired" (ibid., 76, 77, 104), and their possession by the "genii of divination" is thought to be a "permanent state." When they converse with these genii, and question them, their trance, if it is a trance, does not manifest any external signs, and there is nothing to indicate they have entered an "altered state" (ibid., 104). On the surface, then, there is no trance state at all in these cases, even though the soothsayer's vocation was originally determined by trances or possessions displaying all the usual characteristics of those states (ibid.). For all sorts of reasons, mediumistic trance—which one can observe without going to the other end of the earth—can take an almost infinite variety of forms. Its relations with music do not therefore have the same regularities that can be found in the case of shamanism or possession. I shall devote a section of a later chapter to this subject.

To conclude this attempt at classifying religious trance, I should note that we shall be dealing, a little later on, with yet another type of trance, one closely connected with possession but quite distinct from possession trance, and which I feel is best labeled, for reasons I shall provide later on, as "initiatory trance." Lastly, it hardly need be said that I do not claim to have exhausted all the possible aspects of trance in this typology, and that there are many more than those I have described. I have limited myself here to those with which we will be concerned in this book.

THE DYNAMICS OF POSSESSION
Possession Cults and Reprobate Possession
Of the various types of trance we have just investigated, possession trance is the one that will concern us most. It is therefore important for us to investigate in greater detail the characteristics of possession as a religious phenomenon. In his "Prolegomena to the Study of Possession Cults," Roger Bastide (1972, 84) defines such cults as sets of "functional variables" in which manifest and latent functions are articulated in different ways and give rise to a very complex series of combinations. Without entering into the details of these variables, let us simply say here that (1) possession cults are forms of religion characterized by a certain type of relation between a given deity and certain categories of his or her zealots, whom I shall call adepts. This relation causes the adept to become possessed by the divinity. (2) Possession is the socialized behavior of an individual, consisting of a change within the individual, with the effect that the usual personality, which govers the individual's everyday behavior, is replaced by the persona of the deity, who dictates different forms of behavior. This substitution is accompanied by an alteration in psychic activity, generally termed trance. (3) The identification brought about in this way constitutes an alliance, sometimes reduced to a pact of peaceful coexistence, with the major function of leading the divinity to exert its power in favor of the possessed person and/or their group, or to cease exerting its power against them.

There are also cases in which possession is reprobated, either by the whole of society, including the possessed individuals themselves, or by one section of the population, sometimes a majority, sometimes a minority, according to circumstances. The notorious possessions of Loudun, which were the talk of France in the seventeenth century, were unanimously disapproved of, since they were demonic in nature, and regarded as such not only by public opinion but also by those subject to them. They were nevertheless "possession" in the sense of the word we are using here, since they were identificatory.

In the opinion of one of the most important protagonists of this much-publicized affair, Father Surin (the principal exorcist of these extraordinary victims of possession, before succumbing to possession himself), the Loudun possessions took a truly "theatrical" form. This does not mean that they became the object of a cult. Quite the contrary in fact. Far from cultivating possession, the point was to exorcize or put an end to it. This explains why this "theater" was totally devoid of music, and why we shall consequently not deal any further with this type of possession in this book, except very briefly in a later chapter devoted to exorcism.

Music and Possession: An Approach to the Problem
Widely distributed throughout the world, possession in its cultivated forms is associated with music and dance. Associated, moreover, not merely in a general way, as is the case to varying degrees with so many forms of religion, but in a very particular one, since trance, which is the central phenomenon here, is often regarded as the direct result of music and dancing. We are therefore faced with the problem of understanding the origin of this power, so frequently accorded to music, of triggering possession trance. Of what order is it? Psychic? Somatic? Symbolic? Effective? Imaginary? Real? On the other hand, we shall see later that music, even within one and the same cult, may sometimes appear to be indispensable to triggering the trance and then, at others, quite unnecessary. Why? How are we to explain the fact that its effects are, as we shall discover, so variable? Or that they take such different, sometimes even contradictory forms from one cult to another? Or that they have been so variously interpreted by those who have described them? There is something paradoxical in the relations between music and possession. Seen from afar, in their totality, they appear most of the time to be absolutely necessary. Yet when one looks closer, the nature of that necessity appears incoherent and escapes all attempts at formulating it.

This is because possession cults, of which there are so many various types, must be regarded as so many discrete systems whose internal logic will govern the articulation of their elements differently in each case. Music occurs as one of the component parts of those systems, and the role it plays varies with the models upon which those systems are structured. But, since music is itself a system, its relations with each model are equally determined by its own organization, thus accounting for their protean character. How can we try to grasp such a constantly shifting reality?

Since the essential feature of possession cults is the change of state that occurs within the adept's psyche, these cults must be considered first of all in terms of their dynamics. But this dynamic must itself be viewed from several angles. Trance being by definition transitory, possession must be first approached from the viewpoint of the dynamics of trance. The modification of the state of consciousness characteristic of trance follows a process comprising a sequence of distinct phases whose sequential order obeys a particular internal logic. These successive phases - preparation, onset, climax, resolution - each present particularities that vary significantly from one cult to another. As for the modalities of this modification - more or less imperceptible or brutal, mild or convulsive, calm or dramatic - their variations are equally significant.

The relations that trance may have with music can vary not only from one phase to another but also according to the type of modification involved. This being said, however fleeting or brief the state of possession may be, it is always more or less durable. It is therefore important to consider it also from this aspect, the one it takes on during its culminating phase. This phase, which varies in duration and can be very fleeting, consists in a state of consciousness characterized by a form and content that are both set and stable. It is a slice of time experienced under an identity other than the one of everyday life, and which we can justifiably isolate from the let us say normal state of consciousness that precedes and follows it. During this phase - the adept is no longer a Niger peasant or a Bahia street vendor but Dongo, god of lightning, or Yemanja, goddess of water. What is significant, then, is the behavior of the spirit incarnated within the possessed person. In addition, trance, both as an experience and as a corporeal technique, represents different types of events from the adept's standpoint depending on whether he is integrating this experience and learning this technique - during initiation - or whether he exercises previously acquired knowledge and skill. Initiation, which is the discovery of a new state of consciousness and an apprenticeship in the various ways of reaching and then leaving it, is a unique experience that will not be repeated, and one that results in an irreversible modification of the person's relations with himself, with the divinity, and with society. Once this initiation has been undergone, the modification is permanent. On the other hand, the inner change that the votary undergoes when he passes from his everyday state to his possessed state, and then reverts to his former one, naturally recurs every time he goes into a trance throughout the remainder of his life. But, and all the descriptions concur on this point, the behavioral patterns characterizing trance differ according to whether it involves a novice, a recent initiate, a confirmed adept, or an officiant experienced in the trance state. The behavior of the possessed person thus varies during his career, and his trance takes different forms depending on the stage he has reached. It is therefore essential to set trance within this dynamic process when one investigates its relations with music. Lastly, trance, as an event, is linked with the successive stages of a ceremony, and does not generally occur at just any time. A possession ritual is an architecture of time also composed of various phases connected with different kinds of music. It is thus within the dynamics of the ceremony that we need to consider the relations between music and trance. Investigating the relations between music and possession, ultimately means asking ourselves what role music plays in the preparation for trance, in the onset of trance, in the maintenance of trance, then in the emergence from trance, all this being seen in terms of the stage the adept has attained in his career and of the particular moment in the ceremony that has been reached. It is within this threefold dynamic—of trance itself, of the adept's life, and of the ritual's development—that we will therefore examine these relations.

So what means do we have at our disposal to conduct an investigation into these relations between music and possession? To begin, let me observe that although the various manifestations of possession have often been likened—whether rightly or wrongly—to those of hysteria, we do not know a great deal about the actual state experienced by those who have become possessed. The descriptions at our disposal have all been made from the outside, apart from the one by G. Cossard (1970), which despite its qualities, is nevertheless extremely brief. On the other hand, although we know that music does have dynamogenic effects, although experiments have shown that certain sounds or certain kinds of music encourage the growth of plants, the lactation of cows, or the resignation of saleswomen in department stores, although, in short, we can be sure that music does have the capacity to act upon the psychological or physiological behavior of living beings, these effects tell us nothing about the way music may act in the case that concerns us here, which is totally distinct from all those listed above. The only research carried out in this field, that of Neher (1962), is unfortunately devoid of all scientific value, as we shall see later. We therefore have no experimental data available for advancing any hypothesis on the psychophysiological role of music in trance states. Given the present state of things, the only means of understanding this role is to turn to the existing evidence we have on possession cults, which is to say, essentially, the writings of ethnographers. 

These ethnographers (or anthropologists) provide us with three kinds of information, depending on whether they offer accounts of the correlations natives make between music and trance—unhappily the rarest kind—whether they themselves make such correlations—unconsciously more often than not—or whether they simply describe the facts in such a way as to enable us to discern concomitances between music and trance ourselves, which is the most frequent kind, though in this last case precise observations are much less numerous than one would wish. In examining the relations between music and possession as they emerge from such texts, or rather from those I have selected as 'being particularly significant, I shall conform to the principle stated earlier, that of considering possession cults as dynamic wholes. I shall therefore proceed by following the various stages the adept goes through in the course of his career as a possessed person, beginning with the stage I shall label as prepossession. But first it is important to provide a broad outline of this career and of its principal stages.

Possession and Vocation

Whether explicit or not, the autochthonous theory is that possession is produced by the will of a divinity who, for one reason or another, wishes to incarnate him- or herself within a particular individual. The god is the one who selects the person in whom he wishes to incarnate and not the reverse: a person does not select a god for whom he then becomes the vessel. On the surface, at any rate, the relation as experienced by the possessed person is passive rather than actively willed. In Vietnam, in the hdu bong, "it is accepted that Genii themselves are the ones who select their mediums, 'catch' them, and oblige them, willy nilly, to serve their masters" (Simon and Simon-Barouh 1973, 33). In the Niger, among the Hausa, "societal viewpoint requires that adepts be chosen by and solely by the gods. Any initiative on the part of the woman concerned would only be merely presumptuous and sacrilegious" (Monfouga-Nicolas 1972, 95). In Dahomey, among the Gun, "the vodun himself selects vodunsi from members of the families who make up his followers" (Akindélé and Aguessy 1953, 113). In Brazil, among adepts of the can-domblé, "a deity's supreme requirement is that one of the faithful become his 'horse' by means of trance, so that he can come down among mankind and dance" (Cossard 1970, 95).

Perhaps we ought to detail the nature of this relationship. The fact that initiation is sought (as it is in many but not all cases, as we shall see) does not, in practice, mean that it has been deliberately willed. To be initiated into the worship of a divinity when you know, thanks to the intervention of a soothsayer, that the divinity has chosen you, constitutes a submission to that choice, not an act of choice on your part. Whether in Bali (Belo 1960, esp. 2, 47 ff.), Tanzania (Gray 1969, 175), or in Dahomey (Akin-délé and Aguessy 1953, 114), the witchdoctor or soothsayer is the one who, in answer to the questions of a person who has come to express his or her troubles, unveils behind the client's difficulties either the anger of an offended divinity or that divinity's quest for a receptacle, a visible envelope. If the soothsayer's interpretation meshes with the client's unconscious aspirations, so much the better; as with good matrimonial agencies, good soothsayers are those who can arrange alliances satisfactory to both parties. 

"Officially," to use the term employed by Jacqueline Monfouga-Nicolas (1972, 93), he has simply translated the wishes of the invisible element that governs the world. Trance and Possession 35 Thus, if one becomes an adept of a possession cult, it is not because one has willed it oneself—or at any rate not because one has willed it consciously—but because a god wishes it. I should add that it is not always a soothsayer who discloses this fact, and who identifies the god requesting the initiation, as is the practice in Chad, for example, among the Mundang (Adler and Zempléni 1972, esp. 87, 118). In a neighboring country, Niger, among the Hausa (Monfouga-Nicolas 1972, 97), on the contrary, "the healer of the bori [the woman in charge of the college of possessed women] is the one who decides whether or not a woman had definitely been chosen by any particular god." But this does not affect the problem in any way. The significant point is that in each case divination is involved; that is to say, a method of acquiring information about the will of the gods so that their wishes may be obeyed. In all cases, that is, except for tarantism, in which recourse to any kind of divination is never described. This exception, however, is neither complete nor significant. Obviously, tarantism is an institution in an advanced state of decadence. Although it still attracts "new recruits" (cf. De Martino 1966, 41), we know nothing about the way in which they are recruited. But in any event it offers a case of the "selection by illness" mentioned by J. Monfouga-Nicolas (1972, 97), a selection process that does in fact constitute a system of divination, either in itself or as an element of a broader divinatory system, as in the case of the Mundang (Adler and Zempléni, ibid.). Moreover, identifying the tarantula responsible for the bite, in other words the possession, is carried out by means of a "musical diagnosis" that also functions as a divinatory system. We shall return to this subject later. Alongside possession by personal vocation, if one may so express it, which is a response to a particular state or unhappy event in the life of an individual (as is the case, among other examples, with the sadeg "trance medium" in Bali, and with other categories of possession: zar in Ethiopia; tarantism in Europe; the candomblé in Brazil; and usually with bori adepts), there also exists a kind of possession that affects the person undergoing it not as an individual but as a member of a group. Two ways are possible here. In the less frequent of the two, possession is handed down as an inheritance, which can occur in the case of bori: "Bori can be transmitted as an inheritance, in extremely rare cases, without the intervention of any pathological elements" (Monfouga-Nicolas 1972, 93). The same thing has been observed in Bali, but here again, as an exception (Belo 1960, 19-20). Among the Fon of Dahomey, Herskovits tells us (1938, 2:195, 197), albeit without clarifying whether or not the practice is common, the adept of a vodun can designate his successor before dying. In the other way the family, group, or village consecrates an individual to the gods, usually at a very early age. This was the case in Bali—Jane Belo (1960, 4) speaks of it in the past tense—with girl dancers, under the age of 36: Little girls, Belo tells us, "were chosen apparently for their ability to go into the disassociated state and to perform in this state dances which it was said they could not possibly have executed if they were not entered by a god, since they had received no previous training in the dance." This is also most frequently the case in vodun cults among the Gun of Dahomey, at least when a lin-eage vodun is concerned. Since filiation among the Gun is patrilineal, the child is consecrated as a general rule to the vodun of the father's lineage, on the advice of—or at any rate after consultation with—the soothsayer.

The recruitment of vodunsi, the "wives of the vodun,"\* thus follows a path opposite to that of the bori or zar. In the case of the vodun, it is a family matter, and the individual concerned (usually a girl) is not even consulted (a situation comparable to the marriage process prevalent among the Gun, in its traditional form at least); in the case of zar or bori, on the contrary, it is above all an individual matter, and although it may involve familial components, these are not decisive. This does not mean that in the case of vodun, personal predisposition does not play a certain role.

In order to choose future vodunsi, and thus prepare for the next "class" of adepts, "several months before the ceremony of their entry into the convent," the kinfolk, with the agreement of the priest of the vodun concerned, consult Fa, the god of divination. The list of "pupils selected by the vodun" is established in this way (Akindélé and Aguessy 1953, 114). Among other things, this consultation obviously bears upon a particular child's predispositions with regard to the status of a vodun's wife, and the final choice certainly takes this into account. The fact remains, nevertheless, that the decision ultimately rests with the family.

Vodun and lineage live in a reciprocal relationship, since the more powerful the vodun, the greater the protection for the lineage, and the more the lineage honors its vodun (notably through lavish ceremonies, and therefore by large numbers of faithful followers) the more the deity's power is consolidated. This being so, it follows that the lineage must ensure its bonds with the vodun do not become attenuated in any way. It must therefore, regularly supply its vodun, if one may so express it, with new wives as the generations age and renew themselves.

It can happen, however, that the family's zeal slackens, or, as is becoming more and more frequent, that new recruits, influenced by marabouts and missionaries of various denominations, are recalcitrant, refuse to enter the convent, or even run away from it. Any misfortune befalling the family or the country is then interpreted as a warning to restore order. We know that the 1973 drought was regarded by a number of Africans as a sign of the gods' anger at being deserted by mankind. Attempts were consequently made to revive Trance and Possession 37 old forms of worship that had either become extinct or were on the verge of becoming so (de Sardan 1973; see filmography). Possession is thus sometimes a given group's response to adversity, a situation analogous to the one we already mentioned, in which it constitutes an individual response to illness. Vocation of the impersonal type, by which I mean that in which the god's choice (since, let us recall, it is always the god who does the choosing ultimately) affects the person involved (usually a child) not as an individual but as the representative of a lineage, can take other forms as well. It often happens that if a woman remains sterile or loses her children at a young age, her parents may decide to consecrate any future child in advance to the vodun, seeking assistance from the soothsayer. The vodun in question will then be one of the "private voduns" such as Dan, the snake god, or Sakpata, the earth god, who controls the incidence of smallpox. It should be noted that while a "private vodun" for some families, Sakpata can also be a lineage vodun for others.

The orisha cult among the Yoruba, neighbors of the Gun, has two types of recruitment process: personal and impersonal. In the Nago territory of Benin, Shango, the dominant orisha, recruits his votaries young, sometimes as young as two years old. This recruitment, classified by age, aims to renew the alliance between family and divinity and ensure succession between generations. It falls into the category of impersonal vocation, as it is unconnected with the individual's personal history.

Recruitment often occurs at the moment of birth, when the oracle indicates the child's destiny. However, recruitment can also happen in other ways. Pierre Verger (1957, 159) recounts the case of a woman who lost her children to an evil spirit. Ogun, god of iron, took her under his protection and initiated her, making her an Ogun votary. This recruitment is of the same type as the one that predominates in the bori, zar, and ndép cults.

The vodun and orisha cults share the feature of being strictly monotheistic, focusing on one and only one vodun or orisha, who is usually the adept's lineage deity. In bori, zar, and hau béng, the votary is possessed by several spirits in succession, while in tarantism, the person affected is associated with one particular species of tarantula.

In the vodun and orisha cults, initiation entails apprenticeship in a series of secret languages, whereas in the second, Pierre Verger tells me, there is no such component. Trance, Crisis, Fit, "Wild" Possession

Three words constantly recur in texts describing possession cults: possession (of course), trance, and crisis (crise). Some authors talk mainly of crisis, while others use the word trance and employ crise solely with reference to one of its particular aspects. Some writers use both words almost interchangeably. The word crise is used to denote a convulsive form of trance, the paroxysmic aspect of trance, the onset of trance if it is characterized by a moment of more or less distressing agitation, or to refer to the troubled period an individual may undergo.

Trance and Possession

E. De Martino, in his work on tarantism, also uses crise in two different senses: "The real therapeutic ritual begins with music. At first, there was solely the crisis, that is to say, the culturally conditioned imitation done by the poisoned victim. ...Within the framework of this symbolic imitation, the tarantulees refer to themselves as feeling 'broken,' 'torn,' 'bruised,' 'shattered,' or else—as I have so often heard said during our fieldwork—'wounded,' or 'upset,' in other words filled with a profound distaste for oneself and for everything. The extreme form of this imitation is an abrupt collapse, which means that the tarantulee is enacting the role of a person in danger of dying ..."

A. Métraux, in his study of Haitian voodoo, reserves the word crise for the initial stage of possession, in which "the trance manifests itself by symptoms of a clearly psychopathological character" (1958, 106). Roger Bastide, on the contrary, sometimes uses crise and transe interchangeably, so that in his series of studies on trance states we can read, only a few pages apart, "the crise brought on by the bossal god" and "trance brought on by the loa bossal" (1972, 88, 92). Elsewhere (on p. 74), he writes of possession by the bossal god.*? Luc de Heusch (1971, 228) uses the terms transe and crise, or even crise de possession and crise extatique without differentiation. For our purposes, however, it is indispensible to assign a clear meaning to each of these words, or, rather, to make it quite clear to which precise phase of possession they refer. Further, it is essential to realize that the various possession cults throughout the world differ greatly in the type of temporal development they exhibit. Some go through numerous, very ritualized stages, the milestones of a long initiation; others, on the contrary—and tarantism in particular—display a very telescoped type of development.

Certain distinctions that are thus indispensible when describing certain cults have no relevance for others. First, let it be said that if crisis and trance are so often used interchangeably, it is because they both designate an abnormal and transitory state. But although trance is, in this sense, always a crisis or a fit, crisis, on the other hand, is not always a trance. Moreover, viewed as a temporal development, trance contains a particular stage—entry into the trance—which itself often takes the form of a crisis and, consequently, a crisis within a crisis. Finally, as we have seen, the word crisis is also used to designate the state of crisis, either chronic or acute, that leads the individual who experiences it to enter the path of possession. It is therefore important to clarify the ambiguity inherent in this term.

The chronic crisis to which I have just referred—illness, misfortune, troubles of all kinds affecting the individual's person, human relationships, or possessions—leads in general to an acute nervous fit interpreted as the sign that a divinity desires embodiment. Who this divinity is remains to be discovered. If it has already been identified, an alliance with it remains to be made. This nervous fit often consists in falling unconscious to the ground. Frequently, this event occurs without any kind of ceremony, as in tarantism, where, as we have just seen, this sudden collapse represents the paroxysm of the fit.

Describing an initiation in the Yoruba region of Dahomey, P. Verger (1957, 159) relates how the woman in question had previously "fallen to the ground in a rigid state" outside the temple of Ogun, god of iron. In Chad, among the Gula Iro, all possessed women "start their career" as the result of a fit of this sort that floors them quite unexpectedly (Pairault 1969, 258). In Tanzania, among the Segeju (Gray 1969, 175), the victim is brutally thrown to the ground "as if by some invincible force." The day and precise time of the fall are used by the diviner to identify the shetani genius responsible for it. But the fall may equally occur during a ceremony. In Benin, this is usually the case in the rituals involving Sakpata, god of the earth and master of smallpox. This also holds true for the candomblé (Cossard 1970, 158-59), but Cossard specifies (ibid., 162) that the future adept "may also fall at any other given moment outside the ceremonies." I would like to propose we label this first sort of crisis, which resembles a nervous fit or attack much more than a possession crisis, a "prepossession" crisis or fit. Whether or not it takes the form of a fall, such a crisis constitutes in many cults a unique and decisive type of event in the life of the future adept. In many cases, the crisis (and fall) does not merely signify that the divinity has taken possession of the individual, it also indicates, above all, that the individual has been “killed” by the divinity. The fall occupies a particularly important place in the ndép cult among the Lebu and the Wolof of Senegal. Whether a “nonritualized possession crisis” (in other words a “prepossession” crisis) or a “ritual crisis” is involved, the “fall” constitutes the “terminal event,” the “natural conclusion” of the crisis (Zempléni 1966, 314, 400, 410, 414). As the resolution of a ritual crisis, it of course occurs during the ceremony. As the resolution of a nonritualized crisis, on the other hand, it may also occur—like the crisis itself—outside any ceremony, usually “at home.”* In the ndép, the fall does not therefore constitute a unique event but rather a recurrent one. Nevertheless, we should note that those adepts who preside over the cult, the “officiants” or boroom rab bu mag (ibid., 306) fall only very rarely.

In the case of tarantism, as with ndép, the fall exhibits two distinct characteristics. As we have seen, it occurs on the one hand as a sign of pre-possession, and on the other as the end product of the dance itself (De Martino 1966, 69 and photo 7). In the case of the Balinese barong, the possessed dancers, having attained the paroxysm of excitation during their kriss dance, then fall to the ground (Belo 1960, 98). In Tibet, medi-ums fall unconscious after they have delivered their oracles. Zempléni (1966, 419) interprets this fall in the case of the ndép as “the fatal outcome of the meeting with the double,” which is, moreover, what the “symbolic burial” episode illustrates.

Among the Gun, the enclosure where the novices live during their reclusion—an enclosure situated within the boundaries of the vodun's temple—is sometimes referred to as kuxwe or “house of death” (Tardits 1958, 53). Several days after the entry of a graduating class of recruits into the convent, their parents thank the vodun's priest for “having restored their children to life” (Akindélé and Aguessy 1953, 114), a fact clearly demonstrating that the children, upon entering their new state, have undergone a symbolic death. It would seem that their “death” and subsequent resurrection occur out of sight, within the secrecy of the convent. In fact, the ritual always differs to a certain degree depending on the vodun concerned. In the case of Sakpata, the recruits' death and resurrection are public and take on a particularly dramatic and spectacular character.** But this is the exception, not the rule, contrary to what is usually assumed.

The amalgam of possession crisis (or rather prepossession crisis) and ritual death is also found among the Yoruba, as is implied by the following phrases extracted from an oriki (sequence of praise mottoes) of Shango, god of lightning (Rouget 1965, 102-3): The earth does not eat for ever Leopard-Death, Death that sends the child to sleep! Death that bruises many times before taking a wife! Behind these esoteric phrases one should read that the ritual death is merely temporary (“not . . . for ever”) and that Shango, who is Death insofar as he kills (“sends the child to sleep”) and also Leopard insofar as he is king, subjects the novice to a long ordeal (“bruises many times”) during the reclusion before finally making him or her his adept (“his wife”). This text poses the problem of the relations between ritual death (however realistically acted out in the case of Sakpata) and the first. 

The possession crisis: How are we to accept that the recruit can be simultaneously dead, as the god has just killed him or her, and also possessed by him—since our authors indicate, in the case of both vodun and orisha, that this first crisis is a possession? This contradiction might perhaps be resolved if we viewed the matter from the standpoint of native thought, which believes that human beings possess several souls.

In Métraux, for instance (1958, 106), we read that "the explanation given by members of the voodoo sect for mystic trance is among the simplest: a /oa takes up residence in the head of an individual after having first driven out the 'big good angel,' one of the two souls that everyone carries within them. The abrupt departure of the soul causes the twitching and violent movements that characterize the onset of trance. Once the 'good angel' has left, the possessed person experiences a feeling of total emptiness, as if they were losing consciousness."

We know that initiation into the cult of a vodun or an orisha is a long process intended to produce profound modifications in the individual's personality structure, so that they will become a receptacle fit for the divinity. It is characterized by a sequence of phases during which the novice's head is subjected to a variety of treatments: in candomblé, the bori ritual® intended to "strengthen the novice's head" (Cossard 1970, 176); in Haitian voodoo, the "headwash" (laver-tete; Métraux 1958, 107); in the orisha cult, the imposition of osu, a mystic preparation placed on the novice's shaved head at a certain stage in the initiation in order to aid reception of the orisha (Verger 1957, 71).

The structure of possession appears to be related to that of the person, as the latter is formed by the conjunction of several souls. Perhaps it can be best described in these terms. Its different phases could be satisfactorily defined in every case if we could always refer them to an indigenous theory of the conjunction and disjunction of souls.

For example, Adler and Zempléni (1972, 130-31) tell us about the Mundang, among whom possession gives rise to a spectacular "coming and going of the souls of the sinri'* between the sick person and the therapist. During this coming and going, the patient is not guided by their own "small soul" but by the souls of the sinri who possess them.

Among the Songhay, J. Rouch writes (1973, 531), "the most widespread zima® theory is that during possession, the 'double' (bia)* of the god has taken the place of the horse's 'double.'" Elsewhere, the Dogon themselves describe the mechanism of the crisis undergone by a candidate for the function of totemic priest as the direct result of the contradictory movements of their different souls (kikunu). "The struggle between antagonistic kikunu in this crisis symbolizes the struggle between reason and affectivity, which is the source of disequilibrium," Genevieve Calame-Griaule tells us (1965, 46).

Let us now return to symbolic death and the vodun. During their period of reclusion, the vodun's new recruits are in a state of partial death, as they remain quite alive, but display behavior associated with death, such as eating with their left hands or going through doorways backwards. In Bori, the initiation is described by J. Monfouga-Nicolas as composed of two successive stages: the first, an exorcism, and the second, an imposition. The former is accompanied by symbolic death, as the future adept lies flat on the ground, which is referred to as "lying with the worms," evoking an interred body eaten by worms (Monfouga-Nicolas 1972, 117). The "struggle with the dark gods" terminates the first phase and plays an essential role. This struggle is a form of what R. Bastide (1972, 92) has termed "wild trance," which leads to distinguishing it from the prepossession crisis.

In Dahomey, Brazil, and Haiti, "wild" possession crisis occurs when initiation has already begun. Herskovits (1938, 186-87) describes it as a "war" with the vodun, who suddenly attacks the new recruits. In Haiti, wild possession is caused by a Joa bossal, according to Métraux, who observes that "the nature of the nervous attack depends... on the ritual condition of the possessed person; the less experienced he is, the more he struggles. Until his head has been 'washed,' that is to say, as long as his Joa has not been fixed in his head by a special ceremony, he behaves wildly" (1958, 107-8).

In the candomblé, the possession crisis by a santo bruto may correspond to what I label a prepossession crisis, as Bastide's (1958, 22) description suggests, or to what Bastide himself refers to elsewhere (1972, 92) as wild possession, in other words, possession that has not yet been "socialized." This possession by a santo bruto does not necessarily take a brutal form. G. Cossard likens the santo bruto to an orisha who has not been "educated, does not know how to behave...and still has everything to learn" (204). She also describes a phase of the initiation ritual that resembles the one described by Herskovits, implying there is yet another aspect of "wild" possession in the candomblé.

It is important to remember that wild possession, whatever form it takes, corresponds to a period during which the adept is not yet completely initiated. It is also important to differentiate between wild possession and the wildness of possession. In the candomblé, possession by a santo bruto is not necessarily brutal. Extremely violent and brutal possession trances, such as those filmed in J. Rouch's Les Maitres fous, are not examples of possessions of adepts undergoing initiation. By their very nature, such trances demand frenzy. The same is true of Balinese possessions during which men in trance states turn their krisses against themselves. However, there also are nonviolent and calm trances, and others where possession is so interiorized as to go almost unperceived by an inexperienced spectator. To take two cults studied by András Zempléni as examples: possession among the Wolof of Senegal is as brutal and convulsive as that among the Mundang of Chad is gentle and relaxed. As two films demonstrate, the behavior of the possessed is totally different in each of these two cases. The music involved is just as different, a significant point to which I shall return. Finally, as far as making a general distinction between trance and crisis or fit is concerned, perhaps it might be best to reserve the word "trance" for the more or less durable period during which the adept fully identifies himself with the god possessing him, and the word "crisis" or "fit" for the very temporary, often painful and more or less convulsive state marking the transition from a normal to a trance state, or, on the contrary, as in ndop, the end product of that state.

We would, in this way, be led ultimately to distinguish between trances with and without crises or fits; crises with and without falls; and, reciprocally, between crises or fits and falls with and without trance.

Possession and Obsession

Before broaching the subject of initiation, whose goal is to help the adept enter into ritualized possession, or possession in the full sense of this term, let us return for a moment to the state that is an antechamber, as it were, of true possession and which I proposed we call prepossession. We have seen that this latter state is frequently characterized by what Zempleni calls "non-ritualized possession crisis." Clearly, to speak of prepossession is to imply that this state precedes another, possession itself, and by the same token, to speak of "nonritualized possession" would be meaningless except with reference to "ritualized possession," which it will become sooner or later.

Frequently, however, states corresponding to the picture just given of this prepossession—or, if one prefers, this nonritualized possession—are not subsequently transformed, through initiation, into a state of full possession. What term should we consequently use to designate such states?

During the Renaissance—and without doubt long before that—a distinction was made between two states, "obsession" and "possession," the first being regarded as the effect "of the Demon as an external agent," the second as that of the Demon "as an internal principle." In the case of obsession the Demon was thought to act upon obsessed individuals "by appearing to them often and visibly so, regardless of their will in the matter, by striking them, by troubling them, and by exciting in them strange passions and movements far exceeding the scope of their capacities," whereas in the case of possession the Demon "disposes of the faculties and organs of the person possessed in order to produce, not only in her but also through her, actions that the person could not produce by herself."

In Loudun—for these quotations refer to the Loudun possessions—it does indeed seem that only those nuns whose demons had been identified were seen as possessed; the others, whose "symptoms" were "not so clear" were viewed as merely obsessed. In ecclesiastical language, obsession is "the state of a person thought to be disturbed, besieged by the devil, which is different from possession, which signifies actual habitation by the devil within a body." Nothing is more common throughout the world than the belief that certain troubles occurring in people's lives, certain bizarre forms of behavior, and certain illnesses, particularly those of a mental or emotional kind, are attributed to malevolent spirits, baneful forces, or wrathful divinities. This torments such victims, both physically and mentally. From our present perspective, we could say that obsession refers to such a state.

There are two possible ways to end this condition, which is always experienced as a disorder: either by transforming and organizing the relationship with the spirit or divinity seen as responsible for the disturbance, which entails recourse to possession rituals, or by bringing it to an end, which entails recourse to exorcism. Naturally, these alternatives leave room for a number of intermediary solutions.

In Benin, when one says "Fon vodiin wa ta éton me," "the vodun has come into his head," one is speaking of true possession in the sense we have agreed to assign this word. When, on the contrary, one says "vodun wa nu xé," "the vodun has tormented him," one is speaking of the state of prepossession just described. To designate it in English or in French, it would be preferable to use a completely different word. Why not "obsession," since this is precisely the meaning the word once had? This would make for greater clarity.

Moreover, if we agreed to apply the term "obsession" not only to prepossession states but also to those generally labeled possession but that call for exorcism and not initiation as a response, we would be spared the opposition between "happy" and "unhappy" possession—or "authentic" and "inauthentic"—proposed by Luc de Heusch (1971, 232) as a means of distinguishing between accepted and welcomed possession and possession that is rejected and treated by exorcism. This opposition can lead to confusion.

Loudun illustrates a situation in which both identificatory possession and exorcism were involved; but here the exorcism was of a very particular nature, in that the victims were not the ones who asked for it; society (or the Church, which comes to the same thing) imposed it. Contrary to what happens in a society that proposes possession as a remedy for people's ills, at Loudun society entirely rejected possession, and it was the individuals concerned who resorted to it, thereby conforming to an illicit model. Hence exorcism, which was repressive instead of curative, and which did not try to remove a tension between the visible and the invisible, but to resolve a conflict between the individual and society. Above, I proposed we term the Loudun possession reprobate. With the exception of reprobate possession, we will consider that the difference between obsession and possession lies in the fact that obsession calls for either initiation—thereby becoming possession—or exorcism, whereas possession, which can only occur after initiation (the latter being eventually reduced to mere identification of the one responsible for the trance, as in tarantism), never in any case leads to exorcism. Initiatory Trance and Music

Initiation, whose duration and complexity vary greatly from one culture to another, is often the moment when the adept undergoes their apprenticeship in possession, and where music and trance establish their tightest relationship. The word "initiation" implies secrecy, which makes it difficult to gather accurate information. The Brazilian candomblé is a notable exception, as it has been well described by Giséle Binon-Cossard (1970, 157-217). The author's study is particularly fascinating, as she was an adept herself.

In the candomblé, initiation lasts for three months, with the most important stage being a three-week period of confinement or reclusion. During this time, novices experience a state of consciousness different from the one considered normal. This state is characterized by two aspects: the santo state and the ere state.

The santo state is when the orisha is embodied, meaning the novice is effectively possessed by the divinity. However, this state lasts no more than a few hours due to its physical exhaustion and the inability to take nourishment. The ere state is a less violent state of trance, with much less marked alterations of consciousness. The ere state is accompanied by psychophysiological disturbances, such as reduced faculties of taste and smell, a diminished sense of touch, and dissociation from affectivity relating to normal life.

To provoke the ere state, the orisha leaves behind a child, which the novice must summon. The novice in a state of ere behaves in a wholly infantile manner, with an intellectual activity never exceeding that of a very young child. The initiates who look after them provide them with small pieces of wood, rags, and ribbons, which the novices use to create dolls, boats, or kites. The novice experiences a sort of "splitting of the self," where they are aware of their preoccupations in a normal state but envision them with total detachment, as if they were dealing with a complete stranger. They refer to themselves in speech as "my daughter." The novice can be said to exist in a state of double consciousness. 

But this state is also a trance, since, apart from the disturbances already mentioned, it also gives rise in certain cases to "phenomena that fall into the province of parapsychology: projection into space, projection into past and future time, hence, prophecy, prediction, divination." During the various initiation ceremonies, Cossard writes, "the little mother summons the orisha by calling out the ritual words of greeting specific to that particular spirit, and by shaking the adza."** The state of ere then gives way 48 CHAPTER ONE once again to the santo state. After the ceremony, the ere state is induced again as described earlier" (by summoning the ere three times in a loud voice). . In his study of the candomblé in Bahia (which differs slightly from the one in Rio de Janeiro described by Cossard), Bastide (1958) investigates the ere state'™ at great length in his chapter entitled "The Structure of Ec- stasy." "The crisis brought on by the ere," he sums up elsewhere (1972, 88) "is of two kinds: imitation of childlike behavior (after initiation) or else a semitrance (after total trance)." Herskovits (1943, 505),'* writing about yet another region of Brazil, tells us that "when the possessed person returns to her normal state she must pass through the ere condition, a 'type of semi-possession' described as a childlike state that accompanies the personal divinity." Thus the ere state is described by Cossard as a "less violent trance," by Bastide as "semi-trance," and by Herskovits as "semi-posses- sion," all three terms being slightly vague and, it must be said, somewhat unsatisfactory. Although closely linked with possession trance, since it alternates with it throughout the initiation period, the ere trance is clearly distinct from that of possession proper, and even in opposition to it. What ultimately characterizes the ere trance from the subject's viewpoint is that he or she is no longer possessed but at the same time has not yet returned to his or her normal identity. Strictly speaking, this involves a double dispos- session, since the subject is dispossessed both of the god and of himself. It may be objected that he is said to be possessed by a child. This objection cannot be sustained, however, since apart from the fact that this possession may well be purely metaphorical (the texts are not absolutely clear on this point), identification with a child in these circumstances does indeed constitute a dispossession, since the child in question is anonymous. Pos- session proper is the diametric opposite of anonymity. Indeed, one is pos- sessed by a precise deity who has a well-known name. In the ere state, on the contrary, it is not the personality of any particular child but the child- like state as such that is involved. Everything shows, therefore, that the ere state is one of depersonalization, whose role in the initiation process is easily understood. For this process consists, in practice, as much in losing one's former personality as in acquiring a new one, and this loss is indeed a necessary condition for this acquisition process. I would suggest, therefore, that we label this ere state a "trance (or state) of dispossession." And since the state is so closely associated with initi- ation, we could further qualify it, among other things, as "a trance (or state) of initiatory dispossession." One observation made by Bastide con- firms that this qualification is justified: with the impression made on him by the novices in the ere state in their "initiatory chamber" still fresh in his mind, he writes (1958, 200) that "this childlike behavior during religious initiation" could well be "a survival in deepest Brazil of the childlike be- Trance and Possession 49 havior observed in tribal initiation. "Later on we shall have the opportunity to compare the behavior of novices in the Dahomey vodun cult with the one observed in another region of Africa among a group of boys undergoing a tribal initiation entirely unconnected with possession. So what are the relations of this initiatory candomblé trance to music? The extremely detailed descriptions given by Giséle Binon-Cossard, who never fails to record carefully the part played by music in the ritual, answers the question quite clearly: when the novices are in a state of initiatory trance (ere state), it so happens that they occasionally sing, and when they do, they sing alone, unaccompanied by any instrument. When, on the contrary, they are in a possession trance (santo state) they are always totally silent, and if there is music (whether vocal or instrumental), it is always made on their behalf by others, either by the men or women who conduct the initiation, or by a group of drummers. The opposition of the two states with regard to their relation to music is, therefore, absolutely clearcut. I shall return on several occasions in later chapters to the music specifically associated with possession trance in this initiation process, and shall therefore limit myself here to the music involved in initiatory trance.

Twice a day, morning and evening, the novices sing “the ingolosi prayer, which is very long and must be known absolutely perfectly by the end of the period of reclusion” (Cossard 1970, 168, 169). The author says no more about this prayer in her book, but I know from her first-hand account that it consists in a very slow chant presenting specific musical characteristics totally different from those in the remaining repertoire of the candomblé. Everything suggests that this sung prayer is equivalent to the long thanksgiving song sung morning and evening by novices in the vodun cult in Benin, which we shall discuss a little later in this chapter. Other ritual songs, all much briefer, are sung by the novices during the course of the day: first upon awakening, then while going single-file to and returning from the place of their morning ablutions, before their meal, and lastly at nightfall, when they ask for lights to be lit (ibid., 167-70). Since I do not know the wording of these songs, I cannot say whether or not they have any direct relationship with the initiation process, but it seems probable that they have no connection whatsoever with possession, since they are never sung when the novice is in this state, or for the purpose of entering it, or inducing it in his or her companions. This is what we need to remember for the moment.

We have a great deal less information on what happens during the initiation process into the orisha cult as practiced among the Yoruba in Nigeria and, above all, in Benin. In his article entitled “The Role of Hebetude [hébétude] during Initiation to the Orisha and Vodun Cults,” Pierre Verger does tell us, however, that “during the period between the day of resurrection and the one on which the novice receives a new name [in other words during the initiation period], the latter appears to have lost his reason and is plunged into a state of hebetude and mental torpor... . While in this state, the novice is referred to as omotun or newborn child. It is in this state, when his mind has been washed clean of all previous memory, that the orisha’s particular rhythms, his songs, dances, and all the god’s forms of behavior, will be inculcated in him” (1954, 337). The "state of hebetude and mental torpor" is a dispossession state, as everyone agrees. Verger does not elucidate whether during initiation the novice alternates between the possession state and the dispossession or initiatory trance, but it is reasonable to suppose that this is the case. In Benin, the annual ceremony for Shango involves the man possessed by Shango alternating between possession and dispossession. During the possession state, the man behaves "like a child or as if he were simple-minded," treated with familiarity different from the respect accorded when he is possessed. Verger notes that during possession, the man's body is exempt from "prosaic obligations." Alternation of possession and dispossession trance is observed during this brief ritual, suggesting it also occurs during the longer initiation period.

In the vodun cult of Benin, the length of the initiation period varies, but it is generally remarkably long. Reclusion in olden times lasted eight years, while in Porto-Novo, initiation lasted seven years. The length and strictness of the requisite reclusion period discouraged followers of the vodun Bodo, who has not made any new recruits in the last forty years. In the Porto-Novo region, it used to happen that the initiation period lasted for two years, and it frequently lasted six months or more. The size of the new graduating class varies, with it consisting of between three or four and a dozen novices. In 1969, the author attended a coming-out ceremony for a graduating class of sixty or so young initiates, aged between two and fourteen years old. This was the largest class the author had ever seen, and it is worth describing one episode of the ritual in detail for several reasons. The vodun involved was Ohwe, whose "convent" is about two miles outside Porto-Novo. When the first "coming-out" ceremony had been performed, the "new ones" were convened, on an appointed day, to go to pay homage to the king. Led by their monitor and escorted by women carrying their baggage, they formed a long procession stretching for over a hundred yards. Dressed in their finest clothes, heads newly shaved, wearing pearl headdresses, shoulders oiled, shiny looking as if sculpted by freshly incised scarifications, torsos barred by two broad belts of shells, ankles encircled with metal rings, they moved rapidly, single-file along the path, looking neither to the right nor the left. From time to time they sang in perfect unison their walking song, a beautiful tune, ample, supple, alert, and at the same time impregnated with a certain melancholy.

Having reached the palace, where the king, seated on his cushioned throne, awaited them in the court of justice, they prostrated themselves before him and began to sing, presumably for the last time in their lives, a long song of thanksgiving diligently learned during their reclusion. These novices made a superb sight, lying prostrate in a vast, spectator-packed inner court, pressed so tightly against one another that one could scarcely make them out save for their pearl crowns and strings of purple-dyed cowrie shells undulating to the slow rhythm of the melody. They sang the song twice, which took about twenty minutes, after which the king addressed a few words of congratulation to the "new ones." The monitor then translated his speech into their "secret language," since the novices, who had not yet returned to everyday life, could neither understand nor speak any other. In answer, and still in perfect unison, they sang a second song of thanksgiving, much shorter than the first but in the same style. After that, still at the order of their monitor, they withdrew into another court of the palace, where they were served a large meal of beans.

Several days later the very same ceremony was repeated in the palace by the novices of another vodun, Siligbo, who had likewise come to salute the king. This time there were only four of them, but events unfolded in exactly the same manner. Indeed, this is how they had unfolded, or at least had had to unfold not many years ago, for all vodun in Porto-Novo. This seemingly anecdotal aspect of initiation perfectly illustrates the problem at hand: In what state exactly are these novices who sing on their way to salute their king, and, once there, sing a very particular song, then another, and then return to their convent still singing? They certainly are not in their normal state. Their robotic behavior, their totally "absent" gaze, the fact that they can neither understand nor speak everyday language, makes this quite clear. They certainly are not possessed, either, since this state manifests itself by quite a different form of behavior. We are thus forced to assume they are in the same state as the one experienced, as we have seen, by novices initiated into the orisha cult, both in Brazil and in Africa; in other words, here again we are dealing with initiatory trance. However, in the vodun cult this state displays particular forms that we need to examine a little more closely. We have just seen how novices behave at the end of their initiation. Now let us observe them at the very beginning of that process, as described early in the twentieth century by Le Hérissé in his historic work on the former kingdom of Dahomey (1911, 135): "The 'féticheur' who was showing us around his establishment summoned his pupils. Approaching us, we beheld three groaning creatures dripping with palm oil, crouching very low, one arm thrown across their backs, the other pressed to their chests, fists clenched and bent down at the wrists. Two of them were bedecked with flashy objects and clothed in a simple, short, brightly colored skirt; the third, more recently admitted, had no covering other than a piece of greasy cloth around his loins. They all kneeled down and, in shrill voices, recited a monotonous chant that we were told was a greeting and a prayer for our benefit. When they had finished, they left us, still groaning and crouching, to sit in their hut, where they immediately took on the most bestially absorbed air we have ever seen.

Despite the quite colonial contempt inspiring this passage (which causes the author totally to misinterpret what he is seeing), this description could very well apply to novices undergoing initiation as it can still be seen today (if one is permitted to do so), or at any rate as it could still be seen only a few years ago. The photograph in Verger's article (1954, fig. 2) on hebe-tude in the orisha and vodun cults provides a perfect illustration of this, and the word hebetude is indeed the one that seems best to characterize this particular state.

In the early stage of initiation—weeks or months depending on the cases—this dazed state is apparently very pronounced, actually verging on Trance and Possession 53 total hebetude. The new recruits live completely apart from the rest of the world in a "convent." In theory, they are seen by no one other than the priests and priestesses looking after them. Dressed in an unwashed, raffia loincloth, hair neither shaved nor dressed, they are "dirty things," as I have been told twice when I was permitted to see them in two different convents in the Alada region. Heads stubbornly bowed, gaze obstinately absent, they display absolute docility to their monitress.

According to Verger (ibid., 338), this dazed state is due, at least partially, to the effect of herbs and medicinal leaves whose use "is the most secret part of the rit- ual." Let us say that they, like the candomblé novices, are drugged during the entire initiation. But as time passes, this giddy state becomes modified. From all appearances, the "new ones" I was able to see in certain convents, who stood up straight and were no longer doubled over, had shaven heads and were wearing extremely clean loincloths, were in a less deep state of hebetude, representing, in all likelihood, a more advanced stage of initiation.

In the vodun cult, initiatory reclusion is characterized by an important ceremony during which the novices receive the scarifications that constitute the mark of the vodun or the vodun group to which they are being consecrated. These scarifications, which are certainly symbolic but also highly decorative, are incised on the shoulders, the neck, and a section of the torso. Blisters are produced by rubbing in certain powders, and the resulting scars remain raised. By remodeling the body in this way, treating the skin as sculptural material, profoundly altering the individual's physical appearance, "statufying" it as it were, these scarifications are part of an even broader cosmetic undertaking which will acquire its full meaning during the ceremonies that accompany the novices' coming out from the convent, when they file out and dance in public, glistening with oil and bedecked with their finest ornaments. 

As distinctive signs of the vodun, however—and therefore in most cases of a lineage—these scarifications can also be likened to body painting, scars, or tattoos that are done elsewhere in Africa during initiation rituals and that are destined to display membership to a particular tribe or clan, and have nothing to do with possession. A bloody and even dangerous procedure, these scarifications are done in the secrecy of the convent, far from profane eyes. The novices are drugged, I am told, in order to withstand the ordeal, which takes place in an atmosphere of great excitement maintained by continuous loud drumming.

Anyone who has seen “fetishists” in Dahomey cannot have failed to notice a particular kind of reserve, of dignity that radiates from them, an inner bearing, as it were, that is different from that of ordinary people, a quiet energy that emanates from them and distinguishes them from everyone else. The long initiation they had to undergo must certainly have produced a very special ripening of their personality.

In this slow restructuring of consciousness and character achieved by vodun initiation, what is the real importance of the scarification stage? We lack the data to answer that question. But there is every reason to suppose that the novices emerge from this ordeal at least partly transformed.

At all events, it is certain that as initiation proceeds, the profound hebetude which they displayed at first gradually gives way to a different state. Once the initiation is concluded, the coming out of the “new ones” is the occasion for a number of ceremonies, the details of which naturally vary from vodun to vodun. At this point let me simply say that they are sumptuous feasts all of which, in their different ways, are ostensibly intended as a triumphal proclamation of the social group’s vitality. Everything unfolds as if the intention were to show that the coming out of the initiates is a kind of victory for the group.

Decked in finery and jewels, the new initiates look like precious beings whose molding—one is tempted to say gestation—accomplished ever so slowly and secretly in the heart of the convent and now brought to term, is a dazzling triumph for which everyone congratulates himself. Unquestionably, they no longer are “dirty things.” On the contrary, the new initiates are now displayed as objects for general admiration. Their youth, their beauty, their wealth, their skill as dancers, their capacity to accomplish extraordinary feats—a subject to which we shall return—are there on show to excite pride in all the onlookers.

True, their gaze is still abstracted and their docility still absolute; they move like automata and behave like beings who have become totally reified in the hands of those who have molded them. But their state is no longer one of hebetude. The state of hypnosis in which they seem to exist appears, on the contrary, to be a mark of their invulnerability, their indifference to the external world, a sign that they no longer have anything to fear from it. (The childlike and totally stereotyped poses they adopt in certain circumstances, and described by Verger, do not alter this in any way: unawareness and innocence are manifestly their lot.)

After their coming out, the “new ones” then spend several weeks leading a life intermediate between reclusion and normal life. Every five or seven days, depending on the calendar of their particular vodun, they must return to sleep in the convent and remain there throughout the following day, which is the “vodun’s prayer day. The rest of the time, they wander through the countryside, visiting houses and markets, performing their dances, begging for food, and singing brief thanksgiving songs in return. This is the stage when it is easiest to observe them. They only go somewhere under the guidance of their monitress, who is on the regular staff of the convent and is also the one who looked after them during their initiation. They speak to no one else, see no one else, and obey her orders, given in the cult's "secret language," like robots. They give the impression of being somewhere else, of moving in another world, but in no way of being in a state of diminished or dimmed consciousness. On the contrary, as Trance and Possession 55 one watches them passing by single-file, peregrinating from one village to another, what emanates from them is a sense of determination, comparable to some extent to that of marching soldiers whose eyes are fixed straight ahead with never a glance to either left or right.

When they perform their begging and thanksgiving dances and songs, which they always execute to perfection, they give the impression they are somehow floating, in a state of somnambulistic ravishment. In fact, they give the appearance of being in a trance, but a restrained, internalized, reticent kind of trance, one might say, a state very different from the unbridled and paroxysmal trances one usually sees during possession ceremonies. They are clearly not in a state of possession, but one is tempted to say that they are in a state of grace.

Seeing them, one thinks of those little Balinese dancing girls described by Jane Belo (1960, 4), who perform in a state that she too describes as somnambulistic. In this state, identified by a doctor as "hypnotic trance" (ibid.), these little dancing girls execute acrobatic dances they would be incapable of doing, the Balinese think, "if they were not possessed by a god." Some of them, Jane Belo adds, sometimes "would dance through hot coals without being burned." Yes, one may say, but these little Balinese girls are in a state of possession, whereas the "new ones" I have been describing are not.

The moment has come, in fact, to consider their behavior during the "coming-out" ceremonies, when, having received their new names, they are possessed. Although, in this possession state, they do perform actions different from those executed when they are in initiatory trance, the fact is that their general behavior nevertheless remains the same. In the case of certain vodun, these ceremonies include a spectacular rite that is a kind of ordeal by fire. Outside, large jars—one for each initiate—containing food floating in palm oil mixed with some other liquid are prepared for cooking over as many separate hearths. At a given point, the vapors produced by the cooking process spontaneously ignite above the jar, an event that is seen as a "miracle" (Herskovits 1928, 2:165). Each new adept then goes to his or her jar, thrusts his or her hand inside it, and removes the cooking food without burning him- or herself, a sign that "the god is present." During this entire ordeal, the behavior of the new initiates does not differ in any apparent way from that they display the next day, or the following days, when they wander from village to village singing their thanksgiving songs. During these coming-out ceremonies, they also perform dances—usually in pairs, accompanied by drums, and sometimes song—which, although not acrobatic, are of sufficient virtuosity to be one of the highlights of the festivities. "These dances form part of the repertory of possession dances they will perform henceforth on various occasions, in particular at their vodun's annual feast. While executing these dances, during which they are possessed, their behavior is identical to that displayed during the 56 CHAPTER ONE begging dances already described, performed when they are not pos- sessed: they manifest the same abstracted air, the same robotic gait, the same hypnotized appearance. It is only some years later, when they are fully adult both as individuals and as initiates, that they give themselves up to the violent and extrovert dances in which possession manifests itself so plainly, since it is expressed without restraint and can be recognized as what it is without a moment's hesitation.

If we thus consider initiation to the vodun cults by obeying the rule we imposed upon ourselves in order to study possession in general—that is, looking at it as a dynamic process—we notice that its accompanying state of initiatory dispossession is modified considerably as initiation unfolds. Between the state of deep hebetude into which the new recruits are plunged during the first weeks of their reclusion and the state of somnam- bulistic grace they attain at the time of their coming-out ceremonies, a great change takes place. And indeed, what could be more natural? An up- heaval of the self as total as the one they experience during initiation could hardly take place without a similarly total modification of the altered state in ‘which they live. This altered state nevertheless remains, from start to finish, one of depersonalization or, as I have termed it, dispossession. Fur- ther proof is that these “new ones” are given a name only after they come out from their reclusion and are solemnly presented to the outside world.

This being so, are we then really justified in saying that this dispossession is simultaneously a trance? If trance is to be defined as an altered, transitory state of consciousness conforming to a cultural model, everything proves, as we have seen, that we are justified. True, it has the peculiarity of being extremely durable, since it can last for several months, even years. And the fact that it can last so long is explained in part at least by the use of drugs. The fact remains, nevertheless, that it is transitory. There is therefore no incompatibility with the definition just proposed. Even though some trances are very brief, even verging on the momentary, this does not mean that others can- not be very long and follow, moreover, certain specific stages of develop- ment. What is important ultimately is to make a clear distinction between dispossession and possession trance. “A less violent trance” is how Cos- sard describes the ere state. True, but it is neither “semitrance” nor “semi- possession trance,” contrary to what Bastide and Herskovits have written. What we are dealing with is initiatory trance, and this should be under- scored. In the candomblé, as in vodun cults, initiation has two ultimate objectives, which are complementary but nevertheless distinct. The first is to train the initiates, which means transforming them not only in terms of their internal structure (by conferring a certain knowledge and a certain power upon them) but also in terms of their social relations (by making them members of a brotherhood which, in this case, can be likened to a se- Trance and Possession 57 cret society, since initiation is closely linked with secrecy)." The second objective is to create receptacles for the gods, by which I mean individuals capable of becoming possessed. Once initiation is accomplished, the initiate will never be the person he or she used to be, and will never again bear the same name, at least in Benin. But this does not mean that he or she will permanently become the divinity to be embodied. The initiate will only be possessed by that divinity from time to time. And even if he or she is never to be possessed again, he or she would still remain an initiate.

Initiation's goal is possession, but training an initiate is an operation in its own right, and the initiate in his normal state is very different from the person he becomes when possessed. Initiatory trance affects initiates, not those who are possessed. The fact that it is easier, so it seems, to trigger possession trance in a subject already in a state of initiatory trance (which is to say, in a state of dispossession) than in a subject in a normal state does not in any way suggest that initiatory trance is an intermediary state between the normal and the possession state. It is another form of trance, which should be considered in and of itself and quite independently from possession.

Bastide, as we noted earlier, had already seen that a connection could be made between the ere state and “tribal initiation.” Describing the graduation of a group of initiates among the Kissi, in Guinea, A. Schaeffner (1951, 31) writes: “heads slightly lowered, these automata seem to see nothing around them.” Everything in his description reminds one of the coming-out ceremony for the “new ones” of a vodun in Benin, with the single exception that among the Kissi there is never for a moment any question of possession.

Would these young Kissi boys also be in a state of initiatory trance? And could we not ask the same question in other cases? The evidence leads us to believe we could. If this hypothesis could be verified, then initiatory trance might possibly appear as having no connection with possession, and as constituting a particular and autonomous form of trance, which is usually linked with religion, of course, but which, a priori, could as well not be.

However different initiatory trance and possession trance may be from one another, they nonetheless constitute, at least in vodun cults, a continuum between whose two extremities all the intermediate states observed occur. I must stress, however, that this does not mean that the distinction I have tried to establish between them is either nonexistent or even purely 66, 9 convenient. It is just as real as the one that differentiates a “u” sound and an “i” sound, a distinction that in no way prevents us from moving from the first to the second, and vice versa, without being able to say exactly where one begins and the other ends.

The phenomena we are studying here never display oppositions of the type that Troubetzkoy, in the field of phonology, termed “privative,” which is to say that they are based on the 58 CHAPTER ONE presence or absence of some distinctive feature or, if one prefers, on an “all-or-nothing” basis. The oppositions we are dealing with here are “gradual” ones, in other words they operate on the basis of a “more-or-less” type of distinction, and this is what frequently makes analysis so difficult and uncertain. This means that any valid interpretation of the facts can only be made from a structural viewpoint, that is, by taking into account the whole situation in which the phenomenon occurs and the system within which it is at work. During initiation, the novice will probably have moved very gradually from the profoundly giddy state into which he or she sinks at the beginning to the state of inspired somnambulism displayed at the end. The same holds true of the following phases. The transition from initiatory dispossession trance to possession trance experienced during the ordeal by fire described earlier, for example, also seems to be very gradual; in any event, it is imperceptible to the spectator. During a period as changeable as the end of initiation, it is also very difficult to say which particular state is involved at any point. Moreover, it often happens in Benin that the most evidently genuine possession trances manifest such discreet external signs that they go totally unnoticed by the uninitiated. It is not surprising, therefore, that, in the case with which we are dealing here, external behavior is insufficient to identify the type of trance involved.

Having stated these points, we can now ask ourselves in which way initiatory (or dispossession) trance and possession trance differ in their relation to music.

The Musical Repertoire of Initiation

During the entire initiation period, a large part of the novice's time is devoted to daily musical activities. These can be divided into two quite distinct repertoires. On the one hand, there are a cappella songs that the novices sing themselves, and that no one else ever sings; on the other, there is drum music, sometimes accompanied by singing and sometimes not, which is executed by specially appointed musicians so that the novices will dance.

The first repertoire is made up, for the most part, of chants closely connected with the initiation itself, and which the novices will never sing again once their initiation is over and they have graduated from their novice status. This will be labeled the initiatory repertoire. The second repertoire, on the contrary, comprises the rhythms and tunes that will be played and sung at all the cult's public ceremonies, particularly during the vodun's annual feast, in order to trigger and accompany the possession dance. This will be labeled the possession repertoire.

The same kind of distribution of the music can also be observed in the candomblé. On the possession side, we find, first, the invocations sung by the "saint's father" while he rings the sacred bell in order to trigger the santo state, and second, the drums and songs used to incite the novices to dance while they are in the santo state. On the initiatory side, we find various songs executed by the novices in their ere state, and in particular the long prayer, ingolosi, that we mentioned previously. This chanted prayer is characterized, as I said earlier and without being able to go into greater detail, by a particular musical style completely different from that of the singing heard in the public ceremonies.

This same distinction, between initiatory and possession repertoire, can also be found, as we know, in the vodun cults; but in the latter case, I will be able to describe their contents in rather more detail. The long thanksgiving song, sung when the "new ones" are prostrate in front of the king, is performed during the entire reclusion period by all the novices twice a day, at dawn and just before sunset, except on the "day of the vodun" or, in the case of Khevioso (god of lightning), unless he has thundered that day. Each vodun, or vodun family at any rate, has its own particular song or chant, but all these songs display the same stylistic features, which are extremely marked. 'Without going into the musico-logical details, let me say first of all that the long thanksgiving chant (since there is a short one too, which I shall come to later) is performed using a type of vocal emission totally different from the ordinary singing voice used in this region of Benin. Thus, when singing for the vodun Sakpata™ (god of the earth), one sings in a fluted voice and in a high-pitched register. The song is purely vocalized—meaning that no actual words are involved—with very long note values (whole notes, half notes) that are connected by melismas using successions of short or very short notes (quarter to sixteenth notes). All notes may be dotted or not, but the melismas are always sung—one would like to say drawn—with the greatest precision. The voice completely lacks vibrato, which gives this very slow melody, punctuated by carefully measured silences, the aspect of a zen painting, whose spirals would vanish slowly into the air even as they were formed.

The song, which lasts for about ten minutes, is made up of a sequence of seven stanzas, each repeated two or three times with variations. The word “hieratic,” had it not been so misused, would perhaps best characterize this music, which is so impregnated with spirituality, so otherworldly, that it conveys an overwhelming sense of strangeness. Nothing could be less like “black” music than this. The voices, so light, so purged of materiality, so disembodied, move through space without any rhythmic support and create a totally abstract architecture. The same melodic motifs are employed throughout, but linked into sequences that are constantly varying, so that one never quite knows where one is.

It is an immaterial, seraphic music, suspended between heaven and earth, as far removed as it can be from the music one usually hears in this region, a sound that creates a feeling of complete remoteness and of projection into another world. Yet it conveys at the same time a sense of great perfection, both in form and in execution. The perfection of art. If the phrase were not pejorative, one would be tempted to say the perfection of artificiality, since nothing could be further removed from nature than this singing.

It begins with a long, held note sung in the very highest register of the voice, and almost cried out, it then slides very slowly down to the semitone below. The chromatic effect is striking. It ends on the same note, sung to conclude the repetition of the first stanza in a mirror form da capo, which completes the extraordinary impression of atemporality this music produces. Everything is done to conjure up a sense of the unusual, to create by musical means a world apart, a world far removed from this one, as far apart as the life the novices lead during their reclusion.

The strangeness of this singing, its formal perfection, its impassibility, the disembodied timbre of the voices, the atemporality of the melodic development, the total absence of meaningful words—all this gives the music an abstract, almost geometric character. What does this mean? Obviously, nothing could be less gratuitous than this sort of Greek temple, as it were, of African religious song. For me—and here we inevitably enter the realm of total subjectivity—this music is the very expression of the zero state of the self, of depersonalization, in short of dispossession. This is the music of a being somehow floating between essence and existence, and it succeeds admirably in its purpose, which is to express the experience of dispossession.' Apart from this long thanksgiving song, which is always sung twice in succession, lasting over twenty minutes and constituting an amazing vocal feat, there is also a shorter song sung at other times and in different circumstances. This shorter song has words and a melodic structure that differs from the long one. It is sung in a prostrate position and makes use of chromatism, producing a feeling of strangeness. The third category of song, mentioned earlier, is sung during the period when the young novices emerge from their reclusion and proceed from place to place begging for food. Unlike the thanksgiving songs, the begging songs are executed while dancing, and also make use of chromatism. Both the thanksgiving and the begging songs constitute the essential core of the initiatory musical repertoire in vodun cult. The beating of the drums and the songs that make up the possession repertoire belong to the region's habitual musical language. The two repertoires differ in their musical structure and function, as one is sung by the initiates and the other is played for them. The latter, possession, is directed toward the outside, while initiation is directed inwards. The initiatory repertoire is kindred to music of secrecy, like that of masks and secret societies in African music. The bizarre voice production and chromatism characterizing the initiatory repertoire seem to be similar to a vocal mask and a disguise of the person. In the case of possession, it is essential to know by whom the subject is possessed. The role played by initiatory music in the vodun cult posed a problem made even more interesting by the fact that this cult occupies an important place in the general picture of possession cults. The unusual musical devices brought into play by the initiatory repertoire could be connected to the strange event of possession. However, this is not the case. In practice, this music has no connection with possession, or at any rate only indirectly. It is never associated with the triggering of possession trance, which it never precedes and with which it is never simultaneous. This being so, one might say it would have been enough to state it, certainly. But we also needed to understand the why and the wherefore of the matter. Why this music then? Because the vodun cult is not solely a possession cult. It is just as much an initiatory religion and a social institution that lays great stress on the integration of age groups. This music is not associated with apprenticeship to possession; it is associated with the training of the initiate. But the two are linked. Hence the importance of the dispossession trance which, in the context of these very long initiations, constitutes a sort of backdrop that makes the alter- 62 CHAPTER ONE

notification of initiatory and possessional practices possible." The function of this initiatory music is both to express this dispossession and to assist in bringing it about, since in and of itself it manifestly constitutes an ascetic. Hence its strangeness. As for its beauty, I shall not venture to attempt an explanation. It is a kind of beauty that the art of music can achieve whenever it is at the service of religious fervor, and when that fervor represents for the whole of a society the most essential form of vital force.

2. Music and Possession

THE WORD "MUSIC"
"Everything is music," John Cage once said. If this were true, this book would have been pointless from the start, since the relations it seeks to bring out between trance and music would necessarily be relations to everything, or to anything. But this is in fact untrue, or rather it is neither true nor false. There are some statements that should not be taken more seriously than their authors expected. Everything, silence and emptiness included, can in effect be heard, or seen, or felt, as a piece of music might be: it is ultimately a matter of good will. A squeaking door, a faulty loud-speaker, the sound of a flushing toilet can all be appraised with a musical ear. Some find it pleasurable and if they say so we must believe them. Equally, nothing prevents one from saying that a landscape can be viewed as music for the eyes. If "everything is music," then we are dealing with metaphor, which is a perfectly legitimate way of using words and doubtless as old as the world; but I shall attempt to avoid it since it is of minimal profit for our enterprise.

What will the word "music" mean in this book? Given its context, that of trance, the word music will be used to signify any sonic event that is linked with this state, that cannot be reduced to language—since we would then have to speak of words, not music—and that displays a certain degree of rhythmic or melodic organization. Music will therefore be taken in its most empirical and broadest sense. In other words, it will not be treated here as an art but as a practice displaying the greatest possible variety of aspects, extending from the most discreet rustling sounds produced by the shaking of a basketry rattle to the deafening unleashing of a large group of drums, from the solitary tinkling of a tiny iron bell to the orchestral splendors of a Balinese gamelan, from the most elementary monody, chanted recto tono, to the most complex vocal polyphonies (such as those of the Bushmen), from the linearity of a simple motif produced by clapping hands to the extremely complex interplay of a large percussion ensemble, from the refinement of a violin tune skillfully varied by a professional virtuoso to the rustic sound of a summons bellowed through an animal horn or tapped out with a nail on the side of an empty beer bottle. Music and Possession

65 Music and Possession

In inquiring into the concept of "music," we must consider if the concept is adequate for the investigation we are undertaking. By working with this concept, we turn our backs on the system of thought of certain societies. However, this book is not aimed at those systems. We cannot conduct our analysis with indigenous concepts, so we must use our own.

A demonstration of the relations a particular system of thought—be it African, Asian, or European—establishes between trance and particular sound events falling within our definition of music could never constitute more than the first stage of our work. Our aim is to bring out these relations by going beyond interpretations necessarily belonging to cognitive processes different from our own.

When told by a Songhay musician in Niger that he transmits his music to the ears of the spirits by means of a rattling device extending from the neck of his single-stringed fiddle, we take note of this information and then reinterpret it within a more general system of symbolics.

Similarly, when reading that for pop musicians the double bass "lends security" with its low notes, that the percussion is "never frenzied," and that it is the voice, or those instruments deriving from it (in other words, those of medium or high pitch), that furnish the "hysterical cries," we are led to consider these observations as significant of an underlying system.

Any music can be considered from three different viewpoints: first, in and of itself, as an object (independent of its maker and of anyone listening to it); second, as something produced either by composition or by execution (as a subjective creation); third, as something listened to (from the viewpoint of perception). To use the terms proposed by R. Jakobson (1960) for the analysis of language, music may be considered from the viewpoint of the “message” it constitutes, from that of the “addresser” who transmits it, and from that of the “addressee” who receives it—or, if one prefers, from that of the “transmitter” and the “receiver.” In the normal conditions of musical communication, the transmitter and receiver share a common code, so that the message sent by the former refers to a context understandable by the latter, and communication is established between them by the action of a certain contact. “Each of these six factors (transmitter, message, receiver, code, context, contact) gives rise to a different linguistic function,” Jakobson tells us. Although we must guard ourselves from systematically applying what has been said about language to music, since the one can by no means be reduced to the other, the same proposition can nevertheless be made for music, and with equal chances of leading to interesting observations.

Throughout this book, we will see that, depending on whether the music is made by the person in trance or, on the contrary, for that person, music and trance have quite different relations to one another.

When does music act? We have just seen that possession should be viewed as a dynamic process. Therefore, we will begin by asking the question, When does music act? The individual, in the process of experiencing physiological, psychological, or emotional disruptions that will orient him toward possession, will generally gravitate toward the milieu of possessed persons and will consequently be present at their ceremonies. Since these ceremonies are accompanied by music, he becomes impregnated with the musical atmosphere of such possession sessions. But the chronic crisis he is experiencing and the acute crisis that will follow it most of the time do not necessarily have any direct relation to that music. Indeed, they often have no relation to it at all.

As Louis Mars very rightly points out (1953, 225)—with specific reference to Haitian voodoo (but his observation could as well be applied to other cults)—“We have to distinguish the ritual possession crisis from the possession sickness that arises (generally speaking) independently of any ceremonial atmosphere.” Music can undoubtedly sensitize a subject to the call of possession and can thus contribute to awakening his vocation; this, however, does not mean that music is responsible for the psychological disturbances he encountered and which led him to follow this path.

In Bali, Jane Belo (1960, 48) describing the initiation of a medium, tells us that it was as the result of a series of trances—in my terminology crises or fits—undergone in various places and circumstances (but always outside of any ceremony and thus in the absence of music) that the person concerned, after having consulted a priest on the meaning of these attacks, became convinced that “the gods were calling him.” In this case, we are clearly in the presence of what we have labeled the prepossession crisis. Similarly, J. H. Nketia (1957, 5), writing about possession in Ghana (which he interprets as being essentially a renewal of man’s alliance with the gods or with his ancestors), observes that “individuals are known to get possessed in private life outside the context of music and dancing.” We may suppose that here again we are dealing with prepossession crises. In any case, let us remember that such crises can take place without music and without dancing. Among the Dogon, future priests of the binu (mythical ancestors) undergo crises or fits that occur unexpectedly, not only during ceremonies that include music—and are not necessarily related to binu worship—but also outside of any ceremony and consequently with no music at all. This is no longer the case after their ordination, however, and I shall return to this point later (p. 98).

In the candomblé, on the other hand (Cossard 1970, 158-59), it is usually while the future initiate—of either sex—is attending a ceremony that he or she is suddenly struck by the divinity and collapses to the ground. This is a sign that a god has chosen him or her as his "horse." But at this entirely preliminary stage of possession, neither the victim nor anyone else yet knows which god is involved. Contrary to what happens to those who are already initiated, and who go into trance only when summoned to do so by the song or rhythm specific to the god who is to inhabit them, here the person cannot have answered such a summons since he or she does not yet know the code. Giséle Cossard further points out, as we saw earlier, that the "candidate" can also be struck and fall in this way at any time outside of any ceremonial context. Thus, despite appearances, prepossession crisis must be regarded in the candomblé as well as being independent of music.

In Chad, among the Mussey, it often is while she is out in the bush that the person about to be possessed is seized by an unknown god and struck to the ground. She will then lie where she has fallen, unconscious, until women belonging to the college of the possessed come near her and blow into a gourd trumpet until the right notes awaken her. In this case, then music does not trigger the crisis, but on the contrary, terminates it, by establishing communication with the god who is responsible for it.

Among the Hausa, non-initiated girls experience possession crises by ingesting a drug, betel datura (J. Monfouga-Nicolas 1972, 200). This "profane possession" displays all the symptoms of normal possession crisis except for the fact that "the gods clearly do not manifest themselves." These false possessions occur when girls, who want to imitate bori adepts, swallow datura seeds in order to do so (ibid., 199). But formerly they also used to occur in a more institutionalized way. On particular evenings when the girls congregated to spin cotton together, they amused themselves by introducing the youngest among them to the intoxicating effects of the betel datura.

"When the girls began to shake, dribble, and spin endlessly around and around, mouths filled with froth, the young people's griot® came to play the plant's motto on his drum, then immediately afterwards that of the god Kure.° The girls were then told to sit down, given cool milk to drink, and the griot tapped them on their heads with his drum. The crisis subsided and order was restored." In this example, music is used not to trigger the crisis but, on the contrary, to make it subside, which corresponds to what was just mentioned for the Mussey. The crisis subsides owing to the symbolic alliance effected with the god and obtained, first, by beating out his motto, second, by bringing the drum, the sacred instrument, into contact with the head of the falsely possessed person. When it is simply a case of false possession in little girls imitating the grown-ups' bori, also induced by datura, the young people's griot is likewise summoned. The Hausa bori dance is used to counteract the effects of the betel datura, while tarantism uses dance to cure the bite (real or imaginary) of the spider. In both cases, the music's function is not to trigger the crisis or fit, but to cure it, provoking its resolution in dance. The main difference between the two cases is that in the bori, it is a false possession dance that prefigures the real one by skipping the initiation phase, while in tarantism, it is a real possession dance without skipping the initiation phase.

Tarantism's absence of initiation is likely due to the fact that it is not a completely socially integrated religious practice. This absence explains why the prepossession crisis in tarantism is not a unique event in the possessed person's life but an annual recurrence. In the nd6ép, the prepossession crisis often occurs during a ceremony, but it can also occur without any ceremony and without music.

In the ndop, the normal climax of ritualized possession trance is a crisis resolved by a fall to the ground, with both crisis and collapse directly related to music. The behavior of a new ndépkat" at her first public séance is described by Zempléni (ibid., 358-60). She must, "if possible, achieve a crisis leading to collapse. If necessary, she will be dragged in front of the drums in order to force this outcome" (ibid., 375). So whereas the "unorganized crisis" (ibid., 415) and the ensuing collapse do not seem to be necessarily related to music, the ritualized crisis and collapse, on the contrary, appear to be directly provoked by it. Let us now pass on to initiation. The role of music seems to differ according to whether one is dealing with the bori, for example, or the candomblé. In the bori, possession is always accompanied by music throughout the entire initiation, both during the exorcism phase (dark gods) or the ensuing imposition phase (white gods). In the candomblé, on the contrary, the majority of possessions that occur during initiation do so without music, or almost so. As we saw earlier, the novices live in the ere state throughout their reclusion period, and this state is interrupted by short periods when they go into the santo state, which is to say into a possession trance.

The day begins with a morning purification bath. Wakened before dawn, they walk to their bathing place in silence with their "little mother" walking ahead of them ringing the adza' or sacred bell. Each in turn is bathed with cold water by the "little mother." The shock they experience, Music and Possession 69 Cossard writes (1970, 168), is usually enough to ensure a return to the santo state. There is every reason to believe that the bell is not rung during the bath ceremony itself, so that here we are faced with possession occurring in the absence of music.

There is another possession trance that occurs without music: the one caused by drinking abo—an infusion of leaves collected from plants that have the "property of provoking and reinforcing the trance state" (ibid., 181). As with bori, the candomblé thus provides examples of trances induced solely by the action of drugs and in which music plays no role whatsoever.

Continuing with the candomblé, at least seven days after the beginning of the reclusion period, a first ceremony takes place, at the end of which the novice becomes a jawo, or the orisha's wife. "The saint's father summons the orisha with the appropriate salutations while ringing the adza. This is the dramatic moment of the ceremony, for it can happen that the orisha is slow in coming" (ibid., 176). This possession, which marks an important phase of the initiation process, is thus accompanied musically by nothing more than the tinkling of a sacred bell.

Several days later another ceremony takes place in which the jawo, while in the santo state, is bathed in blood in order to establish the mystical bond that will henceforth bind her to her orisha. The ritual, Cossard tells us (ibid., 184), is identical to the assamento ceremony she describes elsewhere, which means that it too takes place in the complete absence of music.

On the evening of the same day the naming feast takes place in the presence of a large audience. When the jawo make their appearance they are already possessed. Upon the invitation of a woman who accompanies them and to whom the "saint's father" has entrusted the adza, the new jawo then cries out her name. At this point the drums are beaten "to greet the birth of a new orisha" (ibid., 185). This is another example of a possession trance associated with the sacred bell but owing absolutely nothing to the sound of drums. Among the Wolof, as among the Thonga, it is at the end of a ritual in which music plays a central role that the possessed person is induced to utter publicly the name of the divinity possessing him. This is, of course, a crucial episode in his initiation, since by uttering this name, the possessed person not only identifies the divinity but, in so doing, enables himself to become identified with it. There are broad analogies between the kind of music used in the two cases. Zempléni (1966, 356-60) in his work on the Wolof and H. A. Junod (1913, 438-43) in his study on the Thonga, both place equal emphasis on the violence of this music, the purpose of which is to reduce the sick man to a state of nervous exhaustion: “almost intolerable noise of the drums,” Zempléni writes; “hideous din,” notes Junod. We shall later examine what exactly this music consists of. For the moment we need only recall that in both cases music attempts to induce the crisis through the same method.

"Conquered at length by this noisy concert the patient enters a condition of nervous exaltation. The crisis occurs, the result of evident hypnotic suggestion. He rises and dances wildly in the hut. The hubbub is redoubled. They implore the spirit to declare his name. A name is shouted . . . " (ibid., 443). This is very close to what Zempléni describes as occurring among the Wolof. In his account of a long and theatrical ndép ceremony he describes the musicians once more beginning their drumming, the chants resuming, the bells ringing "louder than ever." Finally, the sick man's trembling "gives way to organized movements." This is the ritualized crisis, followed by a long cry and then the declaration of the name "that they were waiting for."

We have another example from Tanzania. Among the Segeju (Gray 1969, 178) the sick man's public declaration of the name of the shetani possessing him occurs at the climax of a seven-day ceremony characterized by "noise, dancing, blood, and frenzy." This declaration takes place on the sixth day. On the seventh the spirit leaves the patient.

In the case of a quite different form of crisis, the wild possession crisis mentioned earlier, what happens differs considerably since, in this case, music is used not to provoke the crisis or fit but, on the contrary, to make it subside. At least, this is what Herskovits (1938 2:186-87) found among the Fon. "On a given night the voduno informs each candidate that one of the vo-dun of the pantheon will 'declare war' on him." The candidates are awakened before dawn by a gun shot and loud cries. They leap up "from their sleeping mats, run about wildly, throwing stones at anyone within reach, and beating those who approach them." A drummer will then succeed, with some difficulties, to calm them down, by beating out rhythms that "will bring them their gods." And it is at this point, after the name of the divinity has been proclaimed, that the candidates, calmed by the drum, go into trance.

As among the Thonga and the Wolof, this episode is thus linked to the declaration of the god's name. In the candomblé, or at least in the old candomblé ritual described by Cossard (1970, 204), which, as we have seen, constitutes one aspect of wild possession in this cult, events unfold in ways comparable to the example just described among the Fon. The ere in the process of initiation were "released into the countryside where they lived a solitary existence, hiding from the eyes of the lay people and living on wild plants, or even on whatever they could steal from people's homes." Summoned back after a period of several days, the ere would return "in a state of extreme savagery, beating anyone they encountered on their path" (ibid. Possession of the ere by their respective orisha was then induced by a specific drum rhythm, the adarum (to which we shall return) thereby causing them to pass from a state of wild possession to what we may call, antithetically, “cultivated” possession. Here again music clearly plays the role of calming the wild possession, not of provoking it.

Now let us examine possession when the people concerned are no longer candidates or adepts in the course of initiation, but initiates. Here again the relations between music and possession appear to be quite variable. Possession ceremonies are organized in various ways depending on the ritual to which they correspond: the coming out of new initiates, for example, enthronement of a new dignitary, the annual feast of the divinity, seasonal rituals, conjuration of calamities, therapeutic sessions, and so on; the calendar and frequency of such ceremonies naturally vary a great deal from cult to cult. In a general way, however, crises or fits and possession trances do tend to occur at certain specific points in the ritual and not at others. In the majority of cases they occur while music is being played, and are closely related to it. It is essential, all the same, to stress not only that the rule is far from being absolute but also that the same music, or rather the same type of music, does not have the same effect on all adepts, regardless of circumstances. Thus adepts in a state of impurity must never under any circumstances be possessed. This means that the effect of music is not as constrictive or as automatic as some people have sometimes wished to believe. P. Simon and I. Simon-Barouh (1973, 42 n.) provide a well-substantiated example in their description of the haw bong. But although this restriction on account of impurity, which concerns women above all, seems to be universal, there are others, on the contrary, that are specific to certain cults. Among the Yoruba the annual feasts for Shango, god of lightning, are attended by a great number of adepts. All of these, and there may be several dozen of them, are capable of being possessed by Shango. But in practice the god must never be embodied by more than one of them throughout the entire feast, which lasts for seventeen days. On the first day the man chosen goes into his trance under the following circumstances: at a given moment in the ceremony, soon after a kid has been sacrificed to the god, the drums fall silent; an officiant then chants an invocation during which his female counterpart holds out the animal’s freshly severed head toward those who are present. Suddenly one of the adepts goes into a trance, dashes forward, and seizes the kid’s head between his teeth, which is a sign that the deity has accepted the sacrifice. From that point on the man is possessed by Shango. He will remain in this state during the following seventeen days, although he will alternate between the possession state and the ere state described earlier. In the course of one season the feast moves from village to village, and in each one a different adept will in turn embody Shango. The same invocation, chanted in the same context, thus triggers the trance in this or that person, leaving all others unaffected. The effectiveness of the music thus appears to be largely governed by convention. And it should be remarked in passing that the convention is different among the neighboring Fon and Gun. Among them, Khevioso, a homologue of Shango, can be embodied by several dancers simultaneously. The same is true in the case of Sakpata, who admittedly has a great many hypostases, which is not the case with Shango. As a general rule, it seems that whatever the cult concerned, the reaction to music varies according to the seniority and importance of the adept. Writing about the relations between trance and music, Cossard observes that “the more recent the initiation, and the stronger the sensitization to the rhythm, the greater the likelihood for the occurrence of trance" (1967, 175). In the ndép, to which we will return later, trance, under the effect of music, must normally result in the crisis and then the fall. Although new adepts are "grounded by griots in a few seconds" (Zempléni 1966, 416), the veterans, on the contrary, do not succumb for quite a long time, the actual period varying according to the individual. When, for their part, women officiants (those who oversee the cult) go into trance, they are in theory not supposed to go "as far as crisis and fall," unlike the adepts already mentioned. (ibid., 400, 417). If it so happens that one of them does—and the honor in such a case goes to the first drum, who uses every ounce of his talent to produce this end result—"the session then attains its highest peak of intensity." The efficacy of music thus varies according to the status of the adept, who can be more or less vulnerable according to age, experience, and position in the hierarchy of the cult. We shall return later to the role played by the musician, as opposed to music itself, in inducing the trance state. For the moment we can say that, regardless of the particular cult, the officiants, who by definition have had a long experience of possession, can control their behavior to a much greater extent than new initiates. This means that they are less slavishly controlled by the music, so that they can either resist it, as our ndép example has just shown, or in fact do without it altogether, as we learn from Michel Leiris's descriptions (1958, 61-71) of the possessions of Malkam Ayyahu, a practitioner of the zar cult, who could show off the possession state at the drop of a hat, as it were, outside any ritually defined occasion and also, needless to say, without any musical stimulus. Generally speaking, moreover, since the role of officiants is to control the possession of others, it is natural enough they should first know how to control their own. These few examples will have made it clear enough, I trust, that the relations between music and possession vary to a very great extent depending on the particular cult, the stage reached by the adept, the state of that adept at a particular moment, and the ritual in which he or she is taking part. In certain cases, music triggers the fit, in others, on the contrary, it brings it to an end. Sometimes it seems to play a decisive role in inducing trance; sometimes it seems to have none whatsoever.

As for coming out of trance, as opposed to entering into it or being in it, music can again play a role. In Bali, the trance of the little girl dancers is ended through specific songs (Belo 1960, 198). In Chad, among the Mundang, in order to return the possessed persons to their normal state, the musicians play a particular theme while the chief officiant taps them on the back. In the candomblé it is a rhythmic theme played by the drums that tells the dancers embodying the orishas to leave the room at the end of the ceremony (Cossard 1970, 117). In the book, we have just seen that there are certain cases where the triggering of crisis or entry into trance can not be attributed to the effects of music, because there is no music playing at that precise moment. This is an exception, however, as possession fit or trance is usually accompanied by music. The music's formal characteristics vary considerably from one country to another, and there are as many different kinds of possession music as there are different possession cults. Despite their differences, they all have the same effect: inducing trance.

To identify the shared characteristics, we must examine the principal aspects of these various kinds of music. We begin with the acoustic characteristics of trance music, considering if it is vocal or instrumental, or both at the same time. In many cases, possession music is both vocal and instrumental, with the relative importance of the vocal and instrumental elements varying from one cult to another.

There are exceptions, such as possession ceremonies accompanied by singing alone. Examples include a possession ceremony in Java, centered around a doll and aimed at inducing rainfall, and trances in Bali due to possession by sanghyang spirits. In Tunisia, dhikr chants, used to accompany communion trance, can trigger possession trance in those who listen to the chants. In Black Africa, there are specific examples of purely vocal possession music, such as the bori cult, where women can become possessed when they hear the two women officiants sing the mottos of their gods.

In summary, possession music varies in its formal characteristics but has the same effect: inducing trance. The shared characteristics include both vocal and instrumental elements, with the relative importance of each varying between cults. There are exceptions, such as possession ceremonies with only vocal music, and cases where the music triggers possession trance in those who listen to it. During the samp ritual, which is a simplified version of the nddp, the music consists solely of sung bak, the mottos of the genii (rab). The drummers, crucial in nddp ceremonies, do not participate in the samp, which is strongly associated with the Moslem rab. This absence is explained by the disapproval of musical instruments characteristic of Islam. In black Africa, purely vocal music is the exception, with possession music generally provided by a combination of instruments and voices.

Examples of purely instrumental possession music include Bali's barong, where the trance music is provided solely by gamelan instruments, and Brazil's candomble, with a particular drumming called adarum that may not have vocal accompanement. In ancient Greece, the dances of the Corybantes were performed to instrumental music. In southern Italy, tarantism's tarantella is a central musical expression, provided by an instrumental ensemble, but there are also "singing" tarantulas requiring a vocal form of "iatromusic."

In tarantism, song has less importance than the tarentella, but it can take various forms, depending on the circumstances and the type of possession concerned. Generally, possession music combines both song and instruments, with the instruments typically serving to accompany the first category of instruments or the voice. 

Certain instruments, such as rattles or bells, have a rhythmic function by their very nature, while others have a naturally melodic function, like the fiddle. Others, such as the drum, can perform one or the other function depending on the way they are used. In regions where tonal languages are spoken, the drum can be made to "speak" in such a way as to perform the function of a melodic instrument and acts as a substitute for song. Apart from this particular case, it may be played in such an expressive manner that the drumming can become, as in the ndép, a melodic combination of timbre, stress, and intensity.

In short, if the drum is the instrument most often used for possession music, this is because it can be melodic as well as rhythmic, and because, when fulfilling the second of these functions, it can be incorporated into a great many different instrumental ensembles."® This being so, if we look at the various kinds of possession music as a whole, there does not seem to be one single type of melodic instrument that noticeably prevails over the others. The violin, nowadays, is the preferred instrument in tarantism, but in earlier times its role could be filled by a great variety of instruments, among them musettes, shawms, trumpets, bombardons, and other wind instruments, which are sometimes replaced today by the accordion (Carpitella 1966, 361). Piano has never been mentioned in this context, as far as I know, but it has been in another, not so far away. In Paris, around 1780, Mesmer, the well-known inventor of magnetic trance (which has thousands of adepts nowadays in Latin America) and also the sponsor of Mozart's Bastien and Bastienne, used to play "moving tunes" on this instrument to trigger the trance of his patients when they could not attain the "perfect crisis" (Rausky 1977, 104).

Leaving Europe now for Africa, we see that among the Songhay of Niger (Rouch 1960), the fiddle is the instrument used to play the spirits' music. This is also true among the Hausa, though in certain cases the fiddle may be replaced by the flute (Monfouga-Nicolas 1972, 105). Let us also observe only in passing—since the trance concerned is one of communion, and not of possession—that the flute plays an essential role in the orchestra used to accompany the Mevlevi whirling dervishes in their dancing and trances. We should add, though, that there are many dervish sects and that the Mevlevi one is among the few that uses the flute (nay)—an oblique one, incidentally—for the dhikr. In Iraq, to cite only one example, the dervishes who practice "body beating"—in other words corporeal mutilation—during the dhikr do so to the sound of an orchestra made up solely of drums, with no accompanying melodic instruments (Hassan 1975, 223-26).

"The maenads are sometimes depicted as striking tambourines in order to induce other entranced maenads to dance. One vase shows Dionysus himself playing the seven-stringed lyre in a scene of bacchic dance (Emmanuel 1914, 397). Another vase shows a satyr also playing a lyre, but a five-stringed one this time (ibid., 395, 396), while a dancing maenad executes “swaying movements of the torso, arms outstretched,” in a pose that Jean Rouch’s films on possession among the Songhay have made familiar to us.

It is clear from the texts that the aulos was the most typical instrument of corybantism and maenadism, but it is also true that the Greeks associated other instruments with trance, up to and including the lyre itself, which since it was Apollo’s instrument, one might have expected to be excluded from Dionysiac rites, and which, in Crete, was associated with the aulos in the ecstatic dances of the kouroi (Jeanmaire 1939, 432).

In Tibet, just as the already entranced diviner is about to be totally possessed, “two priests approach the oracle and taking up positions at his left and right sides, each of them blows a thighbone trumpet into his ears” (Nebsky-Wojkowitz 1956, 430). When he hears this sound “the intensity of his convulsions increases.”

Among the Sumerians it was the harp that was “used during the oracles of the high priest” (Farmer 1957, 235). Among the Hebrews (and we will return to them later), stringed instruments, the harp and the lyre, were associated with prophetic trances. But in certain cases the stringed instruments were complemented by clarinets and drums. In Iraq (Hassan 1975, 181), the lyre is the typical instrument of possession cults practiced by the blacks originating from Africa.

In Chad, among the Kotoko (Brandily, 1967, 53ff.), the characteristic instrument of possession rites is the harp, accompanied by the water drum; among the Gula Iro it is again the harp, but even more prevalent is a series of spherical whistles (Pairault 1966, 259 and fig. 179); among the Mundang (Adler and Zempleni 1972) it is the gourd trumpet, and among the Mussey (Garine, filmography) it is the gourd trumpet with vibrator.

In the Central African Republic, among the Ngbaka-Mandja (Arom and Taur-elle 1968), it is the xylophone. In Zimbabwe, among the Shona, it is the mbira, a set of plucked lamellae (McEwen 1970 and Tracey 1970, 37-38). In Madagascar, among the Vezo (Koechlin 1975) it is the accordion, which has replaced the zither for this purpose.

In Bali, unlike the “folk” possessions mentioned a short while ago, which are accompanied by purely vocal music, possessions attributed to the gods are accompanied by gamelan music (or rather, to use the Balinese word, by “gongs”), sometimes in association with song and sometimes not.

In Laos (J. Brunet, discography), mouth organs accompanied by small cymbals are used “to make the shamans go into trance.” In Vietnam, possession songs are normally accompanied by a moon-shaped lute and a little drum.

The conclusion is that among all the instruments used for possession music, no constants emerge, and practically speaking, they can all do the job; at least, this is what the facts indicate." One may wonder if some particular instrument, by virtue of its specific sound — violent, strident, piercing, screeching, enveloping, haunting, percussive, who knows? — might perhaps have turned out to be more capable than any other of contributing physically, in one way or another, to the preparation for and the triggering of trance. Clearly this is not the case at all. If there were such an instrument, then one would come across it, if not invariably, at least more frequently than any other. The facts indicate the contrary.

One may also wonder that, despite their great variety, the musical instruments used for possession do not manifest some commonly shared acoustic property that might perhaps explain why they all act upon the listener in the same way. But no family of instruments is missing from our list above; the hypothesis is thus untenable. Drums of all sorts — and heaven only knows that their variety of forms, dimension, materials, and sonorities could hardly be greater — bells, rattles, harps, lyres, fiddles, xylophones, gongs, trumpets, clarinets, mouth organs, whistles . . . Every one of these instruments, which somewhere or other is closely associated with trance, delivers acoustic signals too radically different from one another to be able to produce, at the level of auditory physiology, the same effects on the listener. So that if one of them could by chance produce such effects — that is, were capable of triggering trance by virtue of its sonority alone — another would certainly lack this ability.

Although all these instruments are associated with trance, and more particularly with entry into trance, this association is not related to the physical impact created by the sounds they produce. At the beginning of this chapter, we asked ourselves what particular characteristics instruments used for possession could share? We now see they have none. Rhythmic, Dynamic, Melodic? Music, we have seen, can be vocal or instrumental, but whether it is one or the other still does not explain the sort of action it might have on trance. Its effects cannot be attributed to some special virtue of the voice, since in trance sessions there might quite often be no singing at all, nor can it be attributed to any sui generis power of a particular instrument, since, in fact, all instruments can be used, contrary to the commonly accepted idea that the drum is the major cause of the great hurly-burly of possession.

We must now investigate if the effects of music could be due not to its acoustic characteristics, but to the manner in which they are shaped; by this I mean by the rhythmic, dynamic, or melodic — or more correctly modal — features of the music. Are there such rhythms that in and of themselves, because of their intrinsic musical structure, are more suitable than others for inducing trance? Concretely (and presenting the facts in a rather simplistic way), would 4/4 time be more likely to produce such an effect than 3/4 time? A syncopated rhythm more than one that is not? A staccato more than a legato rhythm? A rhythm with strong stresses more than one almost without stress? A monotonous rhythm more than a continually changing one?

Carpitella (1966, 361), who considers “rhythm to be the determining factor in tarantism's iatromusic,” asks if the original rhythm of the tarantella was in “‘perfect’ or ‘imperfect’ time.” Danielou, for his part (1975, 14), asserts that “the processes and the characteristics of these [ecstatic] dances are the same in all regions of the globe, in India, in the Middle East, in Africa,” and that “the rhythms used are always of 5, 7 or 11 beats. "Such an assertion cannot be taken seriously: no study has yet been undertaken that would allow us to state this universal rule, and a great many observed facts contradict it. The question posed with respect to the tarantella is, however, legitimate, and we are justified in asking the same sort of questions about any music used to accompany trance dances. As far as I know, no work, either monographic or comparative, has been published on this subject. However, it seems valid to ask, for example, what exactly were those rhythms among the Greeks "that had the property of provoking trances, by possession of the Corybantes and also, no doubt, of the Sileni-Satyrs" (Jeanmaire 1951, 497). Plato himself scarcely had any opinion on this point. In The Republic (400 a—b), when discussing what I shall label for simplicity's sake the "ethos of rhythms," he admits he does not know either "which rhythm represents such and such a character," or "which rhythms are suitable (for producing) mania," in other words trance.

We know from other sources that the dithyramb was originally closely associated with Dionysiac rituals. And as a poetic genre, we are told that it was essentially iambic, so its rhythm must have consisted of a foot made up of one short syllable followed by a long one. In a text attributed to Plutarch and presented by Jeanmaire (1951, 289) as "a development that is basically no more than a paraphrase of the Platonic theory concerning the divine origin and character of mania," we read, concerning the relations of possession to rhythm and melody, that "in the case of Bacchic and Corybantic leaps, it suffices to change the rhythm by abandoning the trochee, and the air by abandoning the Phrygian mode, for them to be- come less violent and cease" (Amatorius 16. 31). Here, the trochee (a long syllable followed by a short), and not the iamb, is associated with possession dance. Elsewhere, apropos the word iambos, Jeanmaire (1951, 234) wonders whether it refers "in one case to a dance step in duple time and in the other to a rhythm that may be in triple time." Uncertainty on this point is evidently considerable.

What we do know, on the other hand (ibid., 242), is that "the celebration of the dithyramb manifested itself by noisy exclamations, outcries underscored by music in which the flute [read: aulos], which incites mania, played a role that has always remained preponderant, but which nevertheless included other instruments, small drums, kettle drums, castanets. The rhythm must have been dominated by repeated ritual acclamations." Interesting though it is, this text does not tell us much about exactly what this rhythm was (a point to which we shall return later, but from a different angle).

Just as the lyre, Apollo's instrument, is sometimes associated with Greek Dionysiac cults, so in Egypt the paean, an essentially Apollonian literary form as well, seems to have been incorporated, with its own specific meter no doubt, into the Greek Dionysiac tradition. Such is the information we have concerning the rhythm accompanying trance and to which Dionysiac dances were performed. As we can see, it is rather scant, but there is enough to let us suspect that no one rhythm was especially associated among the Greeks with possession dance, or, to say the same thing differently, that there must have been several rhythms, and that none was specific to trance. As a matter of fact, this is the same conclusion we shall reach again later on, albeit by way of dance, in the chapter devoted to possession music among the Greeks." From ancient Greece let us now pass on to modern-day Brazil and the music in candomblé, about which we do possess a fair amount of information, owing in particular to the work of Gisele Cossard. The repertoire of twenty-five rhythmic themes published in her study (1967, 180-207) of candomblé music contains, with only one exception, duple meter rhythms, in many cases employing triple subdivisions. As for the tempo indicated, they show that the smallest pulse unit varies according to the theme from MM 288 to MM 576. Thus we are faced with a group of rhythmic themes that are extremely uniform as regards meter, but extremely varied as regards tempo. Apart from one or two, including the one for the entry of the orisha, these themes are all intended to trigger trances. Each of them is specific to a particular orisha, with the exception of the adarum rhythm, which we already mentioned, and is valid for all the orisha, without any distinctions.

"This swift and insistent rhythm is a veritable imperative," says Cossard (1967, 176). "Rare are the initiates who can resist it, even those among the most senior." On the day of the center's annual closure, it is this theme that the saint's father orders to be played "so that all the initiates present will go into trance" (1970, 145). It is also played during any other ceremony when the orisha "delay from incorporating themselves" (ibid., 108). In fact, the adarum does not have a particularly quick tempo, since Cossard records it as being MM 69 to the quarter note. It contains no note shorter than a sixteenth note and frequently makes use of both eighth and quarter notes. Its rhythm is nevertheless very particular. The first three bars contain accented and unaccented eighth notes, an eighth note against the beat, and a triplet of eighth and sixteenth notes; the next three bars are made up, on the contrary, of a regular sequence of quarter notes. Rhythmically, then, this theme has an extremely uneven profile. As for its "insistent" character, it evidently stems to a large extent from the four accented quavers with which it begins.

Is the efficacy of the adarum due to rhythmic factors comparable in some way to those Métraux (1958, 161, 169) describes in Haiti when he writes about the drummer's "feints," defined as "breaks" against the beat ("brisures et cassees") that "interrupt the flow of the dance and produce a state of paroxysm propitious for /oa crises?" Does this device belong to a musical system specific to trance? Are not the same devices equally used in music having no connection to possession? An in-depth study would be needed to ascertain it. However, let us note that evidence of the same kind has been collected by Alain Daniélou (1967, 92) in Asia, "in the kirtdna-s, which in Bengal are the mystic chants danced to in groups, and in the prophetic dances of primitive peoples in Southern India." Here is what he writes: "The dancers are first of all drawn into an easy rhythm with which they identify completely and thus sink into a sort of hypnotic half-sleep. The musicians then create a shock by means of several violent drum strokes and embark on a new, much more complex rhythm. After hesitating an instant, the dancers are taken over by this new rhythm without even consciously willing it. In some of them, this provokes a trance state and a complete loss of self control, as though the rhythm were a kind of spirit that had possessed them. This trance state is characterized by insensitivity to pain, complete loss of modesty, and visionary perceptions. "Let us also remember, even though it lies somewhat outside our domain since it involves shamanism and not possession, that according to F. Densmore (1948, 36-37) the healing songs of the North American Indians she studied are characterized by changes of stress and rhythmical irregularities that distinguish them quite clearly from the tribes’ other songs. Although there are not enough data at our disposal to enable us to state that such rhythmic breaks constitute one of the universal features of possession music, it is nevertheless true that they recur very frequently, and this is something we need to remember.

On the contrary, it does seem that we can consider another rhythmic feature, the acceleration of tempo, to be universally used as a means of triggering trance. Discussing the dithyramb as a ritual, which is to say as a “chorus arranged in a circle that sings and dances,” Jeanmaire (1951, 240) writes: “The movement was imparted only gradually to the cyclical chorus, which for a while at least gave the impression of crawling on the ground like a heavy cable, the goal being a progressive approach to the ecstatic state, which is achieved precisely by the monotony of the acclamations, repeated at first to a deliberately slow rhythm, and by the progressive acceleration of their cadence.”

Writing about the candomblé, more specifically in reference to the toque adarum and after having stressed that “it is not accompanied by chants, since this time not just one divinity but all of them at once are summoned,” Roger Bastide (1958, 20) notes that “the ever more rapid rhythm,’® the ever more imploring tone finally opens up their muscles, their viscera, their heads, to the penetration of the god they have awaited so long.” Similarly in Tunisia, in the case of the possession dances performed by women as they listen to the dhikr chanted in the neighboring room by the men, it is when the rhythm of this chanting accelerates that they begin to dance and fall into trance (Ferchiou 1972, 56).

The same is true of other marabout-type sessions in which the music, which is quite different, is in fact true possession music, since it is played specifically for the purpose of inducing possession. Here again, the session has two phases: “during the first, the atmosphere is relaxed, the rhythms are slow, and the words distinct; this is the phase in which all those who are present participate. The second becomes progressively more intense, and the rhythms, which steadily accel- erate, are those of the possession dance” (ibid., 57).

In Tibet, the invocations chanted in order to trigger the oracle’s trance and addressed to the divinity who is to descend into him, are first chanted slowly, but soon “the tempo [is] increased” (Nebesky-Wojkowitz 1956, 433). In Bali, Jane Belo (1960, 35) describes how the orchestra accelerates suddenly in order to trigger the trance of the barong carrier. One could go on and on listing such examples. But even this rule, needless to say, is not without exceptions. To mention only one, again in Bali, the orchestral music accompanying the trance of the kriss dancers at the end of the bar- ong ceremony maintains an even tempo from start to finish. *° As is frequently the case with all sorts of music, acceleration of tempo very often goes hand in hand with an intensification of sound. The record entitled Féte pour l’offrande des premieres ignames a Shango (Feast for the offering of the first yams to Shango; G. 

Rouget (1965) provides us with a typical example of simultaneous accelerando and crescendo; in this case, the accelerando is achieved not so much by an acceleration of the tempo as by an increase in the number and insistence of the drumbeats within it; as for the crescendo, it results both from the intensification and dramatization of the singing and of the horn call.

In Bali, describing the ceremony during which "the official entrance of the god" into the medium who is to embody him will take place, Jane Belo (1960, 50) observes that in order to encourage trances in the mediums present, people were singing loudly while the orchestra played "as loud as it could." Elsewhere (ibid., 20) she notes that, again in order to trigger the trance state, "the singing and the music of the orchestra redouble their intensity."

Among the Thonga of Mozambique, H. A. Junod (1913, 438-43), describing a session held for the purpose of inducing the sick man to declare the name of the spirit possessing him, emphasizes the violence of the percussion, which is composed of single-skinned drums, drums made of large tin cases, and calabash rat- tles shaken so as to almost "slightly touch the head or the ears of the unfor- tunate sufferer," the total result being "a hideous din." In addition to these instruments, there also are "incantations" remarkable for the singularly incisive and penetrating nature of their melody, whose disturbing effect is intensified by a "very pronounced sforzando when the chorus took up the dominant phrase" (ibid., 442).

In the candomblé, "when possession is long in coming," Roger Bastide writes (1958, 18), "the priest or the priestesses ring the agogo*' close to the girls' ears as they dance, and then it is by no means rare for the divinity, spurred on by this deafening noise, this barbaric sound, to make up his mind at last to mount his horse." Here the crescendo is achieved not only by louder playing but also by playing closer to the one for whom the music is destined. The same is true, as we have just seen, with the Thonga and their rattles.

In Tibet, as we saw, horns are blown into the ears of the oracle on the verge of possession. In Bali, Jane Belo (1960, 50) describes how the singers leave their places and move to a spot just behind the medium who is about to be possessed, so that they can sing very close to him and thus make him go into a trance. These facts are not without importance, and we shall return to them later.

In Madagascar, among the Vezo, B. Koechlin (see discography) notes that when the god takes a long time to come down, the tempo increases, while at the same time "interjections ring out: 'your hands!,' 'louder,' 'clap all of you'" and among these exclamations, he selects "it's getting hot now, sister!" Zempléni, for his part, has demonstrated the great importance of the "warming-up" process in nd6ép ceremonies (1966, 395, 399), which follow a carefully staged dramatic scenario. All the participants—officiants, musicians, and spectators—contribute in varying degrees to the general warm-up. Although the chanting plays an important part in this process, the decisive role seems to be played by the drummers, the "griots"—who themselves are well aware of this fact: "We summon and excite the rab with our drums," they say (ibid., 395). The lead drummer seems to be the "master in these rhythmic dialogues between the public dancing and the crisis." With the first "crisis labor______ The possession séance for the "naming of the rab" (that is, for identifying the spirit possessing the patient) as described by Zempléni (ibid., 356-60, 369-70) becomes one immense and increasingly dramatic crescendo, in which the drama (the fit and final collapse) is carried to its climax by a constant and progressive amplification of the sound. His account is lit- tered with observations relating to music. After a certain number of rit- uals have unfolded, first without any musical accompaniment and then to the sound of a rattle (a small horn filled with cowrie shells), an officiant begins to ring "a little bell close to the patient's ears." A short while later, with the bell still tinkling, "the drums thunder out. The atmosphere in the room changes totally." The ritual continues as the officiant "shakes his lit- tle bell tirelessly in the patient's ears. The din grows louder still." The 84 CHAPTER TWO treatment of the sick person takes ever more violent forms, and "the dry clicking of gourd rattles is now added to the almost intolerable noise of the drums and the insistent tinkling of bells." The sick woman howls. She is about to speak the name of the rab. Silence then dramatizes the situation: "the drums abruptly fall silent." If no answer comes, "the drums, bells, and chanting resume." The acceleration of the tempo is described else- where (p. 416) in these terms: "The drum beats and the gestures then be- come so rapid that the ear perceives a qualitative change in the music (even though the rhythmic pattern stays the same)." The collapse, "the terminal point of the crisis," is "marked by a resounding blow on the first drum." The ndép, as described by Zempleni, is probably the most spectacular ex- ample of increasing dramatic tension by an acceleration of momentum and an intensification of sound. But degree of intensity aside, other exam- ples of accelerando and crescendo abound, as we have seen, and the list could be extended without difficulty—so much so that these two features may well be regarded as constituting veritable universals of possession music. Yet here again several reservations must be made. In the first place, it would seem that this dramatization of the music is to be found solely in the possession cults in which trance is accompanied by crisis, whether the latter precedes the trance (as with the Shango ceremony cited earlier) or, on the contrary, forms its climax (as in the case of the ndop). When the trance is totally nonconvulsive in character, and when there is no fit, then the music maintains the same intensity and tempo. At least this is the case among the Mundang, as the films and recordings of Zempleni, Pineau, and Adler demonstrate.*? In this case, the dances per- formed by the possessees are always characterized by a great gentleness (even the panther dance, so very different from what one observes during the ceremonies for Agé, god of the hunt, in Abomey). The music used to accompany them—double-skinned drum, gourd horn alternately blown and sung into, and rattle—is likewise devoid of all violence. It flows gently, always yielding the same delivery and it renews itself in a manner that owes nothing to changes of tempo or intensity, but results from expressive modulations always occurring on the same registers. The character of the music, the character of the dances, and the character of the trance thus ap- pear to be completely interdependent. And nothing, indeed, could be more natural. Although the violence of music and of trance may well be closely allied, this does not change the fact that an outburst of music may perfectly well not lead to a fit, or, inversely, that a fit can occur without musical vio- lence. Although the relation between musical violence and the onset of a crisis seems to be extremely close in the nd6p, in other cults it appears to be much less so. True, in Haitian voodoo, as in the candomble, to cite only two examples, trances most often occur at the moment when emotions are at their strongest and the music is at its most dramatic, but it is not exceptional for things to happen quite differently. Michel Leiris told me recently he had noticed this several times, as did Alfred Métraux, during the voodoo ceremonies they attended together. It is by no means rare, they both observed, for trances to occur precisely at a moment when the music slackens. No one would think of relating such slackening to the entry into trance. Yet the opposite seems quite normal, and if trance occurs at the moment when music reaches its climax, no one fails to connect the two. This is what has usually happened, and it explains why music has so often been perceived, quite improperly, as the very springboard for entry into trance.

Michel Leiris, for example, remembers a voodoo ceremony in Haiti toward the end of which, at a moment when the music had ceased completely, a lemonade seller, who was of course at a slight distance from the dancing area and thus from the musicians, was suddenly seized by a violent crisis and began rolling frenziedly in the dust and howling. And Pierre Verger, too, has told me how often it happens in the candomblé that whereas the drummers have unsuccessfully attempted to send someone into trance by unleashing the full force of their instruments, the trance is brought on by the mere tinkling of a little bell gently shaken close to the subject's ear!

In fact, we see that in the domain of the relations between music and trance, the connection between causes and effects offers a very wide margin of freedom. To illustrate this point, I will cite as examples two ceremonies for Ogun, god of iron, that I attended with Pierre Verger in the Yoruba region of Dahomey. In both cases the ceremony was held on a weekly basis in honor of this orisha, and during it the officiants went into trance almost as a rule. The music and drumming were quite spectacular (Verger 1957, 150-70). And as the recordings make plain, the music attains the same paroxysmal climax on both occasions. Yet on the first occasion the expected trances ensued and on the second they did not. There must undoubtedly have been a reason for this; but the fact remains that the same music did not produce the same effects on both occasions.

I can cite yet another example of entry into trance, which I witnessed personally, again in Dahomey, that was not linked to any kind of paroxysm. In this case (during a ceremony for Dan, the snake vodun) it occurred while the officiant was chanting rather quietly and shaking a rattle smoothly and evenly. The woman, who was quite close to the officiant, it is true, went into a trance within a matter of minutes.

As for East Africa, K. P. Wachsmann (1957, 8) underscores the many different aspects possession music can assume there. Although certain possessions are triggered by the sound of an extremely noisy gourd rattle, others, on the contrary, are induced by the sound of very gentle chanting accompanied by an almost inaudible zither. Then there is the extreme case of the "deaf" tarantulas (Carpitella 1966, 86) who inspire in their devotees a behavior consisting in "a nonchalant dance, as though the tarantulee were deaf to the music. Investigation of a number of different possession cults shows that, although the dramatization of music by accelerando and crescendo often plays a role of primary importance in triggering trance and/or fit, this rule is not absolute. Even in cults that systematically use these techniques, trance and fit can occur without any musical paroxysm. Ravel’s Bolero, as far as I know, does not habitually induce possession in our concert halls. In Africa, an outburst of music, particularly drum music, can reach the intensity described for the ndop in the course of feasts or ceremonies unrelated to possession.

The violence of the music in the nddp, however, is the sine qua non of the fit and fall. Outside the ritual framework, agitation and collapse can occur, which challenges the notion that music is the sole inducer of possession. During a ndép ceremony, the crisis and fall seem to be directly associated with the explosions of the drummers, but not the entry into trance. Experienced possessees go into trance and dance, but do not go as far as a crisis or fall.

The crisis or "labor of crisis" consists of a "motor sequence" with two consecutive phases. The possessee, at the drummers' mercy, executes a violent and convulsive dance. The second phase involves rapid, oblique arm movements and violent swinging of the head. Drummers accompany these movements, causing them to become increasingly rapid and violent. The possessee then experiences disordered movements, contortions, and raucous cries before falling.

The physiological cause of the fall seems to be autostimulation of the inner ear. The possessee drives himself toward muscular exhaustion and extreme spatial disorientation, which correlates with the remarks of Dr. H. Aubin quoted by Leiris. The frenzy is governed by and relies upon the drumming, but the possessee's loss of balance and fall are due to the frenetic movements of their dance and their own frenzied agitation in general, and not to the music. 

Or, rather, the music is only indirectly responsible for them; it spurs his dancing on, but it is not a source of vertigo or auditory dizziness, as it were. Without ever explicitly formulating the hypothesis, numerous authors, in remarks scattered throughout their work, more or less insidiously lead the reader to believe that the violence of the sound involved—particularly that of drums, rattles, and bells—is capable of producing a phenomenon of this nature. “A din growing ever louder,” “almost intolerable noise of the drums” (Zempléni), “frightful hubbub” (Junod 1913, 441), “deafening noise” (Bastide). We have already encountered “voodooish drums of the rada ritual, unbelievably percussive. ... Orchestral convulsions. Thunder” (Leiris 1955, 18). One could add other quotations that highlight the unbearable, intolerable intensity of sound to which the individual who is either possessed or on the way to becoming so is subjected. Going from these observations to thinking, or causing others to think—even if involuntarily—that any convulsions, crisis, or collapse are in fact signs that the intensity of sound can no longer be tolerated, involves only one step. This step, moreover, is all the more easy to take because it is sometimes taken (and for good reasons, at the level of appearances at least). Describing the first possession crisis of the saint's daughter-to-be, an event usually taking place during a feast, “when the orisha are embodied and the drums play the rhythmic compositions intended to summon them,” Gisele Cossard (1970, 158-59) writes: “The person seems at first unable to go on tolerating the sounds she is hearing. She puts her hands over her ears as though to protect herself from them, she sways, she loses her balance. ...” And this person, it should be noted, is only a mere onlooker; she is not part of the group of “embodied orisha”; she is not dancing. So in this case the giddiness and the collapse are to be ascribed directly to the music, which “she seems unable to go on tolerating.” Thus we are faced here with a very different process from the one observed in the ndop. But collapse following a convulsive possession crisis can also be found without accompanying music. In Tibet, the medium goes into trance, as we have seen, as a result of “special prayers” chanted “in a peculiar, quick rhythm” (Nebesky-Wojkowitz 1956, 547), accompanied, depending on the case, by drums, bells, cymbals, and sometimes thighbone trumpets. 88 CHAPTER TWO He is seated (ibid., 433-34), but as he enters his trance he begins “to swing the upper part of his body rhythmically with a rotating movement from left to right ... rolling at times limply as if it were only loosely attached to the trunk.” After having delivered the oracles demanded of him—and after the music has stopped, of course—the medium is once more seized by convulsions, again rotates his trunk as at the beginning of his trance, and suddenly falls backward into the arms of his helpers, stationed behind him to break his fall. The text does not specify it, but one assumes that the rotation of the torso is also accompanied on this second occasion by the head-rolling mentioned earlier. So here we find the same bodily movements as those associated with the final collapse in the ndép. The physical context and the relations to the music, however, are very different. There is no deafening music or, in fact, as in the second episode, no music at all. There is no dancing properly speaking, or any frenzied agitation, except for a very brief period at the beginning of the trance. But the medium displays an extreme state of inner concentration, achieved through meditation that sometimes lasts for several days (ibid., 440) and through a wholly corporeal technique that is not described but that includes the swaying and rotation of torso and head already mentioned, breath control, and an exercise that prepares the medium to bear the weight of an extremely heavy metal helmet, which is placed on his head as soon as the first signs of trance manifest themselves and which he wears throughout the séance. At certain moments, the trance nevertheless evidences very marked convulsive aspects. Like the priests of Ogun in Dahomey, "the seated oracle suddenly leaps "several feet" into the air at the beginning of his trance (ibid., 434). Moreover, as in Bali and Madagascar, his entry into trance is encouraged by the burning of a great deal of incense. What role does this incense play exactly? Is it simply part of what one might call an overall program of overstimulation? Or does it in fact act as a true drug? The authentic oracles all abstain from any stimulant (ibid., 440) as a means of entering the trance state. But there are "imposters" who make use of a mixture of Indian hemp and Guinea pepper that "is supposed to make one feel the blood running hot through the veins and become rather excitable by the music made at the beginning of the ceremony" (ibid.). Clearly, an intensification of musical perception is consciously sought here, which means that it must play some role in the system. It is worth noting that in Niger too, in the bori, during the ceremony for the "raising of the dark gods," the neophyte is likewise subjected to fumigation, and J. Monfouga-Nicolas tells us (1972, 116) that 'just like the music . . . the smoke from certain plants is a summons to the gods, a sign they recognize just as well as their motto." In Niger, however, the plants utilized produce an "acrid and evil-smelling" smoke that chokes the initiate. In other words, the stimulation sought is not at all the same as that in Tibet, but its physical effect is accompanied by a symbolic action that figures in a system of signs which here again is related to music. Let us return to the final collapse of the Tibetan oracle and the collapse of the possessee in ndép. They each occur in contexts as different from one another as could be imagined. In ndép, the collapse is very closely connected to the frenzy of the dance and the music; in the case of the oracle, it is not. In the first case, it is taken to represent "the lethal outcome of the encounter with the double," writes Zempléni (1966, 419), who then adds: "in order to let oneself be invested by, then fused with, one's double [the rab], one must erase the foundations of one's own identity, one must die." In the second case, on the contrary, the collapse represents "the moment in which the dharmapala [deity] is supposed to have left the body" (Nebesky-Wojkowitz 1956, 429). However, it is true that in both cases the collapse occurs after a period of intense emotion, extreme tension, and great convulsive muscular exertions. It is probable, therefore, that in both cases the fall is simply, in part at least, the effect of a brusque decompensation. However, on the level both of physical technique and symbolic representation, the conditioning involved is so different in each case that one is tempted to think there must be something else at work, and that the something else is a behavioral convention, a stereotype. This does not mean to say, of course (imagination being the powerful force it is), that the behavior is insincere. Let us go back to the nddp example, for instance. If what I am tempted to think happens does in fact happen, then neither the numbing effect of the music, nor that of the dance, supposing they exist, is sufficient to explain the collapse—any more than either suffices on its own to explain entry into trance. In tarantism, in which collapse occurs before as well as after the trance, albeit in a form very different from that of nddep, the role of the rhythm is to provide a regular (and rapid) pulsation for dance music. As we know, this dance music is regarded as a remedy for the crisis (and for the collapse that was its manifest symptom). But during the entire time that the tarantulee is entranced, the dance, in its turn, is intended to lead to collapse (De Martino 1966, 68) except at the end, when he is granted “grace” (ibid., 73) and returns to his normal state. De Martino shows how important are the intensity and proximity of the sound: “During the upright phase, whenever the tarantulee—still dancing to the beat of the music—lingered in front of the musicians, or amongst them, the drummer would hammer out loud rhythmic strokes close to his ears, but still keeping time . . .” (ibid., 70). But in his general interpretation of the part played by music in tarantism (ibid., 145-46), he lays the most stress on the moto perpetuo aspect of the tarantella. After giving an account of an episode that “provides an excellent demonstration of the relation between the crisis and its 90 CHAPTER TWO musical resolution” he concludes: “Everything that occurs seems to suggest that a certain rhythmical ordering of sounds unleashes that most elementary sign of life which is movement, while, at the same time, the discipline of that rhythm prevents the movement from sliding into pure psychomotoric convulsions. . . . Tarantism begins, runs its course, and ends—as ritual and action—in the very elementary perspective of a fresh breakthrough into historical existence by placing itself, pro tempore, under the protection of rhythmic repetition, as certain and as predictable as the orbit of a planet. . . .” In this case, we are far away from the “feints” and “breaks” that Metraux tells us are so propitious to /oa crises. Now let us pass on to another aspect of the relations between rhythm and trance. So far we have examined them only with respect to a certain number of specific cases. It is equally possible to consider them from a much more general point of view, and that is what I propose to do now, very briefly. To make things as general as possible, let us take three musical regions: black Africa, Southeast Asia, and Indian America. And I should make it clear, because some may have doubts in this respect, that however impressionistic or disputable it may seem, this particular division—in my opinion at least—does correspond to a certain reality. It will be agreed that the musical styles of these three regions all possess rhythmic aspects, specific to themselves, that can be decisive factors in identifying them. There are certain unmistakable characteristics that enable us, without the possibility of error, to attribute a particular way of drumming to one specific region rather than to another. There is a rhythmics particular to Amerindians* that could not under any circumstances be black African. I would be tempted to go further and say there is an incompatibility between certain fundamental aspects of American Indian rhythmics, on the one hand, and black African rhythmics on the other. The fact that in the present state of musicology, it is difficult to say exactly what it is, does not affect the matter. In the same way, there is a radical difference between the rhythmics of Vietnam, let us say, and those of Amerindia and Africa. This being so, in all three regions, we find the same relations between music and trance (possession trance, as is usually the case in black Africa, or shamanic trance, as is the case for Amerindia; the difference is not important). If one particular rhythmic is thought to trigger trance in one region, and in another quite a different rhythmic performs the same function, the reason must be that any rhythmic, or any rhythmic system—for any rhythmic is a system—can do the job as well as any other. Or else, which comes to the same thing, no rhythmic system is specifically related to trance. This totally contradicts the assertion by Daniélou, quoted at the beginning of this chapter, that certain rhythms possess the particular virtue of being able to trigger trance in all regions of the world. If this were the case, it would mean that the action of rhythm—and therefore of music—in triggering trance is of a physiological order. Everything points to the contrary: the relations between rhythm and trance operate at the level not of nature but of culture.

As a conclusion to these remarks on rhythm in possession music, two observations should be made. First, contrary to what we found out about instrumentation, which, as we saw, revealed no particularities, the rhythmic systems of such music have two frequently recurring characteristics: on the one hand, breaks or abrupt changes of rhythm, on the other, an accelerando crescendo, which recurs so frequently one might view it as a universal of possession music. Second, again contrary to what we found to be the case for instrumentation, which we examined only in and of itself, or, if one prefers, from the point of view of acoustics, rhythmics must be considered from a double viewpoint: in and of itself, that is, as a message received by the person in the trance, or preparing to enter it; as a dance performed by the entranced person; that is, as a modality of his or her perception. For dancing to music (or rather “dancing the music,” if one may say so) is in fact perceiving it in a particular way. For the dancer, it means reenacting it on his own account. It means retransmitting the message in the form of movement and not merely receiving it. One is tempted to say that it means “acting” the music rather than simply undergoing it. At any rate, it certainly means substituting a totally or partially passive relationship to music with an overtly active one.

In a later chapter, we shall once again observe that as far as the relations between music and the subject in trance are concerned, it is important to distinguish between those that are active and those that are passive. We shall see, in fact, that depending on whether one is dealing with shamanism or with possession, either the active or the passive relations are involved. This is therefore an important distinction to make. As for dance, it too will have a short chapter devoted to it later on. Let us now pass to facts about the melodic order, or, more precisely, to facts about the organization of the relations between pitches, in other words, to facts about mode, using the word “mode” here in its most general sense. Are there musical modes specifically propitious to trance, or more frequently linked with trance than others? The ancient Greeks and Chinese, the civilizations of India and of Islam, all the “high cultures” in fact, have associated musical scales with emotions, passions, the cosmic order, and ultimately, with man’s moral and physical health. In Greek antiquity, Aristotle observed that the philosopher classified melodies according to three categories: "ethical" melodies, linked with various ethoses or states of soul; "practical" melodies, linked to certain occupations; and "enthusiastic" melodies, associated with possession. Aristotle's Politics mentioned that the Phrygian mode was best suited for "enthusiastic" music. However, Plato, who often discussed the relation between music and possession, didn't mention the Phrygian mode.

The aulos was the instrument associated with mania and Marsyas, a Micrasian. This suggests that the musical mode of possession and its favored instrument were seen as coming from elsewhere.

In Greek antiquity, Aristotle observed that the philosopher classified melodies according to three categories: "ethical" melodies, linked with various ethoses or states of soul; "practical" melodies, linked to certain occupations; and "enthusiastic" melodies, associated with possession. Aristotle's Politics mentioned that the Phrygian mode was best suited for "enthusiastic" music. However, Plato, who often discussed the relation between music and possession, didn't mention the Phrygian mode.

The aulos was the instrument associated with mania and Marsyas, a Micrasian. This suggests that the musical mode of possession and its favored instrument were seen as coming from elsewhere. Maurice Emmanuel (1914, 440), taking his lead from Aristotle, underscores that Greek music is divided into two antithetical worlds: the Dorian, "harmony of European Hellas" and the Phrygian, "music of the Asians, imported by the aulos players of Phrygia." One easily recognizes that broad antitheses of this kind—and the one first made by Nietzsche between Apollo and Dionysus, naturally springs to mind—are rather reductive; so let us not give this one any more importance than it actually merits. However, we do not lend it too much credit if we simply note that—as many other texts confirm—the music of enthusiasm or Dionysiac mania was strongly felt to be Phrygian. It was indeed from Phrygia (or Thrace, but in any case from Asia Minor) that the Dionysus cult spread (Jeanmaire 1951, 22) or, as the Greeks themselves believed, that it originated. We are therefore justified in saying that although Dionysiac music was Phrygian in instrumentation and mode, it was not because the musical characteristics of this instrumentation and mode in and of themselves (that is to say, their particular timbre or set of intervals) were thought to have any remarkable effect on triggering trance, but rather because they were the clearest sign of Dionysus' identity. This would in any case concur with the general logic of possession. For what in fact is possession other than an invasion of the field of consciousness by the other, that is, by someone who has come from elsewhere? Insofar as he is the other, Dionysus is at the same time an elsewhere; whether he is or not really is of little importance. This is how he was thought to be, and how his music was experienced.

In Dahomey, people of Gun or Fon origin speak Nago** when they are possessed by a vodun of Nago origin. Elsewhere, people who ordinarily speak a given African language talk in Arabic if the spirit possessing them is thought to be of Arab origin. When she was possessed by Beelzebub, Jeanne des Agnes spoke, it is said, in Hebrew (Certeau 1970, 66-67). What is true of speech could also be true of that other language, music. Whatever our interpretation of the facts may be, it seems clear that among the Greeks the music of Dionysiac possession was characterized by its use of one particular mode and no other. A comparable situation may be found among the Thonga of southern Africa. Among them, possessions are said to be caused by foreign spirits, either Zulu or Ndau. Songs relating to possession by Zulu spirits are pentatonic, we are told by T. F. Johnston (1972, 13), whereas those relating to possessions by Ndau spirits are heptatonic. The fact that one rather than the other scale is chosen is directly related to the fact that Zulu music is pentatonic and Ndau music is heptatonic. In other words, the scale is not chosen for its particular melodic potential or expressive resources, but as a sign of the identity of the spirit with which the melody is connected. This considerably strengthens the above interpretation of similar facts among the ancient Greeks. With respect to tarantism, Diego Carpitella (1966, 361) observes that if the musicians are to be believed, "the tarantulées are incited to dance" by certain tonalities only, "and remain insensitive to others." This is because each tarantula "likes its own tune." Consequently the repertoire contains "a traditionalized series of tunes and songs from which one must choose the one (or ones) best suited to each particular case" (De Martino 1966, 153). At least, this was the situation some time ago, when tarantism still flourished in southern Italy. Nowadays, because the cult is in a state of decadence, this “aspect of tarantism is on the decline and has disappeared from general awareness,” Carpitella observes (1966, 351), and adds that during his fieldwork, in 1959, his own observations did not confirm what the musicians had told him. Whatever the present state of things may be, let us keep in mind that, traditionally, the different tunes played for the tarantulee were in principle related to the different species of tarantula that may have bitten him or her, and they thus served to identify the particular one responsible for the bite. Moreover, the tunes varied in their key signatures. Here, then, we are confronted with evidence showing that music is identified not with the region or people whence the spirit regarded as responsible for the possession originated, but with the species of the creature whose bite triggered the crisis. The choice of key or mode is thus dependent in all three cases (the Greeks, the Thonga, and tarantism) upon considerations external to the music itself, and not upon the use of any expressive possibilities the music may possess.

Everyday Language

To conclude, let me turn to another aspect of the matter, even though it really concerns timbre rather than melody. Writing about the “low notes” of the single-stringed fiddle, Rouch (1961, 141) tells us: “According to the Songhay, it is these raucous, wavering, and tragic notes that speak to the gods, that summon them and calm them.” A comparative study of both profane and sacred tunes that make up the repertoire of the fiddle (god ye)—which can itself be used as either a sacred or a profane instrument—would let us formulate some judgment about the use of these notes in the “spirits’ tunes” and would thus help isolate the melodic system used in the Songhay’s possession music, if such a system exists. Similarly, among the Wolof, one could make an inventory of the mottoes sung during the nddp and then attempt to isolate the stylistic characteristics of this repertoire. Among the Yoruba, similar research could be applied to the mottoes that, in this case, are played on drums, rather than sung, or played on the fiddle. For my own part, however, I doubt whether such research—which must still be done—would succeed in isolating styles that could be clearly distinguished from the style of the profane popular tunes belonging to the same literary genre.

At the risk of jumping ahead too fast, I will say that, on the basis of the possession music I have heard so far (some of it from all over the world, but in particular that of the Songhay, the Wolof, the Gun, and the Yoruba) it does not seem at all probable that any such music uses a musical system specific to it; that is to say, one that constitutes a separate and distinct system within the general musical system to which it belongs. Indeed, paradoxical though it may seem, it is quite logical that possession should speak, on the musical level, the language of the everyday. The reasons for this will be investigated later. The same is not true, however, of initiation and initiatory trance, which are expressed, on the contrary, by a specific musical language characterized by its deliberately unusual nature. At least, this is what we find both in the Benin vodun cult and in the Brazilian candomblé, as we saw earlier. In Benin, the songs relating to initiatory trance are distinguished from all the other music of the region by their very unusual use of chromaticism. In the book, are there other such examples? One may wonder whether a certain liturgical chant sung in the Buddhist repertoire, described as constituting an "essentially ecstatic" music and performed in a state that could be one of trance, should not also be placed in the category of initiatory music. This chant has, of course, no connection with those already described for Benin, but it too makes systematic use of chromaticism. Compared to the usual Buddhist music one hears, it does strike one as being very unusual indeed.

On the contrary, the hymns for the genii sung during possession séances in the Vietnamese hau bdng cult, as described by Simon and Simon-Barouh (1973), belong to the most banal popular style. Whereas in both Africa and Asia trance that is not linked with possession expresses itself in a musical language constituting a separate and distinct system within the population concerned (I have given two examples, but the list could certainly be extended, particularly in the area of shamanism and of communion trance), contrariwise, possession trance seems to require, everywhere and at all times, a form of music belonging to the most everyday and popular system.

Despite appearances, what I said a moment ago about the use of Phrygian music by the Greeks and Zulu or of Ndau music by the Thonga does not violate this rule. Among the Greeks, the Phrygian mode, despite its foreign origin, was perfectly integrated into the general musical system and was as much part of the popular tradition as the Dorian mode. And in all likelihood the situation is the same among the Thonga.

The brief (and very incomplete) survey I have just provided of some of the formal characteristics of possession music thus tends to indicate that, although such music does play a part in triggering and maintaining the trance state, it does not owe its effect to the properties of its musical structure, or if it does, it does so only to a very small degree. Let us therefore abandon this aspect of music, by which I mean the signifying side of the musical sign, and turn instead toward the signified one.

What does possession music signify? What is its meaning? What are the words of the songs saying? What do the dance rhythms express? Or, rather, to what dances do those rhythms correspond and what do those dances signify? We can say in a general sense that the vast majority of such songs concern divinities that have come to be embodied, or that are expected to do so. They can concern these divinities in several different ways. Sometimes they are addressed directly to them, summoning them or, on the contrary, asking them to go away; sometimes they describe them, usually in a flattering way, and often by referring to their genealogies or their motives, which comes to the same thing.

Jane Belo, in her book on Bali, does not provide very much information about the texts sung during trances caused by the gods. But the songs for the popular trances brought about by sanghyang spirits (the sanghyang who inhabit the dolls and the little girl dancers on the one hand, and the sanghyang of animals on the other [Belo 1960, 180-225]) fit in well with what I have just said. Judging from Simon and Simon-Barouh's chapter on the subject, the same is true of the "hymns of invocation to the genii" sung in Vietnam during du bong ceremonies. In Tibet, the chant used to trigger the oracle's trance is formed of two parts (Nebesky-Wojkowitz 1956, 429). The first is an “invocation to the dharmapala who is asked to take possession of the medium. The invocation usually starts with a detailed description of the dharmapala and also of the abode in which he is supposed to reside." Then follows "a litany . . . praising the dharmapala— who by now should have occupied the body of the oracle—enumerating and eulogizing his various capabilities" (ibid. ). In Madagascar, the songs (antsa) sung to summon the divinities (tsumba, a dialectical variation of trémba) are “fairly slow." The words “aim to describe and flatter the god" (Koechlin, discography). "These solemn chants" alternate with other songs accompanied by a board-zither, an instrument "also used on a schooner, to summon the winds when the boat is becalmed." Once the trance is well established and the dances take on a purely playful character, it is the dynamism of movement that is mainly required. The importance of the words decreases, and they are often reduced to simple exclamations. But for slower dances, the words may acquire importance again, and the singing consists of "success songs," occasionally humorous in content but no longer connected with possession as such.

Among the Thonga of Mozambique, the importance of the rhythm and sound level provided by the drums in possession séances have been strongly emphasized by H. A. Junod, as we have seen, but "that which is the most essentially necessary" he also writes "is the singing" (1913, 441). This is provided by experienced possessed persons: "They address the spirit in laudatory terms, trying to cajole it by flattery, to get the right side of it, and thus to induce it to grant the signal favor of a surrender" (ibid.). Such phrases as "Rhinoceros, thou attackest man!" show that these songs obviously fall into the category of mottoes.

In Ethiopia, "apart from the songs used to evoke the z@r, which are called wad&ga like the gatherings during which they are performed," and apart from "songs with prophetic intentions . . . often contributed by professional possessees" and consisting most often of "a very general lament about vicissitudes of the times," Leiris (1958, 43) also describes a great many songs "performed for the purpose of entertainment." Elsewhere, however, (ibid., 80, nn. 2, 93) he makes reference to a "song intended to make the zar descend onto a novice" and also mentions— though without expressly linking it to the singing—the use of mottoes (fukkara) which he defines as a "fairly free accumulation of stereotypes recalling Homeric epithets."

In Niger, in the bori, the songs used to trigger trance (and on occasion to calm it too, when the possession is a false one) are essentially mottoes. At least this is what emerges from the work of Jacqueline Monfouga-Nicolas (1972, 109-59, 160, 201, etc.). Still in Niger, among the Songhay the "musical mottoes" (that is to say, the ritual texts) which are sung "usually with instrumental accompaniment" (Rouch 1960, 135), but which are also frequently played on the fiddle without being sung, provide the very substance of their possession music. "Each divinity has one or several musical themes specific to him," writes Rouch, who then assigns these themes and texts, the dance steps associated with them, and even such objects as altars, ritual furniture, and costumes, to one and the same general category of "more or less materialized signs of the divinities." In Senegal, the bak, a "theme-song or motto-song is one of the rab's attributes. In Brazil, the candomblé rituals feature specific "canticles" for each deity, which are sung and accompanied by sonorous drum rhythms. These "canticles" serve as leitmotifs, attracting the orixa (Bastide 1958, 19).

The candomblé practices involve the use of these "canticles" and drum rhythms to summon and attract the orixa. The "canticles" are sung and accompanied by sonorous drum rhythms, creating leitmotifs that are intended to attract the orixa. As Music and Possession 99 these canticles unfold, Giséle Cossard writes, "so the initiates go into trance" (1970, 107). The texts she quotes elsewhere (1967, 172-75) demonstrate that we are once again dealing primarily with mottoes. The sung invocations requesting the divinity to come and take possession of the adept combine mottoes, exhortations, prayers, and, on occasion, insults—a sign of the familiarity that reigns between men and gods.

Thus among the Vandau: "They are not afraid to insult the possessing spirit, like the chief's daughter who is mocked for being a prostitute, or like the almost untranslatable song of the Mandiki" (Junod 1934, 281). In nearby Zimbabwe, among the Tonga, A. Tracey (1970, 38) reports that when people grow tired of waiting for the medium to become possessed, a certain mbira player specializes in singing a song so insulting to the mhondoro (spirit), who is usually addressed in flattering terms, that shame forces him to "come out" immediately.

Whether they are prayers, praises, or insults, these songs are addressed to the deity, and this is the important thing to remember. They constitute communication with him. When they are specific to a particular deity, melodies played on an instrument have the same function as sung mottoes: they are call-signs. Indeed, these melodies often are mere instrumental versions of the sung mottoes which are deprived of their text; but, when they hear them, "men and gods also hear the words that relate to them" (Rouch 1960, 135-36).

Whether linked to a text or not, these tunes are used for dancing, and the resulting dance constitutes the motto's choreographic aspect; it expresses the deity's personality just the same, but in movement rather than words. Whether it is a rhythmic theme played on a drum or a melodic theme played on, say, a fiddle, this theme, when linked to a particular deity, has a "signified" referring to that deity, either because it is related to him or her by some expressive correspondence (it depicts the deity) or because it simply has been arbitrarily attached to him or her.

Thus the rhythmic themes specific to the various orisha in the candomblé are described by Giséle Cossard (1967, 177) as "dramatic," "full of vivacity," "aggressive," "tempestuous"—each of these adjectives corresponding to the nature of the divinity in question. On the other hand, I am unable to say whether or not the "tunes of the genii," which constitute the repertoire of the holey (genii) cult among the Songhay, also have an expressive content.

In tarantism, each variety of tarantula has its own particular tune. But is the correspondence in this case expressive or is it purely arbitrary? We do not know. We do know, however, that in order to cure tarantulees "the piper or zither player plays for them various motifs related to the quality of the venom, so that they are ravished by the harmony and fascinated by what they are hearing, and the venom either dissolves away within the body, or is slowly eliminated through the veins" (early sixteenth-century text quoted by De Martino 1966, 144). Since each tarantula "likes its own tune" (ibid., 100), there is "a traditionalized series of tunes and songs from which one must choose the one (or ones) best suited to each particular case." It is the "right" music, in other words the one that best fits the case, that "will make the tarantula scazzicare (leap about)" (ibid., 65), just like the appropriate canticle in the candomble or bak in the ndép will attract the corresponding orisha or rab. But although there are different varieties of tarantella, each differing from the other in tune, key, and rhythm, it seems that the dance—or rather the sequence of the dance’s various movements—always remains the same, no matter which tarantula is involved. One of these movements consists in imitating the spider. It is thus a figurative dance, as are so many other possession dances in Bali, in Vietnam, and in Africa. Depending on whether it involves a warrior (sword dance), a loving woman, a wild animal symbolizing power (tiger or panther) or fertility (snake), the dance will naturally differ in character, and with it the music that sustains it. And in this case one is also dealing with more or less directly figurative music.

The situation offered by tarantism, in which the same dance is performed to different tunes, corresponds among the Mundang to an inverted situation where, on the contrary, different dances are performed to the same music. The film and recordings made by Adler, Pineau, and Zempleni, already mentioned earlier, show that different possessed women all dance at the same time, one the panther dance, one the sun dance, one the rain dance, and still another the milling dance. In a small group, they all dance to the same music. This music varies only in its details and, as we have seen, nothing shows it is linked to one or the other choreographic figure. We are thus dealing here with music that, in contrast with the figurative music in tarantism, one might describe as abstract.

Another example of nonfigurative music is the adarum rhythm already mentioned several times. The saint's daughters, who ordinarily respond only to the summons of the rhythm specific to their own particular orisha, all go into trance when the adarum is played. In the ndop, while the rab's bak (the genius's tune) is what most distinguishes one genius from another (Zempleni 1966, 405), and while each class of rab has its own mimicry (its "identificatory behavior"), contrariwise certain dance movements, particularly those of the "labor of crisis," together with the drum music directing them, of course, are the same for all rab. This is true among the Songhay as well: "Although each Holey has one or several specific mottoes, one or two special musical themes, the dances that lead to his incarnation are not particular to him" (Rouch 1960, 146-47). These dances comprise several distinct phases, characterized by different figures and following one another at a steadily increasing pace until they finally lead to the crisis, but here again, as with the "labor of crisis" in the ndép, the drumbeats, and not the played or sung melodies, control the dancing. And since the same drum music works for all the holey or for all the rab and is thus impersonal in a way, it does not function as a musical motto,** which is also the case with the adarum rhythm.

The list of such examples could be extended considerably. It is consequently necessary, with respect to music accompanying possession dances, to distinguish between sung or played themes on the one hand, which are usually musical mottoes, and on the other drum mu It can be defined as a sign whose "signified" is the god to which it refers and whose "signifier" has three facets: linguistic, musical, and choreographic. The signifying power of this sign is peculiarly extensive, since it involves spirit and body, intelligence and sensibility, and the faculties of ideation and movement, all at the same time. This is evidently what makes it, for the adept, the most powerful means available for identifying himself with the divinity possessing him. In certain cases when the deity's unknown identity must still be established, it will also be the principal means of identifying him or her.

Tarantism provides a particularly striking example of this use of music or, more precisely, of the musical motto, as a means of identifying the divinity (here, the spider) responsible for the possession. In the late nineteenth century, one could still find "in Naples twelve different tarantella themes used to diagnose tarantulees in order to establish which one corresponded with which particular case, and consequently triggered the dance," writes E. De Martino (1966, 160), who elsewhere quotes a passage from G. Baglivi, the celebrated iatromechanist of the late seventeenth century, describing "musical exploration" (or diagnosis) as follows:

"The musicians who were summoned asked the patient the color and size of her tarantula so they could adapt their music accordingly; but the patient replied she did not know if she had been bitten by a tarantula or by a scorpion. They began trying out their themes: at the fourth, the tarantulee immediately began to sigh, and at last, no longer able to resist the call of the dance, she leapt half naked from her bed, without a thought for conventions, and for three days kept up a sprightly dance, after which she was cured."

We find the very same process at work in the case of the Sardinian argia, a variant of tarantism that departs considerably from the Apulian model. Like the tarantula in Italy or Spain, or the scorpion, in Sardinia a mythical creature, the argia, is responsible for the patient's poisoning. This creature "is categorized under three distinct species, the nubile, the wife, and the widow, and the treatment of the poisoned person differs according to the type of argia that bit him or her. In particular, the widow argia, symbolically associated with the color black, always requires dirges ...the musical exploration [is] intended to determine the type involved in the given case [and] it unfolds through the successive use of musico-choreographic themes and songs traditionally associated with each type" (ibid., 214-15).* The success of this musical "exploration" depended on the skill of the musicians, as did the efficacy of the cure, once the "right music" had been found, De Martino also tells us (ibid., 161). This "right music" is, in fact, to give another example, what Plato speaks of when he describes the Corybantes "falling into a trance when they hear the melody specific to the divinity by whom they are possessed" (Jeanmaire 1951, 134). And again, it is the "right song," played for the medium among the Tonga that proves irresistible: as soon as the deity hears it "he is unable to refuse to incorporate him" (Tracey 1970, 38). Among the Thonga,** as among the Wolof, it does not suffice for the possessed woman to declare the name of the divinity possessing her—a crucial episode in her initiation, as we saw earlier: she must also sing the deity's theme. In the ndop, after they have extracted the name of her rab from her, the officiants continue to press the sick woman: “They begin shaking her again in order to get the rab’s song-motto out of her. It was some time before the young woman began to sing in a staccato voice, the bak required of her, and which all those present then repeated in chorus” (Zempléni 1966, 370). Among the Thonga (or Tsonga), things unfold slightly differently. The patient sings his song, but he has to invent it himself: “Every possessed person invents a song which will be henceforth his, and by means of which crises, or trances will be provoked or cured” (Junod 1913, 445). If the spirit responsible for the trance is a Zulu one, as is most frequently the case among the Thonga, the words will be in Zulu, even if the man involved does not know this language (ibid.). This is an extreme case of personalization of the sung theme, which, among the Tonga, corresponds to the inverted case of “songs, which while identified with mhondoro spirits in general, are not tied to any one” (Tracey 1970, 38). This recalls what I said above about the adarum rhythm in the condombleé, at the sound of which all the orisha, without distinction, go into trance.

Who makes the music and in what state is he? Who makes this music played at various points in the ritual, which triggers adepts’ trances and which makes them dance when they are possessed? Who plays these instruments, who beats these drums, who sings these songs? Whatever the cult in question, in most cases it is important to make a distinction between two categories of individuals: those whose activity is expressly and exclusively to make music, in other words, those appointed to make it and whom I shall call the “musicians,” and those whose activity is to make music only episodically, or accessorily, or secondarily, and whom I shall call “musicants” (musiquants).

A short parenthesis about this last word will perhaps be useful. In using the French word musiquant, I was returning to the verb musiquer, which is hardly used nowadays, but which was used not so very long ago and figures in the well-known French Littré dictionary, with reference to excellent sources such as Rousseau and Diderot. Present usage in the French language does not make it possible to express in a single word the act of making music (faire de la musique). The same holds true for English. This situation is often, and particularly here, a constraint. Using in French the verb musiquer or in English the coined expression to musicate—which I would propose as its equivalent—opens up a number of possibilities, such as making a distinction between “make music” and “musicate,” which is not necessarily the same thing, or between “musician” and “musicant,” as I have just done, or again, as I will do later, between a “musicant” and a “musicated” person. Let us add that the series “to musicate, musicant, mu- sicated” could as well take the form of “to musicize, musicizer, musi- cized.” The reader will choose which one of the two seems preferable . . . or less horrible to him.

Every, or almost every possession cult has two aspects, that of its pri- vate rituals, reserved for the initiates or those being initiated, and that of its public rites, in which both adepts and followers of the cult take part and which more or less always take the form of a performance in which possession dances constitute the central element. For simplicity’s sake, we will only examine this second aspect. One part of the music for these performances—dance music, to be sure, but also the music of overtures, preludes, interludes, postludes, divertissements, and others—is furnished by people especially appointed for the task and whom we shall call—whether they are instrumentalists or singers or both—the musicians. They often are professionals, and in this case they are always paid for their services. The rest of the music—invocations to the divinities, sung mottoes, calls, playing of various accompanying or punctuating instruments, handclapping, and so on—is provided by the adepts (we shall later see which ones) and by the spectators, all of whom we shall call musicants when they fulfill this function.

The difference between musicians and musicants does not reside solely in that they participate in the general musical performance in different ways, even though this difference is essential and is sufficient in and of itself. They also differ in their relation to the cult and particularly to trance. It is this last point that is of interest to us. As far as the musicians are concerned, things are relatively simple: they do not, in principle, go into trance. Indeed, to do so would be incompatible with their function, which is to provide for hours on end and sometimes on several consecutive days, music whose execution must continuously adapt itself to the circumstances. It is therefore important that they should be constantly available and at the service of the ritual. This is probably the reason why these musicians frequently are not adepts themselves. Since they have never been possessed, there is no fear that they will enter into trance.

Pablo, then, these musicians, who seem to be the very pillars of possession séances and without whom possession dance would be inconceivable, are in a way external to the cult. In any case, they occupy a place apart. Like the officiants, and in collaboration with them, they control the adepts' possessions and play a part in inducing them, particularly in the case of neophytes, but, unlike the officiants, they have never lived through the experience themselves. In certain cults, however, it can happen that they are adepts themselves. In this case, they have to be very experienced in order to be able to resist possession in all circumstances. Incidentally, it does happen that they cannot resist it. But it is equally possible that they may have every outward appearance of being in a trance, when in fact they are not at all.

Speaking in general terms about Haitian tambouriers (drummers), Métraux writes: "Looking at them, with turned-up eyes and contorted faces, hearing the rattle escaping from their throats, one would think they were in a trance, but this apparent frenzy is not due to any god. It is in fact rare for them to be possessed by a loa" (1958, 159). The musicians can certainly reach states of very great overexcitation, but this should not lead us to confuse inspiration with trance. However, as an example of a borderline case in which the musician is not possessed but "inspired," let me quote what Jean Rouch tells us when writing about the Songhay: "It is the fiddler's (godye) left hand that is inspired' (guided) by the genii who are collectively summoned at the start of the ceremony by the 'hunters' theme' (gawey-gawey)" (1973, 532). In Vietnam, in hau béng ceremonies, the task of providing the music is assigned to a group of musicians, some instrumentalists, some singers, who in principle are professionals (Simon and Simon-Barouh 1973, 40). But the authors of the description tell us, in the ceremonies they have observed in France, the musicians were “amateurs,” either adepts of the cult or simply “disciples of the Genii.” These musicians do not go into trance. The instrumental music dominates the ceremony from beginning to end, with preludes, interludes, and postludes framing the tunes to which the genii dance. Contrariwise, the singing of the hymns breaks off during the periods when possession is at its climax. It is worth noting, in passing, that this seems to be a general rule: in cults in which the music for possession dance is both instrumental and vocal, the instrumental music always prevails and is always more continuous than the vocal.

With respect to tarantism, the instrumental music, which predominates to a great extent, is provided by a small group of professional musicians who specialize in this function. Quoting Kircher, E. De Martino writes about the “musician-therapists ... who, in seventeenth-century Tarento, were civil servants receiving set wages and who, in 1876 still, were regarded as persons of great social prestige” (1966, 212). Civil servants? This is perhaps an exaggeration on Kircher's part, but they were hired for a price and were the cause of great expense for the patient or the patient's family. Unless I am greatly mistaken, it has never been recorded that one of these musicians was, or could be, a tarantulee himself.

In Bali, when trances are caused by gods, the musicians of the village orchestra are the ones who provide the music. In the case of trances caused by spirits, the music is mostly, if not exclusively, vocal. The people of the village are the ones who provide it, and anyone who wants to is free to join in the singing that regulates the possessed dance or pantomime (J. Belo 1969, 40, 202).

In the nddp, the musicians are “griots,” in other words professionals who belong to a particular caste. They only play drums and do not take part in the chants intoned by the officiants and repeated in chorus by the ordinary adepts. The spectators participate by clapping their hands.

In the holey cult, among the Songhay, the principal instrumentalist, who plays the single-stringed fiddle, and the gourd-drummer(s) who accompany him, are likewise professional musicians. The fiddler—who is not a griot (Rouch 1960, 141, 144)—is often also a zima or a priest of the cult. He plays and sings at the same time. The situation is more or less comparable in the bori, except for the fact that the fiddler is not a priest of the cult.

In Dahomey, in both vodun and orisha cults—and in many other cults in black Africa as well—the musicians, who are drummers, are not professionals; at the most they are semiprofessionals. This is also true in the case of the candomblé. But whether in Africa or Brazil, whether professional or not, whether they play the fiddle, the xylophone, or the drum, whether they are purely instrumentalists or whether they combine playing with singing, none of these musicians goes into trance.

If we turn now to the musicants, in other words the adepts® (officiants or ordinary members) insofar as they are musical actors, and their relation to trance when they are in this role, their case is much more complex than that of the musicians. In a general way, we find that the role of the adept as musicant varies according to his seniority in the cult and his place in the hierarchy. The more neophyte he is the less he takes part in the music; the more he grows in seniority and importance the more he takes part in it, or at least the more he is likely and able to take part in it, for the situation changes from one cult to another. It would seem that more often than not, whether he is a neophyte or not, the ordinary adept does not take part, or takes very little part, in the music when he is possessed. For him, the only expression of his possession state is dance and mimicry. The officiant, on the contrary, a veteran adept who is used to possession, can sing and can play the ritual musical instrument he or she is carrying (if he is carrying one) while possessed. All of them, however, neophyte, ordinary adept, and officiant alike, enter into trances at the sound of music (instrumental, vocal, or both) made by the others, and not by themselves. This at least seems to be the rule, whatever the cult involved.

In the ndop, as in the candomble, the officiants sing the themes of the deities while ringing bells, and their vocal and instrumental contributions play an important role in triggering trance in the adepts in their charge. But, and let me stress this, while fulfilling their functions as officiants and musicants, which go together, they are not themselves in trance. The ordinary adepts, for their part, also sing the divinities’ tunes, but without playing any instrument. In the candomblé (Giséle Cossard, personal communication) an adept is only permitted to “start a canticle” after seven years of seniority. Before that, she is only allowed to sing the refrain in chorus with her companions. During the entire period of their apprenticeship, which lasts seven years and ends with a special feast, new adepts thus participate in the music only passively, which is a very good illustration of what I just stated on the relation of neophytes to music in general.

Although in most cases, officiants only “musicate” during ceremonies when they are not in a state of possession, it can nevertheless happen that they are in fact possessed at the time. The orisha cult in Dahomey provides us with two examples of this exception, the first involving instrumental music, the second vocal. Among the Nago-Yoruba of the Sakété region, in the course of the weekly ceremony for Ogun, god of iron,* the god’s priest goes into trance together with other priests who are embodying kindred deities. The music is provided by a number of musicians divided into two groups, drummers and bell-ringers on one side, a chorus of women on the other. The officiants, four or five in number depending on the circumstances, all hold a pair of large iron bells with internal clappers. During the entire time they are waiting for their trance to begin, that is, while the musicians (instrumentalists and singers) summon the gods to incorporate themselves, the officiants remain seated and silent. At the moment they enter into trance, they utter a great cry and leap into the air, after which they embark all together upon a long ritual deambulation taking the form of a quadrille that is half walked and half danced and during which they con-tinually bang their bells together in time with their steps, so that the resulting din mingles with the rest of the music. Here, then, we are dealing with officiants in a state of possession who are “musicating,” but it should be noted they are not “musicating” in order to induce either other adepts or themselves into the trance state. The same observation also applies to a priest of Shango, god of lightning, who sings while he is possessed during a ceremony at which the first yams are offered to this deity. 

* It is only once he is actually in trance, which was induced by sung and drummed calls played by others on his behalf, that he begins to sing, limiting himself to intoning the first words of a song known to all and that everyone takes over in chorus. Among the Ga of Ghana (Kilson, 1971) the adepts of the traditional religion (kpele), which is a possession cult, frequently sing kpele lala (kpele songs) during ceremonies when they are in a state of possession. But, we should note, they may also sing them during the same ceremonies without being in a trance (ibid., 26-27), and these same songs can, moreover, be sung outside of any ceremonies by the laymen. When an adept wishes to dance during the kpele dances, which are in fact public possession séances, she stations herself in front of the drummers and sings a kpele song; this serves as a sort of prelude to her dance and also gives the musicians the required rhythm. Whether the adept is entranced or not does not affect the way in which this is done. The author tells us no more on the subject; what she does say suffices to make it plain, and again this is what we need to remember, that the action of singing is unrelated at this point to the triggering of possession.*? What has just been said concerning the Ga of Ghana could as well fit the Gun of Porto-Novo (Benin), among whom I have often seen a possessed vodunsi (adept of the vodun) come and plant herself in front of the drummers in order to sing the first words of a given air, thus showing the musicians the tune she wanted for her dance. But here again the singing had nothing to do with inducing trance. Whereas the majority of these tunes can be sung by the vodunsi whether or not in trance, some of them can only be sung when the adept is possessed and when the dance takes place inside the convent. The study of this last repertoire, which is, of course, much less accessible than the first one, remains to be done. On the other side of Africa, in Ethiopia, the evidence provided by Leiris, already mentioned earlier, concerning “songs with prophetic intentions . . . proffered by professional possessed persons,” or “songs with a moralizing tendency” sung by Malkam Ayyahu while she is possessed (1958, 43, 66), again does not invalidate the rule that the possessed person is not the one who sings in order to prepare his or her entry into trance. These songs, which are not possession songs, are not sung by the possessee during the phase preceding his trance, but only after he has already entered it: “Malkam Ayyahu covered her head with a handkerchief and, having become Abba Yoséf, sang several moralizing songs and quoted some proverbs,” writes Leiris. Describing entry into trance and the preparatory phase preceding it, he notes elsewhere (ibid., 83) that when the patient has had his soul already “partially ‘veiled’ by listening to the wadaga song,” he remains silent, sometimes for a long while, “without 108 CHAPTER TWO singing or clapping his hands with the rest of the assemby” before gradually slipping into a state of possession. Using his informant’s own terms, Leiris adds in a note, to make things even clearer: “Before making them do the gurri [the convulsive dance of those who are possessed], their z@r gives them ants and makes them stay quiet during both the singing and the clapping.” One could hardly express more clearly the fact that in the z@r the possessed person is neither the musician nor the musicant of his own trance. In Tunisia, Sophie Ferchiou (1972) describes an extraordinary situation: women entering possession trances upon hearing chants that are not intended for their ears and performed by men trying to induce a different type of trance in themselves. Summary: Men of a Sufi brotherhood gather for a practice called dhikr, while women, in a separate room, devote themselves to their own possession practices. They dance and gesticulate in response to the rhythm and volume of the men's chanting. Once the dhikr session ends, the possessed women swoon to the floor, and attempts are made to revive them with soothing phrases. The relation between the trance of these possessees and music conforms to the usual scheme, with the unusual aspect being that the music is not made by or for them.

Another example is provided by Sophie Ferchiou, showcasing the height of paradox in a different sanctuary with another brotherhood, the Tidjaniya. Here, music is provided by four women singers seated around a drum. These women, descendents of the saint, are immune to possession due to their ancestry. This confirms the rule observable in the majority of possession cults.

Finally, the case of adepts who are still neophytes is examined among the Thonga of Mozambique and the Wolof of Senegal, where the first ritualized crisis is intended to make the sick person utter the name of the spirit possessing them. After having uttered the spirit's name, the possessee must then sing his tune. Among the Wolof, this tune is a bak, that is to say a motto-song already known to everyone and long associated with that particular divinity. Among the Thonga, on the contrary, the possessee must make up the song.°' Be that as it may, we should note that in both cases, even though the neophyte in a state of possession does sing during the course of his or her first ritualized crisis, the singing does not serve to trigger this crisis but, on the contrary, to induce and express its resolution. The same observation applies among the Lovedu of southern Africa, neighbors of the Thonga, where the first ritualized trance also shares many features in common with that of the Wolof. The main purpose of the séance is to make the patient dance to the point of exhaustion in order to force the spirit to manifest itself. Quoting Krige (1943), Luc de Heusch writes the following: "The first exit of the pathogenic spirit is painful. The patient sways when it approaches, his movements become more and more frenzied, he drags his feet with great effort and finally collapses in a trance. He then chants the song for the arrival of the spirit who is saluted by the attendance" (1971, 265-66). Among the Kongo, quite some time after the first ritualized trance, at the end of the initiation period, during the coming-out feast which takes place at the end of three months, the neophyte is invited by the master of ceremonies to sing in order to appease the spirit responsible for her possession (de Heusch 1971, 263, quoting Van Wing 1938). Here again, in both cases, we see that the point is to resolve the crisis, not to induce it.

110 CHAPTER TWO

So far we have seen adepts acting as musicants and not as musicians, in the sense that singing or playing an instrument is only but one aspect of their activity, and not its principal goal. Among the Mussey of Chad (Igor de Garine, see filmography), on the other hand, the adepts do seem, on certain occasions at least, to act as musicians properly speaking in that making music appears to be their essential activity. When taking part in certain rituals, the college of possessees (men and women) constitutes a veritable band of instrumentalists in which everyone plays the gourd-horn, an instrument characteristic of possession. All of them are entranced while they play, and they do nothing else. To my knowledge this is the only case of its kind. The reason for this exception must certainly be sought in the particular logic of the Mussey possession system, and in the position this system occupies within their religious organization as a whole. But whatever the reason for it, by behaving as musicians and not as musicants the Mussey must be regarded as an exception.

What is it that should be remembered from the examination we have just made of possession music in its relations with the people who make it and with the state in which they are at the time? First, that a large part of the music is provided by people—the musicians—who do not go into trance, who often are not themselves adepts, and who consequently are marginal with respect to possession. Second, that possessees never figure as either the musicians or the musicants for their own entry into trance. For the possessee, it is the music made by others that triggers, or helps to trigger, his trance, never the music he makes himself. This fact is significant: in shamanism, as we shall see later, the reverse is the rule. Third, the adept's activity as a musicant increases only in proportion to the degree to which he becomes more capable of controlling his own trance state. It is as though the adept becomes capable of "musicating" only insofar as he has become less vulnerable to the music. The adept thus passes from a stage of zero musical activity to one in which his musical activity is relatively large. This coincides with his passage from the status of neophyte to that of officiant; in other words, from a state of total submission to the deity to one of relative independence. Last, the officiant "musicates" in order to trigger the trance of those adepts for whom he is responsible only when he is not in trance himself. When he is in trance, his activity as a musicant no longer serves his efficacy as an officiant, at least insofar as he is in charge of others. We thus find there is a kind of incompatibility, total or partial depending on the case, between the state of possession and the act of making music, or, if one prefers, between the state of possession and music as active behavior, or, again, between being possessed and "musicating."

When the relation of the adept to music is examined at two particularly significant moments—that is, when the adept is still a neophyte and when, either as a neophyte or as an officiant, he goes into trance—it turns out to be one of total passivity. At the outset, it will be remembered, we found that the adept's general relation to possession is, in a similar way, also fundamentally passive; it now turns out that possession is a form of behavior involving a double submission: to the will of the gods, on the one hand, and to the effects of music on the other. The inherent logic of the system basically requires that the possessed person be neither a musician nor a musicant, but a "musicated" person.

"Uttering Cries" As a general rule, then, the possessee is not a musicant. This does not mean, however, that he or she is necessarily silent. "Crier comme un possédé" (shouting like a possessee), for instance, is a current French expression. Uttering a cry often is a part of trance behavior. In tarantism, for example, the "crisis cry" has been described as being sometimes "more like a yelp than a human cry" (De Martino 1966, 121), sometimes, on the contrary, as approaching a sort of music. According to D. Carpitella, to whom we owe the ethnomusicological observations appearing as an appendix in De Martino's work, "the characteristic cry of the tarantulees [is] based on two syllables 'A-hi' in accordance with a time-ratio that may be codified as: A = hi! A — hi! A + hi! This time-ratio develops within a tes-siture going from approximately the interval of a diminished second to a ninth" (ibid., 365). Others have referred to this cry as a "baying" sound. In tarantism, then one has several ways of uttering cries when one is entranced. The same can be said of the vodun and orisha cults in Benin. Frequently the priest of Ogun emits, at more or less regular intervals, little yelping sounds. Adepts who are possessed by Sakpata, on the other hand, will at certain moments utter modulated cries of extraordinary violence that very closely resemble those just described for tarantism. This cry sometimes, but not invariably, accompanies mimicry quite clearly meant to represent the efforts of parturition. In Niger, as Rouch's films show, it often happens that those possessed by holey, and even more so those embodying hauka, do literally bark when they are in the most violent phase of their trance. Other, similar examples could be cited. Moreover, we all know the great importance that bioenergy adepts attach to the cry in their quest for liberation through trance. There is no doubt, therefore, that uttering cries is a very significant manifestation of trance, and that it needs to be decoded on several levels. For the moment, let us simply state that in and of itself, the trance cry merits a book-length study. 112

CHAPTER TWO MUSICIANS AND THE POSSESSED

What is the relation of the possessee, not to the music this time, but to the musicians? It is essentially characterized by the submission of the former to the latter, and this follows logically from what we have just seen. In Haiti, Métraux tells us that “the tambourier [drummer] may not be a professional musician, often is not even an initiate, but he nevertheless is the mainspring of the entire voodoo ceremony . . . a talented drummer can induce possessions or halt them just as he wishes.” (1958, 159). This shows how great his power over the adepts may be! During ndop séances, where, as we have seen, the crisis and subsequent collapse are crucial, the honor of “bringing down” mainly falls on the first drummer (Zempléni 1966, 416).

When the possessee has already been dancing for a while, and the crisis is drawing near, “her whole body begins to quiver. At this sign the first griot moves nearer and quickens the tempo.” The “labor of crisis” then ensues: “the possessed woman is at the mercy of the drummers, who accompany her movements and force them to become ever more rapid and violent” (ibid., 415). In fact, a close interpersonal relationship develops at this point between drummer and possessee. The drummer takes charge of her, so to speak. Keeping very close to her, never leaving her side, concentrating on her slightest movements, incessantly observing her behavior in order to: speed up the tempo, or, on the contrary, relax it; select the necessary types of beat; and adjust the intensity of the stroke. Communicating the rhythm of the dance to her, he holds the possessed woman in his sway and leads her into the ever more violent whirlwind of his music.

But if he is able to lead her in this way, and finally guide her where he wishes, it is because he has been able to establish a close understanding with her. It is because he can follow her that he is able to dominate her and impose his will upon her. He is the master of the game, but within a dialogue. He speaks music and she replies dance.

Among the Songhay, the principal instrumentalist, the fiddler, is also sometimes a zima, a priest of the holy cult. Jean Rouch (1960, 148) similarly emphasizes the personal relation established between the possessed person and the musician-priest during the preparation for and triggering of trance: “At an imperceptible sign, the priests and musicians sense that one of the summoned genii is beginning to manifest itself . . . the orchestra now plays only one tune . . . the dancers as a group continue to move as before, but one of them has now become the sole object of the solicitude demonstrated by the priests, who surround him and recite mottoes of ever-increasing efficacy. . .” Here again we find that in order to induce trance in a particular person, the priests and musicians establish a special relationship with him, “surround” him, make him the object of their “solicitude,” address themselves to him in an exclusive way, and become at the same time very attentive to what he himself is feeling. Music and Possession

In his description of a memorable tarantism séance, E. De Martino (1966, 69) demonstrates the close bonds between possessee and musicians. The latter, in a passionate musical offering, brought their instruments to the possessee's ear. During the phase on the ground, the tarantulee crawled to the feet of the violinist and lingered there, enveloping her with his music, as though hypnotized. The violinist knelt beside her, using his bow on her body as if it were a violin.

In Bali, Jane Belo describes how singers move close to the individual concerned to make them enter trance. Instrumentalists or singers, professionals or not, attempt to trigger the trance state. The musicians enter into personal contact with the possessees. Communication is established at the level of the code involved (words of the songs, dance movements) and at the personal level, the emotional level of direct person-to-person relationships.

However, there are distinctions depending on the type of cult involved. In ceremonies like the first coming-out of new initiates in a vodun cult, or the vodun's annual feast, or the "Customs" in Abomey, the musicians and vodunsi form separate groups, each remaining compact, and no one separates from the group. The possessions in these cases are "impersonal," and the relations between musicians and possessees operate at the group level, corresponding to the logic of the system.

The power musicians have over the possessees is not entirely due to their talents; it also stems from the instruments they play. In the orisha cult, "the drums are very much respected, for they are not just musical instruments. They are seen as being the voice of the gods themselves; through them one summons the gods and, at the same time, replies to them" (Verger 1969, 59). They are consecrated, like the adza bell of the candomblé and the fiddle of the holey cult. The use of the particular fiddle becomes restricted because even a single note played upon it is a summons that cannot go unnoticed in the invisible world (Rouch, 1960, 144). The instrument is equipped with a rattling device whose discreet clicking "guides the music" to the genii's delicate ears.

In the bori, the single-stringed fiddle, which is "capable of forcing the gods to embody themselves" (Jacqueline Monfouga-Nicolas, 1972, 139), is "the most sacred of all" the instruments (ibid., 159). According to information given to Michel Leiris in 1931 (personal communication), but which needs to be verified, among the Bambara, the water spirit (dyiro dyina) responsible for possession is supposed to come and position himself on an iron rod placed in the water drum" (the instrument used for possession) after the drummer has begun to play. The musical instrument is often seen as the voice or the temporary seat of divinity. Evidence of this sort is so plentiful and well known that it is unnecessary to cite any more. The symbolic efficacy of musical instruments does not interest us solely as an element of the very complex system of signs constituted by a possession cult. This symbolic efficacy reinforces the effective power of communication these instruments establish between gods and men, musicians and dancers. It also helps strengthen the power of the musicians who play them, increasing their ascendancy over the possessees for whom they play.

Music and Dance

Dance is doubly more important than music because it is the possessee's own business, and much of the music is played for the purposes of dance. A theory of the relations between dance and possession is even more necessary than the one for which I am attempting to gather together the basic elements in this book. However, for various reasons, I will not attempt to propose such a theory here.

At the same time, I cannot altogether avoid mentioning dance. But I shall do so only insofar as it is indispensible to situating it in the perspective adopted here. In a number of cults, it is possible to distinguish between two types of dance: abstract dances and figurative dances (or simply mimes). Abstract dances trigger trance, while figurative dances manifest the possession state.

Among the Songhay, the dance proper, which is made up of three "principal movements" (Rouch 1960, 147-48), does not represent anything and remains the same regardless of which genius is expected to become embodied. This dance helps to summon him: "the music, the words of the mottoes, the dance steps, trigger the strange mechanism"; and, when a certain stage is reached, the dance indicates that the genius is on the verge of becoming present. After having been grounded by the fit marking the deity's descent, then "calmed Music and Possession 115 399 by the attentions of the 'quiet women,"" the possessee adopts the behavior befitting the god he is embodying, and which consists in stereotyped mim- icry.

In the ndép, besides the dance and the "labor of crisis" resulting in collapse and which are the same for all genii, there is also a mimicry reper- toire—or "identificatory behavior patterns" (Zempléni 1966, 402ff.)— having the same function as that among the Songhay. In theory, adepts of long standing perform only the mimed dances, since convulsive dance, crisis, and collapse are restricted to neophytes. In hau bong ceremonies, the dancing also includes two phases (Simon and Simon-Barouh 1973, 44): "The first is the descent of the Genii. . . . It is reproduced identically in all cases; only the sign of the raised finger is changed." While the drum "beats out the rhythm of possession," the wom- en singers "summon the Genii" (ibid., 42). The dance consists of the adept's head "turning, slowly at first, then more quickly, drawing the whole torso into its rotation. By means of a coded sign made with the hand—the number of fingers raised indicating the order number . . . the Genius . . . discloses his identity." When the embodiments have been completed, the various genii execute figurative dances: the sword dance, flame dance, oar dance, unicorn and lion dance, and the "wands with pel-let-bells" dance (ibid., 45). In the middle of this last dance, that of the Princes and Little Princes, "the Tenth Prince inserts an episode in which he mimes a bowed musical instrument while the notes of the scale are sung as an accompaniment." Although in the hau bong, contrary to what we have seen in the nddp or among the Songhay, the dances contain no elements of violence (the only dance which does is that of a much-feared genius whose descent is "heralded by violent somersaults" [ibid., 57]); there are clearly great similarities between these Vietnamese ceremonies and the African ones just described. The same could be said for tarantism, with its "regular choreographic cycle" (Carpitella 1966, 359): the sword dance, spider dance, convulsive figures (that of the arched back in particular), and the step "more properly agonistic" consisting in rhythmic stamping. These are just a few examples, but they will situate the problem within the perspec-tive of this book. It would no doubt be difficult—and possibly futile—to draw precise boundaries between abstract dance, figurative dance, and mimicry. A par-ticular dance may seem to be nonfigurative only because we do not know (or it is no longer known) what it represents or symbolizes. These three categories do nevertheless exist, and they furnish the elements of a system of combinations that varies from cult to cult, and which undoubtedly tells us a great deal about the underlying logic of these cults. For the adept, dance is the best possible means of exhibiting, if one may so put it, his state of possession, since his movements, steps, mimicry, and costume are in reality those of the god inhabiting him. But in certain cults 116 CHAPTER TWO dance is also a means of compelling the gods to become embodied. "If the music and the dance are pleasing to the spirits, to the point of ensnaring their will, this is because they are themselves dancers who become carried away by the supernatural power of the rhythm," Metraux writes (1958, 168). "They danced, these powerful genii," Rouch tells us, "because the music forced them to do so" (1960, 145). "A deity's supreme requirement is that one among the faithful become his 'horse' by means of trance, so that he can come down among mankind and dance," Giséle Cossard writes (1970, 95). Music incites the gods to dance, but in order for them to dance, they must have a visible support, and this forces them to become embodied. Whether we are dealing with voodoo, the holey cult, or can-domblé, the symbolic system is the same. Of course, this does not mean it is the only one. Whereas Rouch and Zempléni see dance as one of the principal means (if not the principal means) of inducing crisis and fall (which we must re-member do not have the same function among the Songhay as among the Wolof), Leiris, on the contrary (1958, 18), says that the gurri (the dance of the zar cult) which is also characterized by violent movements, is the "sym-bol of trance" rather than the "means of provoking it."'* While referring to it as "a classic procedure for inducing trance," Leiris observes that the gurri has the particularity of marking "both the departure and the arrival of the spirit," so that it is thereby associated with both the beginning and the end of trance. We must therefore rule out the idea that its role is to trigger trance in a mechanical way, as it were. Further on, Leiris notes that “certain great zar ... do not make those they possess dance the gurri” (ibid., 92), which is proof that entry into trance can perfectly well take place without dance. As with music, the problem is to find out whether or not dancing plays a role in inducing trance. If we say it does, then we also have to ask: Is this role real or symbolic? And in either case we still have to ask whether this role should be attributed to the ethnographer's discourse or to that of the adepts themselves.

The relations between the two aspects of dance—figurative and non-figurative—and the two forms of music—instrumental and vocal—emerge so clearly in a note on the dyide (water spirits) cult among the Malinke of Mali provided by Chéron (1931) that a long passage of his text merits quotation in its entirety. This passage also reveals that, as in the ndop, the female officiants (the “high-ranking members”) want to avoid the fall, which is to say, ultimately, the full trance state, since this is the business of the “ordinary members,” who are, broadly speaking, new adepts: a significant rule since it reflects an entire section of the cult's internal logic.

The dances are always accompanied by one or two dyidunu (water drums) played by a woman, the dyidunufola (she who makes the water drum speak); this music is supported by songs, whose tune and words are given (donkili la) by a woman musician, then repeated in chorus by the audience. Each dancer executes steps and gestures, which mainly consist of rapid movements of the legs, arms, and head. The ordinary members dance more often than the others; they enter the circle when the woman singer intones the tune specific to their particular genius, which immediately sends them into convulsions. They then perform their jizn's dance, a special dance that simply mimics the jinn's habitual actions; both song and dance are taught to the adept by the chief, the only person, given his infallible power of identification, who knows the genius of the ordinary members.

As for the high-ranking members, they dance as little as possible, as a precaution, for should they happen to fall to the ground during their revels, this would be a sign of the imminent death of an adept. They cannot, however, abstain from dancing altogether for fear that their genii, thinking they are rebellious, would oblige them to do so. When it is their turn to dance, they require the assistance of ordinary members whose duty it is to watch over them and hold them up should they fall.

If, in possession, dance oscillates between two poles, the figurative and non-figurative, the one being dance as identificatory behavior, the other dance as trance behavior, this is because it provides the adept with the means of assuming his new personality and living intensely at the motor level. Depending on the type of cult, one or the other of these aspects will predominate, but both usually seem to be present; either simultaneously, if the trance takes on both aspects at once (as in the case of the spider dance in tarantism), or else alternately. In possession, then, dance is a representation of the gods, in other words sacred theater, but also theater that one enacts not only for oneself, as Leiris has shown, but also for others. But dance also is physical exercise, as it is by definition, in any circumstance. Viewed from either of these aspects, it is esthetic activity and play. But in all of its aspects, it is, above all, communication—with oneself and with others. For the possessed person, it is a system of signs both in relation to himself, in that it "signifies" his borrowed personality for him, and in relation to the group, in that it expresses this personality and marks out his role (in the ordinary and the theatrical sense of this term) in the "representation" of the world constituted by the possession ceremony.

During the course of the dynamic process presented by possession in its succession of changing states, dance also "signifies" the stage that the possessee has reached in his metamorphoses. Moreover, whereas it is by no means certain that possession music has purely physiological effects on the possessee (or the person about to be possessed), dancing—be it in conjunction with possession or not—undoubtedly brings about modifications in the dancer's state, both at the physiological and psychological level. These physical effects are the ones sought after, and this explains why dancing can be seen as a form of ascetic exercise and why it is often used as a trance technique.

But no matter how important its nature as a sign may be, or its symbolic function, esthetic power, or ascetic possibilities, dance is still a motor activity that finds an end in itself. Dance is always, at least in part and sometimes despite appearances, the pleasure of dancing, of using one's body in play. If it is nonfigurative, dance is pure physical expenditure. In this sense, it is already liberation, catharsis. If it is figurative, particularly when erotic or warlike, dance is manifestly a means of release; when it imitates animals, it is also a means of release, albeit through a symbolic route. Here again, it is cathartic, this time in the classical sense of the term.

At once "mimesis and catharsis" (to borrow one of the subtitles of Jeanmaire's book), dance can ultimately be seen as the true realization of the state of enthusiasm. The identification experienced by the individual with the god he embodies takes place through dance and because of it. It is also through dance that this identification is made manifest in the eyes of others. This second function is as important as the first, since apparently the very existence of possession cults requires that possession be public behavior.

I spoke earlier, with reference to music, of the importance of the "right" tune, which makes it possible both to identify the divinity and to make him or her dance. If this tune is said to be "right," is it not so because the dance with which it is associated reveals, over and above the apparent behavior of the divinity, the deeper nature (or the hidden aspirations) of the possessed person? Or at least one aspect of his or her nature. It seems, according to Giséle Cossard, who made reference to her personal experience of the candomblé (personal communication), that multiple possessions would provide a means of adding light and shade to the inner portrait of an individual by organizing, around the principal divinity he is embodying, a constellation of secondary divinities (also identified by divination, of course) who might unveil other traits of his character.

But the relations of individual to divinity can be of another kind, notably that of filiation, as is generally the case with impersonal possessions. It can happen that possession trance is achieved without music, and consequently without dance, since the latter does not occur without the former. In an earlier chapter, we noted one example of this phenomenon during candomblé initiation. However, it occurs more frequently in inspiration or mediumistic trance than in possession in the strict sense of the word. This is confirmed by the situation found in southern India, where the possessee's main function is to deliver oracles. The possessed man, L. Dumont tells us, "is described as he who 'dances the god' . . ." (1957, 350). But he adds that although "dance is a means of inducing or revealing possession, it is not indispensable to this process. Certain kodangis [possessees] are thought to be able to provoke possession all by themselves. This is why they were sometimes consulted without either music or dance, either during preliminary meetings, or on a day after a cult ceremony for familial oracles."

Before ending this brief summary of the relations between dance and trance, shamanism must be mentioned. A musician, the shaman is as much a dancer, and the role of dance in shamanistic trance deserves in-depth treatment. Suffice it to say that shamanic dance is as much of a show as is possession dance, although in quite a different manner. The only example I shall give will not come from Siberia but from Africa, and will concern a case whose shamanic character remains to be proved. I refer to the Zande witch doctor who, when entranced, acts both as a diviner and a healer (see p. 24).

We owe to Evans-Pritchard (1937, 149-82) the most extraordinary description of a "seance" in which dance appears as a means of divination. Indeed, for a Zande witch doctor, divining is a highly corporeal technique (as Mauss would have said) achieved through dancing. "A witch doctor does not only divine with his lips, but with his whole body. He dances the questions which are put to him," Evans-Pritchard writes (ibid., 176). To sum up, he describes the witch doctor's dance ("violent, ecstatic . . . the most spirited performance of the art that I have ever witnessed") as the principal way of stirring and enhancing divinatory intuition within himself. This is an unexpected aspect of dance, although it deserved to be cited.

I hope the reader will forgive me for now entering the realm of commonplaces and basic truths. At this particular stage in my argument, I feel it necessary to recall a few of them. They will bear first upon the manner in which music is experienced, then upon the manner in which the presence of the gods and the weight of illness are experienced, since in matters of possession, the latter two frequently go together.

How is music experienced? We respond to it in several ways; to simplify matters, let us say physiologically, psychologically, affectively, and esthetically. Physiologically speaking (at the sensorial level), although music is mainly perceived by the ear, this is not the only path it can take. Musical vibrations are wave movements whose amplitude is relatively large when compared to the scale of the human body. The movement of the objects that give rise to these vibrations—or the movement that they excite in objects, since the transfer of energy can take place in either direction—is always palpable and often even visible. It is thus directly perceptible as material and concrete. A musical vibration can be something palpable. If one touches the soundboard of a violin while it is being played, one can feel the sounds quivering against one's finger tip. If one nears one of the extremely large drums the Yoruba beat at their secret oro ceremonies, one will hear the sounds through one's abdomen—which vibrates in sympathy—as much as through one's ears. Similarly, if in the same ceremonies, one comes close to one of the small drums (whose tightly stretched skin is whipped rather than beaten, prestissimo, with extremely slender sticks), one's entire head vibrates. In an organ loft, when the organ plays loudly, one absorbs the music with one's whole body. The whole world trembles, the very air resounds. "To bathe in music" is not just a metaphor. It happens that we truly perceive it through the skin.

The candle flames flickering in churches at the sound of the organ provided Louis Roger (1748) with one of the observations on which he began constructing his theory of the effects of music on the human body. The curious use that Tibetans make of the vibrations of a drum skin is also based on the same type of observation. To blow into a clarinet is to feel the reed quiver between one's lips. To ring a bell held in one's hand is to be in direct contact with the vibrations of the metal one is striking. To shake a rattle is to feel the skin of the gourd vibrate as it is struck by the seeds inside. To play a Jew's harp is to feel the metal tongue moving in one's open mouth.

But this external sensitivity is not the only thing involved. One's internal sensitivity is also aroused by music and likewise functions as a path of reception. It is well known that when we speak, and even more when we sing, we hear ourselves from inside. But in fact we are doing more than hearing ourselves sing. We are feeling ourselves sing. We are feeling our larynx (let us say, more simply, our neck or throat) vibrate, quiver. And this is true of many other areas of the body too: the entire head, the thorax and abdomen, the pelvic region. Music is thus simultaneously an animation of things and a palpitation of the being. Both are felt more intensely when one is making music than when one is simply listening to it. We should be able to say "to act" music, as opposed to "undergoing" it, for these are indeed two very different ways of experiencing it.

Be that as it may, what we need to remember is that music has a physical impact upon the listener and that it produces a sensorial modification in his awareness of being. This physical impact, of course, is what pop music is consciously striving for. Through the din of vast amplifiers, such music obtains effects of violence and acoustic turbulences never before achieved. Having told us that the amplification of pop music can "reach 10,000 watts" (!), and that it "was possible to hear the pop festival on the Isle of Wight from three kilometers away," Alain Roux observes that "this amount of power acts directly upon the body and creates a feeling of participation that many people never attain even during the sexual act. There is no resisting it except by flight. Amplified to this extent, the human voice affects the larynx. ... The sounds of the electric bass (infra-sounds) produce vibrations localized in internal erogenous zones of the abdomen... . The repetitive melodies and perpetual thrumming instantly produce a light hypnosis" (1973, 130). Clearly, this is the kind of effect that certain forms of possession music are aiming for; that of the ndép, for example. Music is in essence movement. Its origins lie in bodily movements—to sing is to move one’s larynx, to drum is to move one’s arms, to play the fiddle is to move one’s fingers along the stem and a bow across a string—and in return, music is an incitement to movement. Since by definition, sound is actualized in the unfolding of time, its relations with itself are constantly changing (even if it remains the same, for continuing is inevitably also changing, since it implies change of duration) and these changes are integrated, at several levels, into the "thickness" of time. Even in its most immaterial aspect—sound totally isolated from its source—music is perceived as movement being realized in space. This is even more true when it is made simultaneously with dance, or to make people dance. To dance is to inscribe music in space, and this inscription is realized by means of a constant modification of the relations between the various parts of the body. The dancer's awareness of his body is totally transformed by this process. Insofar as it is a spur to dancing, therefore, music does appear capable of profoundly modifying the relation of the self with itself, or, in other words, the structure of consciousness.

Psychologically, music also modifies the experience of being, in space and time simultaneously. Like the sound of speech, the sound of music defines the space in which I am situated as a space inhabited by men, and at the same time it situates me within this space in some particular manner. Silence is the sign of an empty or motionless space—death or sleep. Sound is the sign of a space that is filled and in movement. The sounds of nature bring me information on the movements of nature, the sounds produced by men bring me information about the presence of men, and the types of sound I hear tell me something about their activities: they are cutting down a tree in a wood, they are machine-gunning one another, they are dancing, she is rocking a baby to sleep. People are there, they are doing something. The sounds I hear mark out the space around me and enable me to integrate myself into it.

In the dimension of time, music modifies our consciousness of being to an even greater extent. It is an architecture in time. It gives time a density different from its everyday density. It lends it a materiality it does not ordinarily have and that is of another order. It indicates that something is happening in the here and now; that time is being occupied by an action being performed, or that a certain state rules over the beings present. The drum roll that resounds throughout the circus ring as the trapeze artist makes his death-defying leap is one example. Another is borrowed from my recollection of a ritual for the enthronement of a new holder of the power of Ogun Edeyi (god of iron) that took place in a particular village of the Nago-Yoruba territory. Around the sanctuary, a crowd of several hundred people had gradually collected since nightfall. Noise and bustle. People coming and going in a darkness broken here and there by the light of kerosene lamps. Very gradually, the lamps go out unnoticed, one after the other. Total darkness. The night dozes. At about midnight, a cry rings out, a ball of fire hurtles from the sanctuary scattering bright sparks, and suddenly the drums sound. Their thunder takes possession of the world. The universe has changed. Something is happening. The drums will go on beating for eight or ten hours. "Dawn will drive out the night, day will drive out the dawn, the sun will drive out the coolness of morning, but never for an instant will the drums cease to beat. The little drum, mentioned a moment ago, is also beaten for oro. It is placed on the ground and played by two drummers facing each other, while two more are aligned on the other diagonal, ready to take over. This little drum does not 'speak' nor play the metronomic role so often assigned to small drums. It is played more or less quickly and more or less loudly, sometimes frenziedly, sometimes almost in a doze. Its role is to maintain a certain vibration in the air and ensure the continuity of the action, establishing a different order of duration or, if one prefers, to bring about a crystallization of time.

Music does not organize time only at the elementary level but also at a higher one, giving birth to a real architecture of time. Possession music does not operate solely by means of repetition and accumulation. The musical mottoes are melodic or rhythmic statements, and consequently temporal forms. They are capable of being varied and ornamented. In the course of a ceremony, they follow one another and form sequences that should be seen as the multiple ways of renewing and developing musical time, which preserves its unity all the while, as the pieces following one another belong to the same genre. By transforming our awareness of time and space in different ways, music modifies our 'being-in-the-world.'

The state of affective resonance that music—or at any rate certain kinds of music—creates in any individual is another aspect of the upheaval it creates in the structure of consciousness. Nothing is more laden with emotional associations than music, nothing is more capable of recreating situations that engage one's entire sensibility. It induces the individual into a state in which both his inward feelings and his relations with the outer world are dominated by affectivity. Finally, as art, when it is a success, music creates the feeling of total adhesion of the self to what is happening. In this sense, it again brings about a transformation in the structure of consciousness, by effectuating a particular and exceptional type of relation of the self to the world.

These very brief remarks were intended solely as a reminder that music modifies—profoundly, and in several dimensions—the consciousness we have of ourselves in relation not only to ourselves but also to the world. These modifications bear essentially upon the perceptible dimensions of those relations. We shall now see that relations with the gods also fall within this selfsame category of data. It is clear that possession cannot be understood unless it is set in the system of representations of the society concerned." In their turn, these representations must be brought into relation with the way they are experienced in daily life, particularly the presence of gods in day-to-day life outside ceremony. The least one can say is that we are ill-informed about this last kind of experience. What we do know is that in societies with preserved archaic lifestyles, the individual lives in constant sensorial contact with nature. He lives in perpetual intimacy with elements, plants, animals, and possesses a vague boundary between animate and inanimate worlds. The visible is constantly animated by the invisible. The presence of gods is materialized in all sorts of objects, localized in familiar places, and associated with day-to-day activities. He sees the gods as beings close to him physically. The majority of souls peopling the invisible world are those of the dead, with whom the individual lives in close proximity.

In vodun country, the dead are buried in the family dwelling. The individual often attributes illness to the presence of a spirit within him who wishes him ill or wants something from him, or to the theft of his soul. In this context, it seems sensible to interpret sickness as the dispossession of one's self by another who robs you of your forces, divides you, and alienates your physical or mental capacities.

Physical illness is an invasion of consciousness by sensations from a part of the body that is at odds with the rest. For an individual who doesn't picture his body in terms of modern world biological categories, and who doesn't interpret dysfunctions as caused by bacteria or chemical imbalances, it's natural to believe that illness results from a foreign presence.

Sickness on the mental or nervous level is experienced as inner sensations received from one's body. "Overcoming anger" and "feeling drained" express the idea of being dispossessed of one's vital energies. "Dévoré par la fievre" (devoured by fever) and "rongé par la maladie" (eaten away by an illness) express that illness is experienced as if there were another living being residing in one's body. And such expressions exist in all languages, so that we can be certain they are representative of a universal experience. In the societies that concern us here, these internal states are perceived all the more intensely at the sensorial level for the simple reason that daily life is dominated by manual labor, which keeps one constantly aware of one’s body. Given these conditions, it makes good sense to draw a connection between such internal states and the physical presence of one of the souls, spirits, or genii, in short, one of the divinities that people the external world and regulate all of its phenomena—good sense that indeed fits in perfectly well with the commonly held theory on the general functioning of the world. We are thus led to think that, in the societies concerning us here, the ways of being affected by music, of experiencing the presence of the gods, and of undergoing illness all derive, in the sphere of the structure of consciousness, from one and the same type of relation to the world and to oneself. This doubtlessly explains why gods, sickness, and music can be so closely interwoven in possession cults.

Music, Shamanism, Mediumship, Exorcism

The question of who makes the music in possession rituals and what part the possessee plays in such music (if he takes a part at all) led me earlier to refer to shamanism. The active or passive character of the possessee’s relation to possession music is not in fact fully significant unless one compares it with the shaman’s relation to music. This is why we are now going to examine this other aspect of the relations between music and trance.

An in-depth study of shamanic music still needs to be written. Since possession is our principal interest here, I shall do no more than skim the surface of this subject, pausing only when it is important to clarify just how different things are in the two cases. After a digression on mediumship, which often is simply one aspect of either possession or shamanism, I shall move on to a quite different question, also common to both; that of music and trance viewed from the standpoint of exorcism.

MUSIC AND SHAMANISM

By now, I hope it is sufficiently clear that in possession the relation of the possessee to music is most often passive. On the contrary, the shaman’s relation to music is active, since he sings and drums while he exercises his functions. We must, nevertheless, ask ourselves if this inversion is verified when in the case of shamanism we take into account as we did for possession the stage the individual involved has reached in his career. In possession we saw that the relation of the possessee to music is totally passive during initiation, and that it becomes progressively more active as he passes from the status of neophyte to officiant. In shamanism, on the contrary, the shaman’s activity as musicant begins from the moment of initiation. Describing the consecration ceremony of a young female shaman among the Araucan of southern Chile, Métraux (1967, 191ff.) tells us how the new initiate, in a state of trance, climbs the rewe—the tree made into a ladder—which is the “symbol par excellence of her condition.” She climbs it “dancing and drumming.” Having reached the top, she utters a long prayer during which she begs for clairvoyance, effective chants, and the art of drumming. Her behavior is thus the opposite of that of a candomblé neophyte, for example, who cannot take the lead in beginning a song until he or she has been an adept for seven years. The Araucan shamans perform as both singers and instrumentalists from the very outset. Among Asian shamans, full mastery of the drum (shamanism’s musical instrument par excellence) is not achieved until after a certain length of time has elapsed. In Siberia, among the Tungus (or Evenki), after having made a stick for his future drum, the apprentice shaman “remained seated outside for several days chanting shamanic chants. One or two years later, he saw in a dream the reindeer whose skin would cover his drum” (Vasilevi¢é 1969, 251), and it was only after the making and “animation” of the drum* that “the apprentice shaman was granted the right to shamanize.” As a beginner, the Buryat shaman has no right to use a drum; he can only play a Jew’s harp. Among the Ammasalik Eskimos, while the shaman is still a postulant, he does not use a drum: “If he wants to provide the rhythm for the chants he learns far away from men,” he uses “two wooden sticks struck one against the other” (Gessain 1973, 153). Although the Tungus or Eskimo shaman becomes an instrumentalist only gradually, since to play the drum (the geometric locus of all the symbols of shamanism) is to have mastered all the powers, he is nevertheless a singer from the very start, just like his Amerindian homologue, a fact that distinguishes him radically from the possessee. The most important difference, however, is that in every case the shaman is the musicant of his own entry into trance. In other words, he goes into trance not by listening to others who sing or drum for him, but, on the contrary, by singing and drumming himself. All the accounts agree on this point. And herein lies the great difference between shamanism and possession. The possessed person is never the musicant of his own trance; the shaman always is. For the shaman, shamanizing and musicating are two aspects of one and the same activity. So much so that among the Yaruro, in Venezuela, he is called t6ewame, which means “musician” or, more precisely, “he who sings and dances.” As for the word shaman itself, which as we saw originates with the Tungus, it has now been established that it derives from the root sam-, “common to all the Altaic languages,” which “contains the idea of dance and leap on the one hand, trouble and agitation on the other” (Lot-Falck 1977, 9). In Tungus, there also exist “three other series of terms expressing the idea of shamanizing” (ibid., 11). The root of the first is jajar-, which is the “only one that furnishes a term, jajan, designating the shaman, a term of ancient and frequent usage” which originally meant “to sing, to pray to the fire for good fortune”; in Chukchi it gave way to jajar, “drum.” The second has two meanings: “narrate, sing, hand down the tradition” and “shamanize” (ibid., 12). Among the Tungus, then, language itself identifies the shaman as he who dances and sings; in short, to express the matter in general terms, as a musicant. But we should note that he is seen as a singer only with reference to words, and not with reference to the tune or rhythm to which those words are sung. I shall return to this point shortly. We briefly saw in a previous chapter that this is not true for possession, since the term used to identify the possessee has no connection with dance, words (whether they are sung or not), or musical instruments. As we did with respect to the possessed person, we must now ask what role music plays (only this time it is the music of the shaman himself) in triggering the shaman’s trance. And let me say right away that this is a vast problem indeed, and one I shall only touch on. Let us first talk about the shaman’s musical instruments. Naturally one’s thoughts immediately turn to the drum, an instrument closely associated with the image everyone has of the Siberian or Eskimo shaman. Eliade believes that if it contributes to inducing trance, it does so for magical reasons. “It is musical magic” that has determined the shamanic function of the drum, he writes (1968, 149). According to him, this magic can be explained by one of two hypotheses, depending upon whether it derives from the charm of the drum’s sounds, considered to be the “voice of the spirits,” or whether “an ecstatic experience had been achieved as a result of the extreme concentration induced by prolonged drumming.” Why “prolonged drumming” should create “extreme concentration” is not explained. Like so many others, Eliade is, I fear, falling into the trap of stereotypical ideas about the power inherent in the physical sound of the drum.

In the case of possession, we were led to conclude that although the drum is frequently used to induce trance, any instrument at all can perform the same function. And the facts plainly demonstrate that the same holds true of shamanism, even though the actual variety of choice is less great. Among the Tungus, “many groups of Transbaikali have replaced the drum with a pair of canes that fulfill the same functions” (Delaby 1976, 112-13). In fact, these canes serve as “supports for spirits,” musical instruments (they are furnished with small bells and various kinds of jangles—all highly symbolic), and a “means of locomotion” (like the drum, but by virtue of a partly different symbolism, they enable the shaman to undertake his journeys into the upper and lower worlds). We have seen that at the outset of his career at least, the Buryat shaman does not use a drum but a Jew’s harp. Among the Mirghiz it is replaced by a lute, the kobuz (Eliade 1968, 150). We know that the Araucan shamans in Chile use a frame drum that displays curious similarities to the one belonging to their Siberian homologues. But among the Amerindians the shaman often uses a rattle as his musical instrument, at least when he has one, for he can do without one just as well, as is the case among the Selk’nam (or Ona) of Tierra del Fuego, who shamanize without any instrumental accompaniment.

To end, let us also mention the rather paradoxical case of the Eskimos who, unless I am mistaken, all know the drum but do not all use it in order to shamanize. Alongside an active form of shamanism on the Arctic coast as far as Greenland, in which the shaman makes great use of the drum to induce his trance, there is also among certain “Central Eskimo” a more passive and contemplative way of shamanizing (Holtved 1967, 26). The shaman has his visions when he is seated or lying down. And the drum is not used in these circumstances. Triggering trance in shamanism thus appears to be no more linked to musical instruments in general, and to the drum in particular, than it is in possession. On the other hand, in order to trigger trance, shamanic music, in some cases at least, does make use of the simultaneous crescendo and accelerando that, as we have already seen, are at work in possession. Shirokgoroff, who in his monumental study on Tungusian shamanism stresses the “exceptional psychological power of the musical part of shamanic performances” (1935, 327), refers on several occasions, and in different chapters, to the increased tempo and volume of both drumming and chanting, which he says strongly contribute to inducing trance owing to the resulting intensification of emotions. This applies both to the shaman's incorporation of his auxiliary spirits and to his journey into the lower world. According to him, the shaman's aim "is to put himself into a state of ecstasy, which is achieved by various means—rhythmic drumming with an increase of tempo, singing, 'dancing' and even drinking wine" (ibid., 339). Similarly, the audience's entry into trance—for it can happen that the spectators go into trance as well—is achieved by the repetition of refrains, "with gradually increasing emotion chiefly produced by an increase in tempo, intensity, and expression" (ibid.).

But let us first stress that accelerando and crescendo do not always have the effect of triggering trance. Shirokogoroff himself tells us that "the increase in the tempo of drumming and the singing and dancing become a ritual when the shaman does it for influencing the patient, but does not himself feel to be in ecstasy" (ibid.). Second, sometimes different, if not diametrically opposed, musical methods are used. Describing the shaman's preparations for achieving his state of "doubling," Shirokogoroff says that "at the beginning the shaman drums, continually increasing and decreasing the tempo and the intensity, with a definite rhythm empirically discovered, in order to produce a physiological and psychic state in which a suggestion—the coming of a spirit—made by the shaman himself, may have an immediate effect of 'doubling.' " (ibid., 363). Sometimes, then, trance is triggered by the constant acceleration of tempo, at other times, on the contrary, by an alternation of acceleration and deceleration. It seems, too, that whatever its rhythmic form may be, the sound of the drum is thought to possess within itself the power to call upon spirits. And finally, the "content of the text of the shaman's songs" also plays a part (ibid., 330).

As with possession, then, in shamanism the musical means used to trigger trance are varied. Moreover, they operate only within the framework of an overall situation. For in fact, although the Tungus shaman may certainly be regarded, according to Shirokogoroff's account, as the principal musicant of the shamanic séance, he is nonetheless supported in that role both by his assistant, who frequently takes over the drumming, and by all those who are not only present but also participate in the séance. They all help him by chanting and maintaining the rhythm, which has the effect of intensifying his trance.

Several shamans told Shirokogoroff (ibid., 363) that they were unable to perform without an audience. "All people present," one of them told him, "helped me go to the lower world." In other words, the shaman, just as much as the possessed person, but in a different way, must have an audience. Among the Selk'nam of Tierra del Fuego, the shaman (male or female) went into trance by singing (again without instrumental accompaniment) and giving in to frenzied physical activity, dancing, leaping into the air, striking the earth violently with his feet and fists, repeating, all the while, the same incantations again and again. Was this repetition also accompanied by an acceleration of the rhythm and an increasing intensity of the singing? We just don't know. We can be quite sure, however, that the techniques used to induce trance vary—or varied—a great deal from one country (or continent) to another. Among the Selk'nam, who did not use drugs at all, trance was achieved by entirely natural means of autoexcitation, but recourse to artificial means is common in both Asia and America. Among the Yaruro of Venezuela, S. Dreyfus tells us, "trance is, if not induced, at least facilitated by the absorption of a very large quantity of stimulants (fermented beverages, alcohol, tobacco)" (1954, 3). In Siberia, among the methods used by the Yakut shaman to "reach the altered state," E. Lot-Falck (1968, 2: 264) cites mycophagy as "the surest method, provoking hallucinations automatically." But let us get back to music. The exteriorization of the shaman's soul during his journey "manifests itself in two diametrically opposed ways," E. Lot-Falck tells us, "through cataleptic trance and through dramatic trance" (1973, 9). The music is clearly not at all the same in the two cases. During cataleptic trance, the shaman's body is "rigid, no more than an empty envelope, abandoned by the soul, which has left to accomplish some mission," and it is the shaman's assistant who is the musicant. During dramatic trance, on the contrary, the shaman describes what he is seeing during his journey into the upper or lower world and recounts his adventures by chanting and beating his drum, thus providing a truly theatrical performance, or, more accurately perhaps, a one-man show, which includes episodes drawing upon the most varied musical styles: songs, recitatives, invocations, spoken passages, dialogues, imitations of animal cries or sounds of nature, and other onomatopoeias, and voice disguises." Dramatic or epic moments alternate with comic passages. The drum provides a constant support for the sung action, underscoring the vocal effects and providing links between one episode and the next. Its function is sometimes rhythmic, and to be sure, it always accords with the character of the particular song or narrative—hurried, panting, solemn, peaceful, and so on. At other times, its function is one of pure punctuation, and the meaning of the drummed phrases is sometimes symbolic, sometimes descriptive, sometimes simply a kind of signal. At least, this is what one gathers from one of the rare available recordings of shamanic music originating in Siberia." At the antipodes, among the Wayana Indians of Guyana," another recording suggests that, all things being equal, we are also dealing with a theatralization of the shamanic séance that is rather comparable to the Siberian example. Since there is no musical accompaniment proper, the sung action is supported by "skillful sound effects" (Hurault 1968, 4) produced by very rudimentary means. Among the Yaruro of Venezuela, the shamanic séance held for the purpose of curing a sick person also begins with a narration of the journey made by the shaman's soul "into the realm of Kuma, the mother goddess" (Dreyfus 1954, 1). The shaman sings, accompanying himself with a gourd-rattle "engraved with figures and signs representing inhabitants of the supernatural world" and depicting, "arranged around Pwana, the great water serpent, husband of the anthropomorphic goddess Kuma, the tribe's male and female ancestors dancing in the dwelling place of the dead." As he sings, the audience replies in chorus. The "auxiliary spirits" are incorporated in the course of this journey. When the shaman leans over the patient and "tries to extirpate the sickness . . . by aspiration and suction of the painful parts," he stops singing, and his assistant then takes over this function for him. Having successfully "extracted the pathogenic element, he utters a cry, throws himself backward, falls to the ground, and remains unconscious for some moments.

In this crisis, which is directly related to a particularly dramatic moment of the healing process, it does not seem to be linked to any simultaneous dramatization of the music. Although the paintings, cries, whistles, sighs, hoarse breathing, yelps ("which are the sign of the spirits' presence"), and the occasionally quivering voice of the shaman do create a certain theatricalization of the séance and introduce some variety into the development of the sung action, the listener who cannot understand the language and is consequently unable to follow what is being sung would tend to seem very monotonous, despite the introduction of new themes that form a kind of suite. If I had to characterize the style of this sequence of songs in a single word, I would say they are incantations (though this is an entirely subjective evaluation, and based mainly on the monotony I mentioned, on one hand, and on a certain quality in the intonation of the singing on the other).

This is precisely the term Claude Lévi-Strauss uses (1958, 205) in the case of the famous shamanic "song" whose purpose is to "aid a difficult birth" and that comes to us from the Cuna Indians of Panama. This long narrative, which undoubtedly relates the most extraordinary shamanic journey imaginable, inspired Levi-Strauss to draw comparisons between shamanism and psychoanalysis that are too well known to be repeated here. In his interpretation of the "symbolic efficacy" of this "great magico-religious text," he makes no mention of the connections that might exist between the shaman's song and his trance. And he does not do so for two reasons; first, because this was not his subject, and second, because the shaman is not, or at any rate does not seem to be, in a trance.

Whereas "transition to an altered state" is not necessary for the shaman to undertake his journey, which is required for his curative action, we are told that clairvoyance, which the Cuna consider as the shaman's "innate talent," is absolutely indispensable (ibid., 206-7). Among the Buryat, R. Hamayon tells us (1978a, 63), when the shaman goes into the state we have termed "trance," they say he "enters into a visionary state." When he describes his journey he is, after all, describing what he is seeing. Clairvoyance or journey, what he chants has a meaning, and it is the meaning of this sung text that is important. The reasons why the words have been set to music probably have much more to do with the difficulty of memorizing a very long text, or with the need to render it expressive or endow it with a certain magical effect, than with any attempt to engender trance.

One of the great differences between possession and shamanic music lies in the fact that the latter is often endowed with magical power, whereas the former is not. It speaks, it identifies, it induces movement. Its efficacy is of a mechanical order. Its effects are of a practical order: it summons the gods, makes the dancers whirl, creates contact between men and gods, arouses emotion. It has no other powers. The shaman's music, on the contrary, claims, in certain cases at least, to transform the world. To use Lévi-Strauss's words (1962, 292), it seeks to intervene in natural determinism in order to modify its course. It is in this respect that it is magical: through the power of incantation when it is vocal and when the words and their musical shaping are what count, or through the power of sound when it is instrumental, the symbolic nature of the instrument being then as much at work as the spell of the sound. Of the thirty-four shamanic songs Anne Chapman (discography, 1972) collected among the Selk'nam of Tierra del Fuego, sixteen relate to notions of journey and magical power that concern not only healing but also such actions as conjuring a lunar eclipse, aiding whale hunters, or preventing rain through rituals. Incantatory: such is the main characteristic of shamanic music. But what is an incantation? This is a vast problem I can only touch on here.

132 CHAPTER THREE
In his description of the six basic functions of verbal communication, R. Jakobson defines “the magic, incantatory function” as “chiefly some kind of conversion of an absent or inanimate 'third person' into an ad-dressee of a conative message” (1960). The third of the three examples he uses to illustrate this definition is taken from the Old Testament (Joshua 10:12): “Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon. And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed.” This type of text, which juxtaposes conative messages employing, first, the conversion of a “third person,” and, second, referential messages also concerning the second or third person, but in which “the stress is at the same time laid on the message itself . . . which is characteristic of the poetical function of language” [(ibid.)], corresponds fairly well with what we know of shamanic incantations.

As for the musical character of the words, that is, the singing itself, it seems that its particularities are, first, to be very repetitive; second, to use a type of vocal delivery nearer to the spoken than the sung; and third, to make use of unusual vocal effects—cries, onomatopoeias, imitations of all kinds of noises—all of which combine to give shamanic singing a distinct position within the musical system characteristic of the population concerned.

In a previous chapter, I tried to isolate the difference between shamanism and possession and came to the conclusion that it could be expressed by a series of three oppositions: journey to the spirits/visit by the spirits; control over the spirits/submission to the spirits; voluntary trance/involuntary trance. This triple opposition could be further condensed into only one: acting/undergoing. Shamanism appeared to be, if one may say so, essentially acted, possession as undergone. To use Pouillon’s terms (1972, 94), “the orientation of the relation” between subject and trance appeared to be diametrically opposed in the two cases.

We just found a similar opposition in the relations between subject and music. In possession, as we saw, music is made for the possessee. In shamanism it is made by the shaman. The latter is a musicant, the former is musicated. This opposition musicant/musicated should be considered, therefore, together with the three previous ones, as a factor contributing to the distinction to be made between shamanism and possession. Shamanism or possession: in both cases the imaginary content of trance is of course totally socialized. By this I mean that the representations underlying this content are shared by the group as a whole. The musicant/musicated opposition means that the shaman is a musicant since he imposes his imaginary world upon the group, whereas the possessed person is musicated since the group imposes the imaginary content upon him. Moreover, in possession the subject goes into trance because he changes identity; in shamanism he goes into trance because he changes worlds. Music, Shamanism, Mediumship, Exorcism 133 The role of music in shamanism is thus doubly different from the one it plays in possession: first, because music is experienced differently depending on whether one makes it oneself or whether others make it; second, because it serves two different imaginary constructs (or, if one prefers, two different ideologies) of trance. In possession, uttering musical mot-toes associated with the identificatory aspect of trance plays an important role in triggering that trance. In shamanism, it seems this function is performed by the incantatory character of the music. But in shamanism as in possession, the facts are quite variable. The available accounts emphasize sometimes the shaman’s physical agitation, sometimes the chanted summons, and sometimes his use of the drum. In maintaining the trance state, as opposed to triggering it, music constitutes an essential factor guaranteeing continuity during the shamanic journey.

Among the Tungus, after the shaman has entered his trance by chanting and drumming, his assistant takes the “drum and continues the drumming, both for maintaining the shaman’s state of extasy and for controlling the audience,” Shirokogoroff tells us (1935, 329). In fact, the journey is pursued from episode to episode through a musical dimension, and it is both the words and their musical shaping that endow the singing, when necessary, with its incantatory and magical value.

MUSIC AND MEDIUMSHIP
Shamanic and possession trance have in common the fact that they both frequently lead to divinatory practices, as we saw earlier. Insofar as shamans and possessed persons behave like mediums who prophesy or are consulted, I have nothing to add here about the relation between their trance and music. But it can happen that the exercise of mediumship, or, if one prefers, of divinatory trance, acquires a certain autonomy, so that it must then be distinguished from shamanism or possession in the strict sense of the term. From the standpoint of its relations with music, the situation is thus a somewhat hybrid one. I shall now examine this aspect of the matter.

With a view to distinguishing between possession in the usual sense of the term (spirit possession) and mediumistic possession (spirit mediumship), R. Firth (1969, xi) points out that, in the first case, the possessed person's behavior does not necessarily "transmit a particular message to others," whereas in the second "communication is emphasized." The spirit responsible for mediumistic possession has something to say to an audience. And obviously, when the divinity is speaking through the medium's mouth, he should be heard clearly. This means that there cannot be any music at the same time.

I will only cite three examples. In Porto-Novo (Benin), when the priest of Hwonse, a vodun who utters the oracles, 134 CHAPTER THREE prophesies in public or answers questions put to him (something I have witnessed on several occasions), one could have heard a pin drop. In his description of a mediumistic trance séance among the Shona in Zim-babwe, Paul Berliner (1975/76, 137) tells us that as soon as the climax marking the possession of the medium by the spirit is over, the music stops and the participants all sit down to listen to what he is going to say. Later, when the spirit has left, the music resumes. And we have already seen in an earlier chapter that when the Tibetan oracle begins to prophesy, the music stops.

The medium's entry into trance, on the other hand, often requires music. When it does, two possibilities exist. Either the music is provided not by the medium but by musicians or musicants grouped around him, which seems to be the case most frequently, or else the medium himself is the mu-sicant of his own entry into trance. In other words, in the first case events follow the pattern of possession and in the second that of shamanism. Let us look at a few examples of both kinds, beginning not with identificatory possession trance—the trance state central to this book—but rather with the type of trance I proposed to term inspirational or communial. When the Hebrew prophets were in their state of prophetic frenzy, they were accompanied by a variable number of musicians.*4 Elisha went into trance and prophesied while he was listening to music.** These prophets are never described as their own musicants. During the religious wars in the Cévennes (France), it was quite usual for people to go into trance and prophesy during the assemblies in which there was singing; but often they were also “seized by Inspiration”** and prophesied without any music whatsoever. Everything depended on the circumstances, but I shall not delve any more deeply into this aspect of divinatory trance. Prophetism is a vast subject that extends far beyond my present aims. Let us thus move on directly to possession.* In Tibet, the music is provided exclusively by the medium's assistants and consists, as we have seen, in sung invocations accompanied by drums, bells, or cymbals, and sometimes by a horn. At least this is what happened in the case of the “State” oracle; I shall cite a different case later. Black Africa, where possession and mediumship frequently coexist within the framework of the same religious system, provides a perfect terrain for comparing the relations of these two aspects of religion with music under particularly favorable conditions. And the comparison is very instructive, as we shall see. In Zambia, among the Tonga (Colson 1969, 76), before entering his hut to answer questions put by those consulting him, the basangu medium may sometimes go into trance publicly while others clap their hands and sing to summon the spirits. As a general rule, however, he does not enter into trance until he is inside the hut, and does so without any stimulus other than fumigations. On the contrary, possession in the usual sense of the term—a state due to the masabe (a quite different category of spirits) and one that has given rise to a cult mainly concerned with therapeutic activities—is always accompanied by drums and singing. The difference is thus very marked. Contrary to what we find to be the case in possession, the medium's trance is not necessarily accompanied by music, and if it is, the music is of no great importance. Among the Nuba of Kordofan, during mediumistic “séances” organized for “clients” (Nadel 1946, 36), the medium* goes into trance without music of any kind. Among the Kalabari of Nigeria (Horton 1969) different forms of possession are found, some due to the spirits of the group's founding heroes, others to those of water genii. They all, however, give rise to two categories of manifestation: possession dances integrated into a variety of rituals on the one hand, and mediumistic séances on the other. In the case of the possession dance (oru seki or dance of the spirit) associated with the cult of the founding hero, the priest's trance is triggered by a deafening din produced by drums, praise songs, and the sound of machete blades struck violently together to a very insistent rhythm (ibid., 19). In the case of the mediumistic séance oru bibi n'ekwen (speaking through the spirit's mouth; ibid., 25), the medium, who is a different person from the priest who dances the oru seki, goes into trance after the clients (who have come to consult him) have summoned the spirit by means of an invocation and a libation of gin. Perhaps this invocation is sung; the account is not clear on this point, but there is nevertheless no mention of music. There is thus a total contrast between these two entries into trance. Moreover, the same contrast can be observed in the possession attributed to water genii: when it takes the form of possession dance there is music (ibid., 30-33), and there is consequently every reason to believe—although the text does not say so—that entry into trance has musical accompaniment; when it takes the form of consultation with a medium there is none, but I shall return to this point a little later. Now let us go on to the second case, in which the medium triggers his trance himself by acting as his own musicant.

The most striking example is provided by the Sukuma of Tanzania (Tanner 1955). Among them, the medium is possessed by the spirit of an ancestor. He goes into trance in order to reply to questions put by people who come to consult him, diagnose the causes of their misfortunes or illnesses, and prescribe a remedy for them. Seated on his stool, he begins turning his rattles in front of him, close to his head, and then starts to mutter increasingly loudly. This is how he triggers his own trance. When the moment comes, he suddenly stops shaking the rattles and begins to talk. “The stopping of the rattling is said to be done by the ancestor spirit, and not under the direct volition of the magician” (ibid., 276). This is because the spirit has been disturbed by the noise of the rattle and therefore hurries to “assist in the séances in order 136 CHAPTER THREE that the noise may stop.” This medium can also, if the need arises, trigger possession in the patient consulting him, still, of course, in the hopes of finding a remedy for his ills. In this case he does not enter into trance himself. Having whistled to summon the spirits, he begins to shake his rattles close to the client’s ears, slowly at first but then more and more quickly. “The slow crescendo of the rattling allows for the gradual arrival of the spirit concerned, since if it arrived too quickly it would have a harmful effect on the patient” (ibid., 277).

This, then, is a doubly interesting case: it demonstrates that the very same person is capable of triggering trance both in himself and in others; it shows that the musical means are the same in both cases, but that the interpretation of the effects they produce differs in each. In Nigeria, among the Kalabari mentioned earlier, when a woman possessed by a water genius acts as a medium, she triggers her own trance once her clients are there by placing offerings on the altar of the spirit possessing her and “by calling upon it to mount her” (Horton 1969, 29). The reverse is the case, as we have just seen, when the medium is possessed by the spirit of a founding hero: the trance is triggered not by the medium himself but by the clients who are consulting him. In both cases, however, the means are the same: summoning the spirit and giving offerings; there is no music, unless perhaps the summons is sung, something we do not know. Let me sum up the situation among the Kalabari: possession in the usual sense of the term is most often triggered by music, and by music that is never made by the possessed themselves; mediumistic possession, on the contrary, is triggered without the aid of music, or at most by chanted invocations, and entry into trance can be induced either by the medium’s clients or by the medium himself. Benin (formerly Dahomey) provides a unique example. The Gun of Port-Novo have a vodun, called Hwonse, whose primary function is to deliver oracles. The vodun is also consulted to establish the truth and settle legal disputes. Occasionally, it is summoned to assist the king in making judicial decisions.

Hwonse's annual feast is marked by a solemn reopening of the sanctuary, followed by an exhibition of the vodun and an offering of the first yams. The atmosphere is one of great rejoicing, with music played by a small band of drums, rattles, and bells. The final day features a grand processional during which the vodun emerges from the temple and is carried around the sanctuary precincts on the head of the high priest. This is followed by a public séance, where Hwonsé speaks through the mouth of its bearer.

The medium's trance is achieved by washing the head with lustrational water and placing the vodun on top of the head. A drummer plays on the agbla, an instrument used exclusively for such cult purposes. The drum is shallow and entirely open beneath, with a relatively loose stretch. It is played with the hands, by gently tapping the membrane. The player addresses calls, greetings, and mottoes in drum language to the divinity. There is no singing.

During the drum playing, the priest also utters mottoes (mimlan) and speaks to Hwonsé with words "that he alone knows and that force Hwonsé to come and incorporate him." The medium's trance is triggered by both the words spoken by the priest and the drummer's address to the divinity through the agbla.

As we saw in the case of the State oracle, trance is, generally speaking, triggered by music played by the medium's assistants. But Nebesky-Wojkowitz (1956, 437-38) tells us that another diviner, whom he knew very well personally, confided that he sometimes proceeded in a different way: "If he is asked to deliver a prophecy for one of his customers and there is no priest present who would be able to chant the necessary invocation, he will sing the prayers himself. He assured me that this method, too, proves most effective, and that before concluding the chant, he loses consciousness and falls into the trance. Should, however, the first prayer have no effect, then he will chant once or twice again." Insofar as it is self-induced (like those encountered by Tanner among the Sukuma), this trance is an exception among Tibetan mediums. In all other respects, 138 CHAPTER THREE however, it conforms with the general model of Tibetan mediumistic trance, which exhibits a very different aspect from the one seen in black Africa. As we have seen,°® the medium in Tibet prepares himself by meditation and purification, by fast and abstinence. R. A. Stein (1962, 155) describes his behavior while in trance as follows: "Not only is his face transformed—it swells and becomes red, the eyes become bloodshot, the tongue thickens and hangs out, etc.—but he also shows proof of superhuman strength, supporting an extremely heavy helmet, bending swords, etc." This trance, we must remember, owes absolutely nothing to the drugs. Nebesky-Wojkowitz observes that "medical authorities who examined my material expressed the opinion that the trances of the oracle priest may be partly induced by tetany, the attack being initiated by controlled respiration" (ibid., 440). This would imply that trance is produced by voluntary behavior using a form of self-control, an ascetic practice that is much more reminiscent of shamanic practices than of those used in possession. Nebesky-Wojkowitz himself devotes a chapter to what he calls Tibetan shamanism, and in it he compares Tibetan religious practices (particularly those concerning the oracle) and Siberian shamanism. Perhaps we could say that whereas the possession of the Tibetan oracle, seen as a religious practice, falls within the domain of possession, the corporeal technique he uses in trance falls within the domain of shamanism. The Tibetan oracle would thus provide a particularly striking example of a situation intermediate between these two major forms of trance religion. Moreover, whereas the Tibetan medium can only occasionally trigger his own trance, the "true bards" of Tibet, who go into trance before singing, do so as a rule. In order to enter into trance and "summon a hero into himself" (Stein 1952, 156) the bard "begins by purifying himself with a prayer and by singing a description of the hero." This is thus a self-induced trance, one that involves possession rather than shamanism, since as Stein writes, "the god of the epic comes down [and] falls" onto the bard. On the other hand, the act of singing while in trance, which is characteristic of shamanism, thus seems to be characteristic of a certain form of possession in Tibet. In this respect, it would be interesting to know how things stand throughout those areas in which shamanism and possession coexist, particularly in Asia among the proto-Indochinese (Pottier 1973 and Condominas 1973, 141). All the cases of mediumship we have reviewed thus far involve at least a minimum of music, for one must assume, even when the authors do not say so explicitly, that the invocations or summons addressed to the spirit must be chanted to some degree. To what extent was this also true of the Pythia of Delphi, that most famous of all mediumistic possessions? "How was the 'enthusiasm' evoked by ancient writers induced?" asks J. Defradas (1968, 192). On this point, authors are quite divided (cf. Dodds 1957, Music, Shamanism, Mediumship, Exorcism 139 70-74). J. P. Vernant (1974, 11) has recently commented on our state of ignorance as to the workings of "the oracle par excellence, the oracle whose fame and prestige eclipsed all others, and whose authority, from the eighth century onward gradually extended over the whole Hellenic world: the Delphic oracle." In order to answer the questions put to her, the Pythia either went into a "true state of trance," and spoke in so unintelligible a manner that her answers required "prophets" to interpret them, or else she "answered the questioner directly" in which case we must suppose she spoke "in cold blood." In either case, there is no question of music being involved. And even supposing that music was used in order to trigger the trance, it must certainly have been limited to a few chanted invocations, at the very most. In any case, we can be sure that unlike the "telesctic" trance of the Corybantes,^ which always required music, and a great deal of music, the "mantic" trance of the Pythia, on the contrary, required very little or, more probably still, none at all. The relations between divinatory trance and music are thus quite variable.

The fact remains, however, that if the medium is a shaman then in every case in which music is involved he is the musicant of his own entry into trance, but if he is a possessed person, then he is in general musicated. It can happen, however, less often, that the possessed medium too can be a musicant, and in this respect his situation then becomes more like that of the shaman. Not because his trance changes in content—the visitation of the spirit never becomes, as in the shaman's case, a journey to the spirits—but because the relation of the possessee to the spirit possessing him is no longer characterized by submission, nor even, quite often, by identification, which is the defining factor of identificatory possession. The Sukuma medium in Tanganyika, whose trance Tanner describes as self-induced, ultimately is a professionally possessed person, and his constant relations with the spirits who come and inhabit him in order to speak through his mouth have given him a greater or lesser degree of mastery over them. Like the shaman, or almost so, he becomes master of the spirits, and thereby master of his own trance. Any gradation between the two extremes is of course possible, however, and this explains why the relations of mediumship to music are so variable. This variability also results from mediumship's vast variety of forms and techniques. The latter are doubtless attributable, at least in part, to the fact that mediumship is often practiced in a completely private way, in conditions favorable to individual initiative and consequently very likely to encourage change.

THE CASE OF THE BUSHMEN Among the Bushmen,^ music plays a determining role both in trance, which is itself linked to dance, and in the treatment of illnesses. Trance, dance, and the treatment of the sick among these people all fall into the category, not of possession, but, as we shall see, of shamanism. This topic is of such interest from the standpoint of this book that it merits fairly detailed examination here. The Bushmen attribute illnesses to the will of the creator god, who distributes good and ill fortune among humans through a secondary god and his messengers, the spirits of the dead (Marshall 1969, 350). Treatment consists in driving the sickness out, together with its agents, by using the “supernatural potency” (”/um, which Marshall terms “medicine”) wielded by their “medicine men,” a potency or power that also resides in their “medicine songs” and in their “medicine plants.”4? This power is usually possessed by men,*? and medicine men make up more than half of the group's male population; but women can also possess it. To be effective, this power must be activated. It is awakened by singing medicine songs, then heated by manipulating glowing coals and by dancing. “Eventually the n/um becomes so hot that it boils,” and “it is at its strongest when medicine men are in trance and the songs being sung with utmost vigour.” At this point, the healing power reaches its peak of efficacy (ibid., 352-53).

Medicine men exercise this power either in medicine dances in which the whole group takes part—and occurring frequently though not necessarily in connection with any particular illness“ (ibid., 354)—or during healing séances that are more private in nature and aimed specifically at the treatment of a particular illness. To simplify, one might say that the first involves preventive medical practices whereas the second involves curative practices. Broadly speaking, roles in the medicine dance are distributed as follows: the women sit in a circle around a fire, forming a compact group, and sing the medicine songs while accompanying themselves with loud handclapping; the men dance around them in single file, gradually go into trance one after another, then exercise their healing power, both for the afflicted and for the group as a whole.

In the medicine dance, treatment of the illness involves two stages. The first consists in capturing and driving out the illness: the medicine man, in a trance, massages the sick person's body, anoints it with his own perspiration, lays hands upon him, thus drawing the illness out into his own body; he then rids himself of it by ejecting it violently in the direction of the secondary god and his messengers, the spirits of the dead (ibid., 370). The second stage consists in driving away the spirits themselves by hurling sticks and insults at them, and sometimes, too, though more rarely, by trying to conciliate them by calling for their help. When he is entranced, the medicine man is in fact seeing the secondary god and the spirits of the dead, and is therefore able to address them directly. When he is at the deepest stage of his trance, “in half death,” his soul (or rather one of his two souls, it seems) leaves him to go meet the secondary god (ibid., 378).

In olden times, the Bushmen say, there were medicine men who actually met the great god himself, when he let down a rope from heaven so they could climb up to him. Clearly then, we are dealing on all counts with shamanism, not with possession. R. B. Lee (1968, 37), in his article on the sociology of trance among the Bushmen, emphasizes the different roles played by the two sexes in the medicine dance (which he labels “curing dance”). “Only the men dance and enter trances,” he tells us; but “the participation of the women is fundamental, for it is they who provide the musical framework which makes the trance experience possible. The men acknowledge the success of the dance being dependent on the perseverance and sustained enthusiasm of the women. R. B. Lee's account suggests that the medicine dance could be seen as a shamanistic séance, where the music is made not by, but for the shaman. This contradicts the thesis advanced earlier on the relation of music to shamanic trance. The two descriptions of the medicine dance, by Lorna Marshall and R. B. Lee, seem to agree broadly, but they contradict one another when examined more closely and from the viewpoint of their musical details.

Lee makes a very categorical distinction between the women's and men's roles. He writes that there is a fundamental asymmetry in the roles they play in the curing dance. The women sing, and the men dance. The women dance only occasionally, and he notes that the men go into trance. Lorna Marshall provides a more detailed account, agreeing with Lee's description of the roles of the women and men in the medicine dance. However, she also indicates that the men (the "medicine men") sing during the dance.

Marshall's account emphasizes the acoustic dimension of the dance, as the men's singing is an essential part of the music making. She describes the healing practices and the role of the medicine man in the dance. The healers take an active part in music making, both before their trance begins and during this trance, to help induce it and practice healing. This situation among the Bushmen represents an intermediate state between possession and shamanism as it is generally defined. The healer takes part in the songs that induce his trance, but the main responsibility for the singing falls upon the chorus of women. There are at least two underlying reasons for this situation. First, the Bushman healer, unlike the Siberian shaman, is not a solitary figure: as we have seen, at least fifty percent of all male Bushmen are healers; shamanism among them is thus more a collective affair than an individual one. Second, it is through dance that the Bushman healer attains the trance state. This dance is collective and requires such a continuous flow of music that it can only be provided by a group of people specifically assigned to this task. Once the healer has gone into trance and exercises his shamanic healing power, however, it seems that his own singing, and not that of the chorus, takes precedence from the patient's point of view. This demonstrates that for both shamanism and possession, it is important to make a distinction between the different stages of trance.

Now that this point has been cleared up, examining the case of the Bushmen also poses, in a particularly interesting way, the problem of the therapeutic role of music and that of the relations of music and dance to trance. We have seen that among the Bushmen, we could to some extent distinguish between, on the one hand, preventive medicine involving the whole group and consisting in the curing dance, and on the other, curative medicine practiced by the healer during private sessions and without the use of dance. We are thus faced with two different practices. But both use music, or rather curing songs—the songs mentioned earlier that are charged with a magical power.

The great difference between the two practices is that the first is indissolubly linked to dance and trance, whereas the second does not make use of dance and is not even necessarily associated with trance. Moreover, whereas the power of healing seems to be exclusively in the hands of men, both men and women can sing the curing songs, either in the group dance or in the private session. Lorna Marshall, describing the healing of a sick baby under dramatic circumstances, notes the following: "Instantly the women began to sing a medicine song in full voice (no tentative beginning). Men from both groups began to cure the baby. In minutes, two of the men from the parents' group and one from the other group went abruptly into frenzied trance and soon fell unconscious." She points out that in other serious cases, the medicine men she observed at work also went into trance, but only "into light trances." With respect to two healing sessions involving more benign illnesses, on the contrary, she describes the medicine man as working alone, beginning to sing without any preparation, making the n//hara sounds, rubbing the patient with his forehead, fluttering his hands over his body. She adds that the medicine man did not show the slightest sign of being entranced in either of these cases.

From all this, only one thing, among all those with which we have dealt, appears indispensable to the healing process in every case, and this is the singing, under its double aspect of medicine songs, sung by men or women, and of n//hara sounds produced by the healer alone. What are these songs like? For the sake of simplicity, let us say that aside from the n//hara sounds, they display the same musical characteristics as those that define the Bushmen's vocal music in general: yodeling, contrapuntal polyphony, and vocalization (that is, a total, or almost total, absence of words). Lorna Marshall makes two extremely important observations about these songs. On the one hand, she writes: "Despite their believed supernatural origin and the fact that they are charged with n/um, the songs are not set apart exclusively for the curing ritual. They are sung everywhere by everyone, more than any other music, to enliven tasks and miles of walking, to beguile hours of leisure, and to delight and soothe babies" (ibid., 368).

Interpreting information she has collected, she adds that it seems to her that "the n/um in medicine songs is thought to be inactive until it reacts with the x/um in the medicine man" (ibid., 368-69). This interaction of the two powers would obviously not occur under just any circumstances, but only on the condition that the medicine man "actually be intending to cure and thus be seeking to evoke the power of the n/um" (ibid., 369).

Moreover, it should be added that according to Marshall the dance steps also have nothing specific about them: "In the medicine dance, the dancing is always the same whatever song is being sung, ... using the same basic step ... it is this step that a !Kung will use, when spontaneously, on occasions quite unconnected with medicine dance, sudden exuberance leads him to dance along for a moment or two" (ibid., 363). This demonstrates that, as Roger Bastide observes (1955, 501) for possession music, among the Bushmen, it is the "total situation" that confers power to medicine songs.

Unlike the medicine songs, which can be sung (and received in dreams) by either men or women, the n/hara sounds are emitted only by the healers, that is to say, by men. These sounds are not necessarily linked to trance or to dance, but they are indissociable from the practice of healing itself, and are thus in a sense its acoustic expression.

I may also say in passing, though without drawing the slightest conclusion, that one cannot help but compare these sounds, as described by Lorna Marshall (1969, 370), and as we can hear them on the recordings made by the Marshall expeditions,** with those emitted by Amerindian shamans, which have been recorded, in particular, by H. Le Besnerais,*’ J. Hurault,** and Audrey Butt."

Viewed within the perspective of the relations between trance, dance, and music, the preventive and curative aspects of Bushmen shamanic healing practices differ from one another because each has a distinct configuration of its components. This is made clear by table 3.1, in which those components present in healing are indicated by the sign +, those absent by the sign — , and those that can be either absent or present by both signs together (+). The letters m and f indicate their distribution by sex. One can see that the healing power of curing songs is not necessarily associated with trance, any more than with dancing or with the participation of women.

Earlier, we saw that a medicine song is not effective unless it is sung by a healer and with the specific intention of healing. The songs themselves can possess either a greater or a lesser degree of magical power. Thus whereas one song may be able to "cure any sickness" (ibid., 367), another may have become worn out and lost all of its power (ibid., 368). In every case, however, the minimal conditions that must be present for a song to have healing power are those we just mentioned: the inherent power of the medicine song becomes effective only if it is in synergy with that of the healer. In other words, for the Bushmen, a medicine song is not therapeutic in and of itself but is only one element of a therapy. Let us file this information in the dossier of research about music therapy. Now let us turn to music from the viewpoint of its relations, not with healing, but with trance. Among the Bushmen, trance can occur to varying degrees, from "light" trance to extremely violent trance resulting in fainting and collapse. From Lorna Marshall's description, we would probably be justified in deducing that two conditions must always be fulfilled for violent trance to occur. On the one hand, there must be music (essentially, singing), and on the other, there must be either dancing ("medicine dance") or serious illness that involves the medicine man in a dramatic situation.

One might perhaps take the view that the long preparation provided by the dance, which "warms up" the healer's power and brings it to a boil, creates an emotional state within him that is equivalent, as far as disturbance of his consciousness is concerned, to that resulting from the critical situation with which he is suddenly faced when he must heal a seriously ill patient. Although music appears to be indispensable to triggering trance, it must still be combined with a certain emotional situation.

The situation that interests us here is the one that materializes when the "medicine dance" takes place. This dance lasts for several hours, sometimes for a whole night or longer. The warming-up period preceding the first trances may take an hour or two. During this time, as we have seen, the women sing and clap their hands while the men sing and dance, loudly stamping the ground, so that the little rattles attached to their legs jingle to the rhythms of the steps.

For Lorna Marshall (ibid., 373), "the powers of autosuggestion that induce trance" are greatly fortified by "the loud singing that assails the ears for hours, the exertion of dancing, the repetitiousness of the rhythms, the physical nearness to others and the synchronization of movements with others." This singing is wordless, contrary to what happens in possession. Its action cannot therefore be attributed to the emotional impact of words, and is therefore purely musical. Marshall and Lee both stress the passion with which the women sing, and also the loudness of both their singing and their handclapping.

The trance itself is associated, as we have heard, with heat, fire, and boiling. One is reminded of Zempléni's observations about the warming-up music provided by griots to start off the ndép. Among the Bushmen, as among the Wolof, the role of music is to arouse the dancers' ardor and raise their excitement. At the auditory level, the louder it is, the greater its effect as a stimulus; at the motor level, the more passionate it is, the more pressing its invitation to dance. As we saw in the case of possession dance, music in the Bushmen shamanic dance appears to play an important role in a general program of overstimulation. Above all, however, it appears to be the condition sine qua non for dancing, and it is ultimately the dancing that produces the decisive effects; the fact that only the dancers go into trance, while the seated women do not, makes this quite evident. In what does this dance consist? Lorna Marshall describes it as tense. The body is “held erect or leaning forward bent at the hips,” and the movements of the torso are so controlled that the dancers look “like statues being carried by the dancing legs” (ibid., 363). As we saw, the men violently stamp the ground in an attempt to make as loud a noise as possible. In the long run, does dancing in this manner entail a particularly great expense of physical energy on the part of the dancers, or does it incur particularly significant metabolic disturbances? This is something we do not know.

Let me sum up what we have learned from this visit to the Bushmen. Music fulfills several functions in the “medicine dance”: (1) it incites the men to dance; (2) it contributes to the entry into trance of those among them who are healers; and (3) it leads to the practice of magical healing. The greater part of the music is provided by the chorus of women, but the men also sing. The chorus of women is the one that plays the essential role in inciting dance. On the other hand, it seems that the healer’s own singing is of prime importance in the actual healing practices. Be that as it may, the healers play an active role in the music, whose purpose is to make them dance and go into trance, which is contrary to what happens in possession, yet at the same time the main burden of the music making rests on a group that does not go into trance (the women), which is contrary to what happens in shamanism. Viewed from the standpoint of the relations between trance and “who makes the music,” the case of the Bushmen thus occupies an intermediate position between possession and shamanism, a fact that weakens, but does not invalidate, the oppositions drawn in the previous chapter.

We should also remember that (1) music does not trigger trance unaided and that it can work only in conjunction either with dancing or with an emotional situation; and (2) in the opinion of the Bushmen themselves, the efficacy of their “medicine songs” certainly resides in their magic power, but it equally resides in the power of the healer himself and his conscious use of the song for healing purposes.

Last, let us remember that, for Lorna Marshall, the Bushmen’s “medicine dance” should be seen above all as a means of reasserting the unity of the group and reinforcing awareness of that unity among all of its members. The words “united” and “unity” recur three times only several lines apart in her conclusion (ibid., 380): “In their singing, clapping their hands, and dancing, the people are united, . . . people unite and dance together whatever the state of their feelings.” Even if they hurl accusations at one another in the course of the dance, “the next moment, the people become a unit, singing, clapping, moving together.” I shall return later to the importance of this aspect of things.

As a sequel to what we have just learned about the Bushmen, I would like to add a few observations on trance among the Pygmies, their distant neighbors. Both the Bushmen of the Kalahari desert and the Pygmies of the great equatorial forest are, as we know, nomads who live by hunting and gathering. Although they are not of the same “race,” both are peoples of very small stature. Although they live thousands of miles apart, with no contact between them and in totally different environments, their music, or more precisely their singing (since they have no instrumental music, or very little) is extraordinarily similar in some ways (Rouget 1957; Lomax 1968; Frisbie 1971). In certain respects, their dances are also very similar. Among the Bushmen, songs and dances are used to induce trance, and trance plays a role of great importance in their lives. What about the Pygmies? In contrast to the Bushmen, they are thought not to practice trance at all (Bourguignon 1968, 20). Colin Turnbull (1961) makes no mention of it, so we can be sure that trance is unknown among the Ituri Pygmies he studied. The same is not true, however, of the Sangha Pygmies, or at least of those I was able to observe in 1946, that is to say the Babinga (Bangombé and Babenzélé) of the Ouesso region. One day during a dance, the Bangombé hunter who was leading a file of dancers suddenly became entranced before our very eyes (exhibiting shaking, loss of balance, abundant perspiration, bewilderment and then collapse). A little girl then brought cool water, which was applied to his face as he lay unconscious on the ground, a situation comparable to what Lorna Marshall (1969, 378) describes for the Bushmen. The cold water brought the hunter gradually back to his senses, but he remained sitting there for a long while, obviously exhausted, while the others went on dancing without him. I can report nothing more about this trance, except that the group obviously perceived it as perfectly normal. My stay among the Pygmies was too short for me to discover anything more on the subject. Let us simply note that, contrary to what has been said, trance, in relationship with dance and song, does occur among certain Pygmy groups, a fact that is of some interest for mapping the distribution of trance and for comparative studies with the Bushmen.

Exorcism? The words possession and exorcism are so frequently linked together in ethnographic literature and in Western religious thought—and the association is clearly not fortuitous—that one might almost say the one inevitably trails the other like a shadow. Both are often seen as covering two normally complementary aspects of one and the same phenomenon, or, rather, the one is seen as the question and the second as the answer that the first raises. Given this basic approach—which is evidently not ours—one could define the various types of possession in terms of the greater or lesser importance given to exorcism in the response made to them. If possession were represented as a circle, the position of exorcism could be depicted as going from zero, expressed as a totally empty circle and conveying the total absence of exorcism, to a full 360-degree turn, covering the entire surface. In this latter case, in which exorcism is the only possible response to possession, we would be dealing with possessions of the Loudun type, which ultimately are rejected by society or, as we labeled them, reprobate. They do not interest us here since they do not give rise to any form of cult.*! All the same, we ought to note that the Loudun possessions, which occurred outside of the official religion, cannot be reduced—any more than those concerning us here, which are completely integrated into religious life—to cases or a series of cases of individual hysteria. They have so many stereotypical features—use of a secret language, number and hierarchy of demons corresponding to the personality of the possessed, to mention but a few—that they certainly should be connected with older possession cults, of which the evidence suggests they are (partially at least) a survival or resurgence. However, this may be, possession of the Loudun type is not accompanied by music of any kind. As we have seen, the principal function of possession music is to establish communication with the gods. There is therefore no reason to use music when the possession, far from being desired, is rejected. The events at Loudun therefore confirm the logic of our theory. We will linger on them no longer. In the first case, on the contrary, in which possession is unreservedly welcomed by society, we are dealing with such cults as the vodun in Dahomey,* which give rise to possession séances totally devoid of exorcism.* This does not mean that exorcism practices are completely unknown in vodun worship. When someone has been struck by lightning, the high priest of Khevioso, god of: lightning, comes to exorcise the victim’s house.** But such exorcism rituals are one thing and ceremonies in which possessions occur quite another. Each has rather different orientations and, needless to say, only the second kind interests us. In Vietnam, hdu-béng ceremonies are devoted exclusively to the “guardian Spirits, Genii, and, in an accessory way, the Souls of the Dead”; the “evil Spirits . . . do not intervene in any way” (Simon and Simon-Barouh 1973, 76-77). Between possession of the Loudun kind and the one found in vodun worship or the bais-bong ceremonies, between possessions that are rejected on the one hand and possessions that are entirely welcome on the other, there is room for a whole series of intermediate cases.

Possession and Pact-Making: African Examples

Among the VaNdau of Mozambique, the possessed are characterized by two types of possession that coexist and are complementary (Junod 1934). Music, Shamanism, Mediumship, Exorcism 149 Those of the first type are bound to be exorcised. The function of those of the second type is to exorcise those of the first.°* Whether they belong to one or the other of these two categories, the possessed are all occupied by spirits of the Ndau ancestors, but the vast majority are possessed by malevolent spirits, whereas the remaining few are possessed by guardian spirits. The first undergo their possession passively since they depend entirely upon the second category to rid them of it. Contrary to the first, the latter, called nyamusoro, undergo initiation, at the end of which they are able to fulfill their function—that is, to rid the others of their possession. Junod calls them exorcists.

Unlike the passive majority of possessed persons, whose state is caused by spirits “who enter into living beings and torment them until they do all that is demanded of them” (ibid., 273), the “exorcist” derives his “spiritual power” from “the spirit of a dead person who has possessed him, not to harm but to protect him” (ibid., 283). As described by Junod (ibid., 286), the exorcism séance (during which, at the request of the passively possessed person, the nyamusoro rids him of the tormenting spirit) appears almost more like a shamanic séance— albeit without any journey—than a possession séance. I shall not enter into further detail on this aspect of things here. We will, however, take note of the method the “exorcist” uses to liberate his patient (ibid., 287). Junod describes this method as it relates to diverse “categories of ancestral spirits,” the majority of whom are Ndau. It varies according to the category and Junod’s information is more or less detailed from case to case. In order to be appeased, each of the twelve sorts of spirits mentioned requires offerings and sacrifices, but some are more “difficult to satisfy” than others. There are those who "deign to appear only when everyone is drunk" (ibid., 277). One can make some spirits "rejoice" by playing the flute for them (ibid., 275), others by "handclapping and dancing" (ibid., 280). The spirits of hunters are "propitiated" by imitating the act of hunting. To "please" certain female spirits, one dons animal skins with fringes and pearls (ibid., 280). Clearly, these are very friendly ways of exorcizing. And indeed, although the séance described by Junod does involve "liberating" a possessed person of the spirit "tormenting" him, it is far from being true exorcism. The spirit in question is not driven out; it is appeased, made to rejoice, provided with some kind of satisfaction, and then politely escorted back into the bush: "There is your place, your village" (ibid., 287).

There is a certain contradiction in terms involved, in fact, when one speaks, as does Junod, of "the Ndau exorcists' propitiation ceremonies" (ibid., 273): either one propitiates or one exorcises; one cannot do both. Also in southern Africa, the Thonga, neighbors of the VaNdau were described by H. A. Junod (father of H. P. Junod) as responding to possession with exorcism; possession among them is attributed to foreign (Zulu or Njao) and consequently malevolent spirits from whom one must be relieved. Using H. A. Junod's own description, Bastide has shown (1972, 103-4) that the evil spirit in reality reconciles himself with his victim and becomes his guardian spirit.

I should add that the real purpose of the "strange and terrible exorcism" (Junod 1913, 440), which involves an "infernal" or "hideous" din of drums sometimes for days on end, is not to drive the spirit out at all, but to force it "to reveal itself, to declare its name" (ibid., 441, 443). On this particular occasion "the patient will sing his song, . . . a song which will be henceforth his"** (ibid., 445), and which will serve in the future, at the appropriate moment, to induce further trances in him. In this case, we are clearly at the opposite pole of exorcism and reprobate possession.

In the Central African Republic among the Ngbaka-Mandja (Arom and Taurelle 1968), possession works in the same way as among the VaNdau in the sense that there are two categories of possessed: the healers, who go into possession trances in order to heal, and the so-to-speak occasional possessed person, who comes to the healers to be cured. As among the VaNdau, the healer is similar in many respects to the shaman—he is the one who induces trance in the sick person, sings the appropriate songs while shaking his rattles, and directs the musicians. His songs clearly show the ambivalence of the relations with the deities responsible for the possession and the illness. On the one hand he calls to them, "Come and help me cure the sickness!" and on the other he threatens them: "If you try to come back into her and poison her again, you shall all die!" At the end of the ceremony, after the offerings have been made, the healer addresses the divinities again: "This is for you . . . eat your share . . . do not trouble her any more" (ibid., 102, 103, 104). Here, as among the VaNdau, occasional possession results in a relation with the divinity that could be termed peaceful coexistence: let both sides stay in their own place. In the Hausa bori, which exhibits aspects of possession that are very different from the foregoing, initiation may be broken down into two successive phases, which Jacqueline Monfouga-Nicolas (1972, 110ff. 

The Ndau exorcism process, divided into the "exorcism" and "imposition" phases, is similar to the myamusoro's role in the Ndau "exorcist" capacity. The first phase lasts for three nights and aims to clean the slate, allowing a beneficent divinity to take possession of its "mare." The beneficent divinity can belong to either white or dark gods; the latter can cross over to the category of white gods if it becomes beneficial for the neophyte. However, some kankama will always remain dark.

During the first two nights, the kankama manifest themselves when summoned by musical instruments. The initiating jakeso goes into a light trance, and the neophyte appears absent. On the third night, the "struggle with the dark gods" occurs. They arrive in a cohort, as before, but this time, each god swoops down upon the neophyte. After each invocation, the god refuses to leave the initiate's body, and she must fight to make him leave.

At the end of this struggle, a white god assigned to drive out the kankama for good comes and incorporates the jakeso. The latter then struggles with the neophyte, who is still possessed by dark gods, and emerges victorious. Exorcism involves an exorcist possessed by a benevolent god, driving out a malevolent god from the body of a neophyte undergoing initiation. The methods used do not appear to be the same, as the kankama are driven out, making it a true form of exorcism.

In Chad, Monique Brandily's article "Musical Exorcism among the Kotoko" describes a ceremony to exorcize a sick woman who had fallen prey to a genius. After organizing various participants, the séance begins with the possession of the sick woman. The musicians play music addressed to the genius inhabiting her. The sick woman dances, followed by other women who also become possessed and dance. The séance ends when the last woman has been "freed." The woman singer, who played the central role in the séance, then embodies the “marabout” genius and in this capacity begs the “chief” of the genii to order to all his subjects “to leave the women in peace” (ibid., 50). These data lead Monique Brandily to comment on the ambiguity of the ceremony, which, she observes, “consists at the same time in driving out the genius in order to obtain a cure,” and in provoking “several cases of possession among the women present” (ibid., 51).

What is its real aim? Is it to drive out the genii—or as she prefers to call them, the demons (ibid., 38 n.1)? Or is it to make them come? To use Luc de Heusch's terminology (1971, 229ff.), is it exorcism or adorcism? This question, which is posed by so many possession cults, is by no means new. In his work, La possession et ses aspects théatraux chez les Ethiopiens de Gondar, Michel Leiris (1958, 34 n.2) makes the following observation: “It is improper to apply the term ‘exorcism’ to the practices of the zar brotherhoods; their goal is in fact to make a pact with the spirit rather than to expel it.” This observation can in fact be applied to all cults in which the rites are directed toward expelling the spirit responsible for possession. All available descriptions demonstrate that this expulsion is only obtained if a pact with the spirit has been made beforehand.

Before the genii "leave the women in peace," as Monique Brandily puts it, the women must first publicly identify themselves with them, for by reproducing the genii's outward behavior in dances that imitate them, the women, in fact, become identified with them. But this identification, this possession, cannot take place unless one has already summoned these genii, and this precisely is the role of the musicians and women singers. The ceremony's primary aim, therefore, is to summon the genii, not to drive them away.

To return to the healing séance described by Monique Brandily, from the sick woman's point of view, events unfold—whether consciously or unconsciously is of little importance—something like this: I am sick because a genius is tormenting me, I become that genius; satisfied because he has possessed me, he ceases to torment me, I am set free. Is this exorcism? Broadly speaking, it could be, since ultimately the sick woman has exorcised or chased out her illness. Strictly speaking, it certainly is not.

We speak of exorcism when the divinity who comes to be embodied is seen as a demon. But there is every reason to believe this is the case only because among the Kotoko, who live in a region converted to Islam, there is a more or less overt conflict between Islam and the old, traditional religion. Although they once were deities—and still are, incontestably, in many parts of Africa—these genii have become demons. Thus people succumb to them because belief in their power is not yet extinct, but they then expel them—at least this is what they say—because this is what the official or dominant religion requires.

The trances of the female Tunisian possessees described by S. Ferchiou (1972, 60) take place within a similar religious framework. In other places, as the example of the Thonga demonstrated, the conflict manifests itself differently: there, the spirits that possess the patient are foreigners and therefore enemies. Again the patient must get rid of them, they must be driven out. But is this exorcism? Here again the same process is used: in order to expel them, one must first enter into communication with them and appease them; in short, one must have established bonds with them, if not through possession, at least by making a pact. In a great many cults, possession séances are devoid of any element of exorcism. When genuine exorcism occurs, it is the culmination of a process that requires integrating the deity as a prerequisite. The term exorcism is often used pejoratively, mainly because contact with another religion has led to referring to spirits as demons. We must be careful not to oversimplify.

Among the Mundang of Chad, the entire system of possession consists of being possessed by a genius who is seen as an "agent of sickness." Should we compare the possession to a kind of homeopathic cure that treats disorder with disorder, illness with illness? Here again, there is identification with the divinity, initiation into his cult, consecration of altars, and performance of sacrifices.

Possession has often been said to require exorcism for various reasons. Sometimes, it is because the descriptions are a projection of the writer's own ideas onto the facts observed. More often, it is because the cult in question represents an earlier stage of a religion and is in conflict with a monotheistic religion brought into the region more recently. The spirits, the genii responsible for possession, are then seen by followers of the official religion as demons to be exorcised.

The adepts accept the fiction of exorcism because the genii are tormenting them, and expelling them or pretending to do so keeps everyone happy. The essential aspect of their cult, which is to practice possession, is safeguarded.

There are also cases in which possession is due to foreign spirits, reflecting a conflict situation. Expulsion can take precedence, apparently, at least, in certain parts of the ritual. However, to expel these spirits, one must first embody them, which usually entails a preliminary initiation stage.

The reader may excuse the author for spending so much time on the question of exorcism, as it is crucial. The relations of music to possession are of the same order, give or take a few variants, whatever the possession cult. It is because all these cults exhibit one and the same type of religious behavior. If they did not, the author's hypothesis would be unthinkable. It was important to establish that side by side with possession cults in which the intrusion of the divinity is not only welcomed but even ardently desired, there also exist others in which possession only calls for exorcism. If this were so, the inner behavior of the possessed person would necessarily be different in the two cases. Indeed, logically it should be diametrically opposite. We have seen that one of the main functions of music is to establish communication with the gods and thus to create a situation of identification and alliance that favors the kindling of possession. If relations with the gods were conflictual, then the music would either have to play a different role or be of a radically different kind. Apparently, this is not the case. This is why I was led to examine exorcism so closely, and to determine whether it does indeed play the preponderant role, which has often been attributed to it, in possession. It does not. Or if it does, the possession concerned belongs to the reprobate (as at Loudun) and not to the cultivated kind—in other words, it is not a possession cult—or else it is obsession (in the medieval sense of the word as it was described earlier) and not possession in the sense we have agreed upon in this book. One could almost say that the difference between possession and exorcism lies in the fact that possession necessarily calls upon music at some moment or other while exorcism, on the contrary, does not make use of it. This is fully illustrated by the situation Schéhérazade Qassim Hassan describes in Iraq. In her chapter devoted to “the possession ceremonies of black population” (1975, 172ff.) she distinguishes between “non-musical ceremonies” devoted to “exorcizing the spirits of Evil,” and “musical ceremonies” whose function is “the invocation of beneficent spirits.”

Saul and David

The well-known story of David playing the lyre to calm Saul’s delirium is often considered to be the most well-known example of musical exorcism. It therefore merits investigation. Let us begin by looking at the various interpretations that have been made of it. When he writes, with reference to the role of music in Israel, that “music drove the demons out of Saul’s soul when David played for him,” Curt Sachs (1940, 105) clearly interprets it in terms of exorcism. The same is true of E. Dhorme (1956, 868), for whom David and his music constitute the “remedy for the possession of which Saul is victim.” The same is also true of Combarieu (1909, 86), for whom Saul is a possessed person upon whom David’s music exercises a “beneficial” effect. But when he discusses the episode in which Saul, blinded with jealousy, attempts to kill David who is actually playing for him, Combarieu adds that when music “in the spirit of possessed people is associated with painful memories,” it is also capable of provoking “terrible crises.” For him, Saul is “a well-known example” of this “double role of music,” which sometimes consists in “creating a pathological state that is inherent in the musical emotion itself,” but which, on the contrary, in different circumstances, “arrests his fury and restores the subject to a normal state.” H. G. Farmer (1926, 12), who, like Sachs, pays attention only to the beneficial aspect of David’s music, notes that “the evil spirit” who was afflicting Saul is conjured by David’s kinnor. Here again we are back with exorcism. Unlike the previous two writers, however, he does not speak of possession but emphasizes the magical power attributed to David’s music in both Hebraic and Arabic literature. Finally, A. P. Merriam (1964, 111), who like Farmer restricts himself to the calming effect of David’s lyre on Saul, sees it as an example of healing music that should be classified under the broad heading of music therapy. What are we to think of all this? To clarify things somewhat, let us begin by formulating the facts in the terms we have adopted for this book. If the matter is complex, it is because Saul himself has a complicated relationship with his trance. He has frequently been described as a possessed person. Barton (1918, 135), for instance, says so in his article on Semitic and Christian possession in the Encyclopaedia of Religions and Ethics. In my view, Saul's trance has two aspects that must be clearly distinguished, and neither of the two constitutes possession in the strict sense of the word as I am using it.

On the one hand, he is tormented by "an evil spirit sent from God." In no case does he identify himself with that spirit. In our terms, therefore, it is not possession that is involved but obsession. On the other hand—and this is something that has not yet been mentioned—he is also a prophet, a nabi, and therefore susceptible to being seized by prophetic trances, when the spirit of Jehovah descends upon him. Here again, however, there is no question of identification, since this would be unthinkable. For us then, Saul the prophet is inspired, not possessed.

Viewed in terms of its two aspects, what is the relation of his trance to music? We know the circumstances in which Saul prophesied—and therefore went into trance—for the first time. After anointing Saul as ruler of his people, Samuel tells him, among other things: "and furthermore when you come there to the city, you will meet a band of prophets coming down from the high place with a lyre, a tambourine, a flute, and a harp\*＊ before them; and they will be prophesying ecstatically. Then the spirit of the Lord shall suddenly seize upon you, and you shall prophesy ecstatically with them and you shall be changed into another man" (1 Samuel 10: 5-6). So it is while listening to music that Saul goes into his first trance. And we should note that among the various instruments listed, those regarded by the Hebrews as specific to trance are the stringed instruments, not the tambourines or the flutes. This is made clear by the story of Elisha. Before he prophesies at the request of the three kings of Israel, Judah, and Edom, and before he performs a miracle to save their threatened army, the prophet demands that a musician be brought to him. And "when the musician played music\*＊ the hand of the Lord came upon him" (2 Kings 3:15). The Hebrew text does not indicate what instrument the musician played, whether harp or lyre, but the verb translated here as "played" in fact means "playing with one's hands," and refers to a string instrument." In the introduction to his edition of the Bible (1956, xviii), E. Dhorme stresses the importance of this passage and talks about Elisha's "trance." The prophet's entry into trance thus must be attributed to this string music.

This being granted, we can now turn to the text that relates the circumstances under which David was summoned to play before Saul: "Now the spirit of the Lord had departed from Saul and an evil spirit from the Lord terrified him. So the servants of Saul said to him, 'See now, an evil spirit from the Lord is terrorizing you. Let now your servants who are before you speak: let them seek for our Lord a man skillful in playing the lyre. Then whenever the evil spirit comes upon you he will play with his hand, and you will be well' " (1 Samuel 16:14—17). Saul demands that a good musician be found, David is brought to him, and Saul takes him into his service. 

And verse 23 reads: "So whenever the evil spirit from God came upon Saul, David would take the lyre and play with his hand, and Saul would be relieved and feel restored, and the evil spirit would depart from him." Now, if we restrict ourselves to this text alone, we would have every reason to think, as Sachs does, that by "playing with his hand" David drives out the evil spirit, or in other words exorcizes it. But in this case, we are faced with a contradiction. Earlier, it was by "playing with his hand" that the musician induced Elisha's prophetic trance; now it is also by "playing with his hand" that David succeeds in calming that of Saul. How can this contradiction be resolved? Let us go back to the beginning of the quotation from Samuel. "But the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him." Elsewhere (1 Samuel 18:12), when Saul, raving under the influence of an evil spirit, tries to kill David, we read once more that God "had departed" from him. This withdrawal of the Spirit of the Lord thus appears to be a precondition for the arrival of the "evil spirit from the Lord." (And one cannot help thinking here of the exchange of souls we mentioned several times in African possession cases.) This being so, why should we not suppose that if the evil spirit departs from Saul when David "plays with his hand" before him, it is less because the music drives him out than because it brings back in Saul the Spirit of God that had left him? Music, Shamanism, Mediumship, Exorcism 157 We can then say that by playing his lyre David reconciles Saul with the Spirit of God, a situation that is no longer in contradiction with that of the musician using his stringed instrument to induce Elisha's trance, a trance that is inspired by the spirit of Jehovah. We are now in line with the logic of the relations between music and possession as it has gradually emerged in the previous pages. It is true, as I have said, that neither Saul nor Elisha is possessed in the strict sense of the term as I am using it: they never identify themselves with God. Instead, they are inspired, or prophets (nabi). Admittedly, the dividing line between inspiration and possession is often rather thin. In this instance, seen from the standpoint of their relations to music, one might even claim that it has disappeared altogether. By interpreting David's music as having the effect of inducing God to be present again and thus driving out the evil spirit as an aftereffect, we remain within the general logic of a well-attested system. By interpreting it as exorcism music, not only are we faced with the contradiction already mentioned, but we also run up against yet another difficulty. What is generally considered to be exorcism music seems to act in only one of two ways, either by virtue of noise or by the magic of incantations. Here there is no question of either being involved. Like the Hebrews, the Babylonians thought that it was necessary for the "good" spirits to have left someone before he or she could be possessed by "demons" (Barton 1918, 133, 135). Surviving Babylonian incantatory texts for use in exorcising evil spirits express this belief very clearly. We thus have good reason to think that if it was a matter of driving an evil spirit out of Saul, whose "good spirit" had left, David would have chanted incantations. No such thing is mentioned in the Bible. If my hypothesis—that David used his lyre to effect a reconciliation between Saul and God—seems unjustifiable, there is really only one other that could be acceptable; that is, Farmer's. 

He depicts the lyre as a magical instrument and David as a musician famous for his magical power over beings and things. This places him in the Near-Eastern tradition, which according to Farmer originated in Mesopotamia, that attributes powers to music derived from complex symbolic or numerical relations with the cosmos. We shall encounter this tradition again in the chapter on the Arabs. These powers, which were magical in nature, formed the basis of a theory of healing by means of music. Here we return to Merriam’s theory of musicotherapy, which in fact is perfectly compatible with Farmer’s ideas. The contradiction we spoke of earlier could then be resolved in this way: when the musical instrument triggers the prophetic trance in the nabi (it does not matter whether it is Elisha or Saul), the mechanism at work is perhaps not exactly that found in possession but it is nevertheless very close to it; when David’s lyre calms Saul, on the other hand, another musical tradition is at work; that of magical music.

The case of David playing the lyre to calm Saul’s frenzy can thus be interpreted in three different ways. First, it can be seen as a case of musical exorcism. I have already stated the reasons for rejecting this hypothesis. Second, it can be seen as an example of musicotherapy. But this means that we would resort to a notion (musical magic) absent from the text, and that we would ignore an essential situational fact, which is the reference to intrusion by an “evil spirit.” Third, one can see—as I do—Saul’s obsession by this evil spirit as being in some way the reverse of God’s absence. By playing his lyre, David reestablishes God’s presence, which means that he restores in Saul, in an attenuated form, the state of inspired prophet that he had momentarily lost. Granted, this is a rather complicated interpretation, but it does have the advantage of taking into account all the textual data. It also remains within the general system of relations between music and prophetic inspiration among the Hebrews, a system that is in fact quite close to the even more general one governing the relations between music and possession.

One final point concerning Saul’s frenzy, in his attempt to transfix David with a javelin while David is in the very process of playing his lyre for him. Combarieu interprets the prophet’s homicidal delirium as a possession fit brought on by the music. Nothing in the passage from Samuel justifies this interpretation. After it recounts David’s military successes and Saul’s reasons for taking umbrage with them, the text reads: “On the next day the evil spirit from God seized upon Saul, and he was filled with prophetic frenzy within the house, while David was playing with his hand as he did each day. Now Saul had his spear in his hand; and Saul lifted up his spear, saying, ‘I will pin David to the wall.’ But David escaped from his presence twice. Saul was afraid of David because the Lord was with him and had departed from Saul” (1 Samuel 18:10-12). Contrary to what is clearly stated in the two other passages quoted from Samuel that deal, first, with the prophetic trance that seizes Saul for the first time while he is in the company of other prophets, and second, with his state of obsession calmed by David’s lyre (passages that both associate music directly with trance, first to induce it; then to end it), this third passage does not in any way imply that the sound of David’s lyre is responsible for Saul’s frenzy. The evil spirit from God (jealousy) provokes Saul's fury, and at the same time, David is playing his instrument. The text does not connect the two facts, and it is clear that Saul's murderous fury can be attributed to David's presence as a rival warrior, not as a musician.

The case of tarantism has been long regarded as a particularly characteristic and spectacular form of music therapy. Marius Schneider (1948) and Ernesto De Martino (1961) revised the subject, with different interpretations. Neither saw music therapy as the primary factor, and they avoided possession and trance in their index.

Tarantism is a specific form of possession, and music therapy is not the answer. Exorcism is also not the answer. Tarantism is a particular form of possession, and it is important to clarify the connection between tarantism and music.

Tarantism has early descriptions and is a ritual involving music and dance. Marius Schneider's "La danza de espadas y la tarentela" focuses on the "medicinal" rites and their cosmological vision of the world. The dance and music function as therapy for accidental and permanent reality.

In summary, jealousy provokes Saul's fury, and David's presence as a rival warrior, not as a musician, is the focus. Tarantism is a form of possession, and music therapy and exorcism are not the answers. The connection between tarantism and music is important, and Marius Schneider's work focuses on the "medicinal" rites and their cosmological vision of the world. In this vast theoretical edifice, the real and the symbolic are closely intertwined, but at no point does Schneider seem to cast doubt upon the very real aspect of the bite and its cure: "cases observed in detail are too frequent, and we cannot ignore them without running the risk of ridicule" (1948, 126). Schneider himself seems entirely prepared to accept completely the general conception of the world within which the cure is effected. Indeed, he seems to see it as superior to any other in providing an account of the ultimate reality of things. Too bad if the "catastrophic theories of Descartes" (ibid., 128) have been responsible for relegating this conception to "the camp of poetry" where "any madness is permitted." It is the only one that contains the truth concerning "the impenetrable mystery of creation" (ibid., 126).

Schneider's case thus raises the very problem of a particular mystique and its value as a current system for interpreting the world. I shall of course refrain from entering into the debate. Suffice it to say that in terms of our interest here, the symbolic system he describes seems to be the reconstruction of an edifice whose existence as a coherent whole has never actually been observed. The elements that make it up do indeed all have a reality, but they have been gathered from the four corners of the earth, and nothing proves they have ever constituted a whole.

In his La terra del rimorso (1961), Ernesto De Martino provides a totally different interpretation of tarantism. His work derives to a very large extent from the team fieldwork he conducted in Salento in 1959 and it is in light of the materials gathered during this investigation that he reinterprets the old texts used by Marius Schneider, to whose theory he refers very little (1966, 301-2). De Martino sees tarantism as a "minor religious form" centered around a kind of "choreographo-chromatico-musical exorcism" (ibid., 71) and as an institution that "is not reducible to a common type" (ibid., 305). Whereas he in fact acknowledges that its origins must be sought in the "orgiastic and initiatory cults of classical antiquity," and whereas he considers there are "African analogues" (ibid., 204) that justify a "common Mediterranean cultural homeland" for the zar, the bori, and the Iberian and Sardinian forms of tarantism (ibid., 305), he nevertheless thinks it more important to stress its "cultural autonomy." According to him, tarantism should be seen as "an internal episode within an expanding Christian civilization" born in the Middle Ages and related to the Crusades, during which the "real attacks of spider poisoning experienced by the Christian armies in their camps" facilitated "the birth of the tarantula symbol." Having said this, he states that the essential of tarantism, as an institution, is to function on a "mythico-ritual horizon of recapture and reintegration in relation to critical moments of human existence, with a marked preference for the crisis of puberty, the theme of the forbidden eros, and the conflicts of adolescence, within the framework of a peasant lifestyle" (ibid., 304). De Martino's thesis thus seems to be concerned with establishing the historical perspective of the data and deeply impregnated with psychoanalysis. There would be nothing to criticize in this outlook were it not for the fact that it makes us lose sight of what is, after all, the most obvious aspect of tarantism; that is, identification with the spider. One particular point in his argument, symptomatic of the rest, shows this very clearly. One of the dance figures of the tarantulees—the best known—consists, as we know, in imitating the spider’s movements: back to the ground, body arched to a great or lesser degree, the tarantulee moves about like a spider on all fours. One can see this very clearly in D. Carpitella’s film, and the sight is a striking one. In certain cases, the tarantulee utilizes, or rather used to utilize, since the practice has now died out, another dance figure. When the séance took place in the open air, De Martino tells us, quoting Kircher's seventeenth-century account, "some tarantulees let themselves hang from trees by ropes, showing that this suspension was most pleasant for them . . . ; such a passion affected above all those who had been bitten by tarantulas that had the habit of hanging their webs from trees" (ibid., 138). When the dance took place indoors, they hung from a rope fixed to the ceiling. There is every reason to see in this behavior a pure and simple imitation of the tarantula.

Without denying the reality of this imitation, De Martino prefers to see something else in it. According to him, this figure "highlights the particular symbolic value of the swing" (ibid.). Associating this aioresis (ibid., 230ff.)—the act of "letting oneself hang in space"—with the myth of the swing of the hanged virgins and with that of Phaedra's hanging, he interprets the hanging of the tarantulees as a sign of frustrated, unhappy, or thwarted female passions. For him, a number of other symbols can be added to this one: "being rocked in a mother's arms"; a game in space that is "always the same, at first granted, then immediately taken away"; and finally, a "prefiguration of the embrace" with a possible husband.

The problem with such an amalgam is that it not only proves nothing (in fact, it makes one think that anything can be symbolic of anything), but it also obscures the essential core of the matter, which is that here we have people in trance busy identifying themselves, through dance, with a creature thought to have made them ill; in other words, that we are dealing with a characteristic case of possession. De Martino is certainly correct in seeing behind this behavior impulses strongly tinged with an eroticism whose demons need to be exorcized. But one could say just the same about the Hausa bori, for example. For us, the essential thing to remember is not what exactly those involved are trying to rid themselves of, but rather how they do it. Seen in light of directly observable behavior manifested by the afflicted person rather than from the standpoint of its underlying representations, be they real or conjectural, tarantism displays all the characteristics of 162 CHAPTER THREE possession as it operates in the group of cults recognized as possession cults. In fact it dovetails perfectly well with all the points of the definition proposed earlier: 1. It takes the form of a religious manifestation, since it is placed under the sign of Saint Paul, whose chapel serves as a "theater" for the tarantulees' public meetings. And even though the spider itself is not (is no longer?) a divinity in the ritual, it nevertheless seems to be constantly interchangeable with Saint Paul. The female tarantulees (ibid., 363-64), who still dress as "brides of Saint Paul" (ibid., 240) even today sing: Say where the tarantula stung you Underneath the hem of my skirt Oh my Saint Paul of the tarantulas, who stings all the girls and makes them saints. It is characterized by a change in the behavior of the person concerned, and this change is accompanied by trance. When she is entranced—and her behavior indicates on every count that she is—the tarantulee indulges in all kinds of extravagant behavior, of which the most notorious is that of behaving like a tarantula (that is, of identifying herself with it, as though she were possessed by it), since her dance imitates the spider’s movements.

Healing is the manifest function of tarantism. But what is it a cure for? This, as we shall see, is where its very particular nature comes in. Ultimately, then, what is missing from tarantism to make it a possession cult? Simply daring to call it one. Why? Because if it had been, it would have long since ended in the same way as the events at Loudun ended: at the stake. H. E. Sigerist (1948, 114) saw this perfectly well. Whether the origins of tarantism must entirely be sought, as he thought, in the orgiastic cults of Greek antiquity, or whether they became mixed with African contributions, as De Martino seems ready to admit, is of little consequence. The essential point is that the Church of Rome could never for a moment have tolerated its existence as an overt possession cult. The bite of the tarantula, whose effects coincide so extraordinarily closely with the signs that herald the onset of possession, provided a providential alibi. As Sigerist points out, women who gave themselves up to these practices were no longer sinners but unfortunate victims of the tarantula. Fundamentally, then, tarantism is nothing other than a possession cult that dares not speak its name. This does not mean it has no particular traits of its own. Indeed, it has some very marked characteristics that derive, in part at least, from the fact that it had to remain unavowed.

Without wanting to dispute the interest of Schneider’s and De Martino’s theses, I have tried to identify the reasons that justify integrating tarantism, without reservations, into the category of possession cults. This task, I hope, is now accomplished. We can now move on to exorcism and music. As we saw, tarantism is regarded by De Martino as “choreographochromaticomusical exorcism” that primarily functions, let us say for simplicity's sake, as a psychic release mechanism, so that the spider’s bite, which is more often imaginary than real, operates on the symbolic level and provides the opportunity, as it were, for the cure. De Martino cites (1966, 256) a fourteenth-century text, which is “the most ancient document on the musical exorcism of those poisoned by a tarantula bite,” that interprets tarantism as a cure operating not on the symbolic level this time, but on the level of reality, since the actual bite is never doubted at any point. Music and dance are seen as a sort of mechanical expulsion, as it were, of the venom. In other words, this text, the Sertum papale de venenis, views tarantism as an example of what was to be known three centuries later, in Kircher's time, as “iatromusic” or curing music, or what we would term music therapy. 

From penetrating inwards; consequently, the most important parts of their organism do not suffer from it, but on the contrary are relieved” (ibid., 257). This text is also interesting in that it gives an account of the popular interpretation of tarantism (only to refute it): “the common people and the ignorant affirm that when the tarantula bites, it emits music, and that when the sick man hears melodies or songs conforming to this music, he then derives great relief from them. But in my opinion the situation is quite different” (ibid., 256). Of the two interpretations this text provides, the popular and the learned one proposed in its place, the first is more clearly nearer to the truth: it alone takes into account what is, as we have seen, an essential feature of tarantism: identification with the spider. For it is because the melody “conforms” to the music emitted by the spider that it has the virtue of relieving the sick person. We know that there are various kinds of tarantulas, and that the tarantulee is only supposed to react to the sound of the tarantella specific to the tarantula that has bitten her. Indeed, this is how the latter is identified, by means of the “right tune” or, if one prefers, the right musical motto, which as we saw earlier plays such an important role in other possession cults. This having been said, let us note that the Sertum does not actually mention exorcism, either in its own interpretation of tarantism or in the popular interpretation it records. De Martino is the one who is interpreting when he writes that the Sertum is a “document relating to musical exorcism”: neither the word nor the idea actually appears in the text. In using the word, De Martino is apparently making himself heir to a Christian tradition whose makeup he himself describes: “The use of canonic exorcism and the elaboration of crisis as a means of doing penance were the expedients to which the [medieval] Church sought recourse in order to deal with the situation” (ibid., 265). And it is significant that on the same page of La terra del rimorso we read: “In short, the tarantula appears as a ‘possessing spirit’ that exorcism controls,” and that a few lines later we come across a quotation from a priest writing in the seventeenth century who speaks of the Apulian tarantulees as people “possessed by the demon” on whom “exorcism should be practiced” (ibid., 192). Moreover, De Martino is misusing language: from the standpoint of the Sertum, expulsion certainly is involved, but it is venom and not a spirit that is being expelled, and moreover not through words but rather through the mechanical action of the music and dance. This would be of little importance were it not that the use of the word exorcism masks the most important aspect of the possession: in tarantism as elsewhere, it is not a conflictual relation with the deity that is involved, but the partaking of an alliance. The fact that, depending on the case, this relation can vary from alliance proper to a simple pact of peaceful coexistence, as I said earlier, is secondary. Despite appearances, the divinity responsible for the possession is not the one that is exorcised. On the contrary, it is the divinity concerned who, by allowing the possessed person to identify himself with him or her, provides the means of exorcising the illness—real or imagined—from which the person is suffering. In possession cults in which the “therapeutic dimension”—to use Zempléni’s expression—is an important feature, the hysteriform behaviors displayed by the possessed person are not the disorders for which the cure is intended; on the contrary, they are a remedy for deeper disorders of a quite different nature afflicting the sick person; that is to say, for the adversity that strikes him. This means that possession should be understood as a form of therapy for adversity, bringing into play an institutionalized hysteria or, if one prefers, a socialization of hysteria. Music and dance are the principal means of socializing or institutionalizing this hysteria, providing stereotyped forms of trance. In tarantism, the tarantella (music and dance) does not cure the tarantulee's hysteria, but provides her with a means of behaving like a hysteric in public, in accordance with a model recognized by all, thereby freeing her from inner misfortune.

She has stung you
She has bitten you
And we are chasing her away, far away
and
There where she stung you
She can be killed

Still others, however, tend to glorify the tarantula: Dance, Maria And dance hard For the tarantula Is living and not dead or else to minimize its role: It was not tarantula, nor tarantella But it was wine from the cask This is done, however, lightheartedly and with acknowledgments to Bac- chus, or, in other words, with no intention of exorcising. As expressed in the first two of these texts, the desire to get rid of the tar- antula need not necessarily be interpreted as a wish for exorcism. As Jac- queline Monfouga-Nicolas emphasizes, there is always a certain ambiva- lence in matters of possession, and possession can very well be felt as a burden by the possessed, even though they may also derive great satisfac- tion from it, or even have been cured by it. In Dahomey, at the end of an initiation, I remember seeing the Sakpatasi (handmaidens of Sakpata, god of the earth and smallpox) delightedly brushing themselves off. This meant the vodun was leaving them, I was told. Jean Rouch recently told me that, for a certain Songhay adept of his acquaintance, going to a pos- session séance with the prospect of being possessed sometimes did not give him the slightest joy. “Playing horse” for a god is not necessarily an agree- able role. Even if they are benevolent, the divinities may not always leave as easily as one might like. In many cases they have to be coaxed before they will agree to go. But this does not mean that they are being driven out. To be sure, “exorcism” is a word that can easily be used metaphorically. It is significant, however, that it was in an Italian music magazine, Mu- zak,® that I read the following statement by a young Moroccan musician, the founder of a group that draws its inspiration from Gnawa music: “I believe in the liberating value of trance through music, as a means of exor- cising not the spirits of evil but, symbolically, the spirits of the twentieth century.” 4. The Strange Mechanism In both possession and shamanism it is clear that music usually plays a role in triggering trance. But this “strange mechanism,” as Jean Rouch would call it, has been the object of the most diverse, and sometimes ut- terly conflicting interpretations. Before moving on to the second part of this book, in which we shall look at trance in relation to Greek antiquity, the Renaissance, and Islam, let us examine the theories through which the facts have been viewed thus far. These theories gravitate around two poles: let us call them, using Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s words, that of mu- sic’s moral action and that of music’s physical action. Various theories, we shall find, combine both aspects in different ways. Rousseau and the Physical Power of Sounds Jean-Jacques Rousseau—whom Claude Lévi-Strauss (1962) has called the founder of the social sciences—could also be seen as the founder of ethno- musicology, since some of the remarks in his Dictionnaire de musique,' and the Essai sur l’origine des langues fundamentally pose for music not only the problem of the “other” but also of the relations between nature and culture. It is therefore particularly interesting to note that he himself wavered between these two poles, that of moral action and that of phys- ical action (another aspect of the culture/nature opposition) precisely with respect to tarantism. In Rousseau’s time there was a great deal of dis- cussion about the curative powers of music on the one hand and its phys- ical action as mechanical vibrations on the other. In his Dictionnaire (1768, 312) Rousseau writes: “Although music has little power over the affections of the soul, it is nevertheless capable of acting physically upon bodies, witness the story of the Tarantula______ "Undaunted at having to contradict himself quite openly, he asserts the following in a passage from the Essai, which I feel I must quote in full: As proof of the physical power of sounds, some adduce the healing of Tarantula stings. This example proves quite the opposite. Neither absolute sounds nor the same tunes are required to cure all those stung by this insect, for each needs the airs of a melody known to him and <168> CHAPTER FOUR phrases that he understands. The Italian must have Italian tunes, the Turk would need Turkish tunes. Each is only affected by accents familiar to him; one’s nerves will respond only to the degree to which one’s mind prepares them for it: he must understand the language spoken to him before what he is being told sets him in motion. Bernier's Cantatas are said to have healed a French musician's fever; they would have caused it in a musician of any other nation. [1970, 165]

Even though Rousseau, like everyone in his day, regarded tarantism as a particularly spectacular case of healing through music, whereas I regard it as a case of possession trance, what he relates in this passage is the very mechanism of the musical motto we described in a previous chapter. But for him, this interpretation of things is only one part of a much vaster theory of music as sign. Discussing sensations in the chapter "On Melody" of his Essai (ibid., 147), Rousseau writes: "they do not affect us solely as sensations, but as signs or images. . . ." Further on, in the chapter entitled "That Our Most Acute Sensations Mainly Act through Moral Impressions," (ibid., 163), he also writes: "As long as we choose to consider sounds only through the commotion they stir in our nerves, we shall never have the true principles of music and of its power over our hearts. Sounds in the melody do not act solely as sounds, but as signs? of our affec- tions. . ."

In his Dictionnaire de musique, Rousseau applies this sign theory to a concrete case, that of the famous tune "Ranz des vaches," which among the Swiss can trigger what I, for the purposes of this book, have suggested we term emotional trance. Perhaps it is also worth underscoring that this reference to the "Ranz des vaches" is part of a long passage under the entry "Music," which is devoted to what one might call, anticipating somewhat, ethnomusicology, and that the tune is printed at the end of the volume along with four others, one Chinese, one Persian, and two Amerindian, with the intention, Rousseau says, of "enabling the Reader to judge for himself Peoples' various musical accents." This is what he writes:

I have added on the same Plate the celebrated Ranz-des-Vaches, that Air so dear to the hearts of the Swiss that playing it in their Troops was forbidden on pain of death, because it made those who heard it weep, desert, or die, so ardent a desire did it arouse in them to see their country again. One would seek in vain in this Air the energetic accents capable of producing such astonishing effects. Those effects, which never take place in foreigners, derive solely from habit, from memories, from a thousand circumstances that, called back by this Air to those who hear it, and recalling their country, their former pleasures, their youth, and their whole manner of living, excite in them a bitter sorrow for having lost all that. The music is then not acting precisely as music, but as a mnemonic sign. Today, this Air, which is still the same as it ever was, does not have the same effects it once had on the Swiss; because, having lost the taste for their previous simplicity, they no longer regret it when reminded." 

of it. So true is it that it is not in their physical action that we must seek for the greatest effects of Sounds upon the human heart. [1768, 314] Elsewhere, replying in advance to those (and they would be numerous) who would later consider the violence of the music, especially the drums, as the principal stimulus to trance, he clarifies his thoughts even more by writing: “musicians who view the power of sounds only in terms of the ac- tion of the air and the excitation of fibers-are far from knowing in what the force of this art truly resides. The closer they approach to physical impres- sion the further they take it from its wellspring, and the more also do they deprive it of its primitive energy.”* To be sure, Rousseau did not foresee the explosion of decibels favored in our day by certain types of pop music, unleashed by multi-thousand-watt amplifiers through loudspeakers that have become instruments of acoustico-musical aggression. In adopting. this position with respect to the “effects” of music, Rous- seau was reacting against the ideas of his time—which he had initially shared—and forged the way for cultural relativism in the field of music. (“Why is our most affecting music no more than empty noise to the ear of a Caribbee?” he asked in the Essai.* “Are his nerves of a different nature from ours. . . .”) His interpretation of the way music acts in tarantism is clearly the right one, but.it was hardly listened to, and the conviction that in such cases the musical sounds act through the “vibrations they excite in our nervous systems” would continue to have partisans. In fact, certain re- cently expressed ideas on-the effects of percussion instruments, particularly those of the drum, belong to this trend of thought. Let us now examine them. Percussion and Drums In an earlier chapter,' we considered at some length the possibility that the triggering of trance may be attributable to a certain sui generis power characteristic of musical instruments. We found, in fact, that this very widespread hypothesis was unfounded, but certain conceptions are so deeply engrained that I feel it necessary to return to this point once again, and to look somewhat closely at the case of percussion instruments, in particular the drum. For a variety of reasons the drum is surrounded by such a particular aura that not only the man in the street but also, very often, the man of science readily lends it very special powers. The often explosive, violent, and brutal nature of the sounds it produces, and the frequently dramatic or obsessive use to which it is put, indisputably confer upon the drum a particularly strong emotional impact. Its sound can be a truly aggressive force, and its vibrations can have an almost palpable impact. Whether we observe it in Europe, where it is an instrument of war, or whether we envision it in those distant and barbaric lands in which literature and the cinema inevitably associate it with the bloody and tempestuous rites of “primitive” religions (particularly those ceremonies often indiscriminately lumped together under the vague term “voodoo”), the drum is regarded as the instrument par excellence of frenzy. If, to use Rousseau's terms, there is one instrument capable of “shaking our nerves,” then it must, one would think, be the drum. Moreover, it is also the instrument par excellence of rhythm, and therefore of dance. It is easy to understand how, carried away by their imaginations, some people have believed that it is able physically, and as it were mechanically, to project people out of themselves. The literature, often of dubious quality, that has developed around the drum and the scientific theories, equally questionable, that have been constructed around it, warrant a closer examination. Our focus begins with percussion and Rodney Needham's article "Percussion and Transition," published in 1967 in Man. Needham starts by discussing the shaman beating his drum to establish contact with spirits, gradually moving on to the observation that "All over the world . . . percussion . . . permits or accompanies communication with the other world." He questions the relation between the concept of spiritual existence and the "non-cultural affective appeal of percussion." The impact, he claims, derives from percussion itself, not from rhythm, melody, or the repetition of a particular note or resonance.

Needham states that there is no doubt that sound waves have neural and organic effects on human beings, regardless of their cultural formation. Percussion, he argues, produces the greatest effect due to the "foundations of aurally generated emotion." Drums and percussion instruments are not solely linked with communication with the other world, but are also used in many other circumstances, often transition rites. Needham posits "a constant and immediately recognizable association between the type of sound and the type of rite," claiming that "there is a significant connection between percussion and transition."

Needham's proposition and the argument for the use of fireworks in Chinese marriage ceremonies are disputable. John Blacking stressed that the notion of percussion constitutes an extremely disputable category in musicology, casting grave doubt on the validity of the connection Needham has proposed. Claude Lévi-Strauss devoted a section of his work Du miel aux cendres to the "Instruments of Darkness." Needham expresses astonishment at not finding confirmation of his views in Lévi-Strauss' work. Lévi-Strauss discusses these instruments in relation to "transition," but carefully avoids regarding the notion of "percussion" as pertinent.

Needham claims that the triggering of trance in Haitian voodoo results from disturbances brought about by the sounds of the drums "in the inner ear, an organ which modulates postural attitudes, muscular tonus, breathing rhythms, heartbeat, blood pressure, feelings of nausea, and certain eye reflexes." "For Needham, percussion should be viewed from a purely acoustic viewpoint, and its effects from a purely physiological one. For heuristic reasons (which are not worth repeating here and which I do not find very convincing, moreover), Needham nevertheless regards the why of this relation between “percussion and transition” as remaining open. Two notes that appeared in Man the following year, in response to Needham’s article, suggested ways of extricating him from his difficulties by taking the mechanistic aspect of his theory a stage further.

True, both writers contested the validity of the connection made between “percussion and transition,” judging it too general to be significant, and they were of the opinion that stripping it of all reference to rhythm, as Needham did, made it valueless. For it is the rhythm that is important, they both claimed, not just percussion itself. One of these writers, however, again resorts to Needham’s arguments in order to explain the effect of drums on the triggering of trance. If these effects are so widespread, W. C. Sturtevant (1968, 134) writes in his letter to the editor headed “Categories, Percussion and Physiology,” it is because “some universal psychological or physiological mechanism is at work.” A. Jackson, for his part (1968, 297), in his article “Sound and Ritual” says that “since the brain is a common denominator to all mankind, it follows that what is true at the neurophysiological level must be universally true.” Here we are more firmly entrenched than ever in the physical-effect-of-sounds camp. And the reason these two authors feel so secure in their beliefs is that both are basing themselves upon a neurophysiological theory of the effects of the drum that they accept as proven, a theory according to which the rhythmic beating of this instrument is capable of producing a particular effect upon the central nervous system and thereby triggering convulsions.

Sheila S. Walker (1972, 17-24), in her chapter on the neurophysiological aspects of possession, lends central importance to this theory, the validity of which she does not question for one moment. Although in this same chapter (ibid., 24) she prudently confesses she cannot tell “why some societies have drum-induced possessions and others do not,” in her conclusion she loses all sight of that restriction, and those famous mechanical effects of drumming are allotted, if not full responsibility, at least the major share of it in the triggering of trance: “The most fundamental element of possession,” she says, “is the presence of neurophysiological changes, [and these] are most frequently produced by a sensory bombardment, usually in the form of the sonic driving’? of the drum rhythms.” A little later, observing that it is sometimes difficult to separate purely neurological elements from other kinds, she adds: “However, sometimes people seem to be reacting just to the effects of the drums” (ibid., 148). And with reference to hypnosis and the important role it plays in possession, she notes that “the hypnotic state is triggered by the altered state of consciousness and changes in body ego produced by the neurophysiological effects of the rhythmic drumming.” It must be remembered that Walker in fact ascribes very great importance to the cultural determinants of possession in general. We see that for her one must nevertheless turn to a neurophysiological theory of the effects of drumming—the same theory invoked by Sturtevant and Jackson—in order to find an explanation for the triggering of trance." The Neurophysiological Theory of the Effects of Drumming: A Critical Review

Let me begin by questioning the validity of Andrew Neher's theory, which has gained some attention despite its flawed foundation. Neher's theory, presented in a 1962 article, is based on the results of several laboratory experiments and has been referenced by various authors. However, the theory lacks clarity and raises questions about its applicability.

The theory's title, "Physiological Explanation of Unusual Behavior in Ceremonies Involving Drums," raises the question of who considers the behavior to be "unusual." The article focuses on the behavior "often described as a trance state, in which the individual experiences unusual perceptions or hallucinations. In the extreme cases, contraction of the body and generalized convulsion are reported" (1962, 151). The ethnographic descriptions quoted refer to both possession and shamanism.

Neher's thesis suggests that intermittent acoustic stimuli with specific characteristics can "drive" the brain's alpha rhythms, potentially triggering convulsions. The required characteristics are: (1) a bass frequency corresponding to the frequency band of the alpha rhythm, which can vary from eight to thirteen cycles per second, depending on the individual; and (2) a predominance of bass frequencies in the acoustical spectrum, as they can transmit more energy to the brain than higher frequencies without causing damage to the ear.

Neher derived this hypothesis from research by various authors on the effects of intermittent light stimuli, which can cause behavioral disturbances and even epileptic fits (Neher 1961, 449; 1962, 153-54). His arguments are based on: (1) the results of his laboratory experiments using a drum; (2) prior experiments on the effects of light stimuli; (3) musical transcriptions of African drumming and recordings of Haitian music; and (4) ethnographical descriptions.

The presented arguments, compiled in a confused manner, do not inspire confidence. Neher's laboratory experiment involved a drum delivering a signal of low frequency (75-150 kHz) and high volume (120 dB), struck at a relatively low frequency of three, four, six, and eight beats per second, because "it was difficult to beat the drum faster" (1961, 449). The two published encephalograms.

In his laboratory, Neher obtained responses similar to those obtained by others using "photic driving." He concluded that the unusual behavior observed in drum ceremonies is mainly due to rhythmic drumming that affects the central nervous system. However, Neher's experiments produced only involuntary eye-blinks, and there is no reason to accept that the behavioral disorders observed in laboratories under the effect of intermittent stimuli are of the same nature as those observed in possession trances.

Neher bases his arguments on his own laboratory experiments and ethnomusicological data. He believes that the frequency most likely to induce the driving of the alpha rhythm lies in "the range of slightly below 8 to 13 cycles a second." In reality, as described in ethnomusicological documents, "agitated behavior occurs with drum frequencies that reach 8 or 9 cycles per second." 


To consider the mechanism of entry into trance as a conditioned reflex that is due to a musical stimulus is a quite different idea. We owe this theory to Herskovits, who developed it within the framework of his general interpretation of possession as it can be observed in the candomble of Brazil. Reacting against the views of Nina Rodrigues and her successors, who treated trance as a psychopathological phenomenon, Herskovits thought of reinserting it into the general system of religious representations characteristic of that society. He wanted to show in this way that possession trance should be viewed as a normal state resulting from apprenticeship to a cultural model, itself largely determined by history. The psychological process we have in view is that which is very clearly defined by the expression 'conditioned reflex," which means that every time a specific stimulus is applied, there is a corresponding reaction, the individual having been accustomed to behave in this way in response to an agreed-upon signal. There is nothing abnormal in this process, as it represents the psychological level at which a large part of our existence is lived. Imagine a person raised in a cultural environment with a profound belief in divinities, taught since childhood that they will receive or be capable of receiving one of these divinities. They believe these deities are summoned by specific drum rhythms and chants, to which they respond by descending upon the heads of those chosen to serve them. In the presence of the stimulus constituted by all the factors of a given situation conforming to the indications given, the response will not be long delayed, and possession will take place.

The broad lines of this theory were taken up by Roger Bastide (1945) two years later, but Bastide places even more emphasis on the importance of the situation. He writes, "The music does not inevitably lead to trance. The selfsame rhythm that on a day of ceremony will produce a possession crisis in an individual, will produce nothing if he hears it outside this context, since the stimulus of the conditioned reflex, as described by Herskovits, is not a physical stimulus, the hearing of a particular rhythm, but a psychic stimulus, the rhythm associated with a certain day and with a certain place. It is also necessary for the initiate to have had his body purified by certain herbal baths. A set of factors, regulated by society, must all be present together, otherwise the music will have no effect at all."

Bastide's restrictive clause opposes Herskovits' thesis, and despite the restrictive clause that he inserts into its operation, he still remains faithful to it. The question is an important one, since it involves the level of consciousness at which the mechanism of entry into trance operates. The author is inclined to think that if the triggering of trance by music is subject to so many circumstantial restrictions, then to talk of conditioned reflex merely adds to the confusion. The rather oblique use of this term can be seen in how Pierre Verger (1969) tells us that rhythmic motifs played on drums are the basis of "a sort of conditioned reflex" acquired during initiation. Jacqueline Monfouga-Nicolas regards the "musico-gestural whole" as the "conditional stimulus" enabling trance to become a "conditioned reflex," but elsewhere she observes that "the music does not induce the trance itself but the form it must take." 

Some priests have only to enter the sanctuary when the drums and gongs are beating and the flute wailing. Some diviners gaze into a black liquid to the sound of gongs. Another may have to hold upon his head, again to the sound of gongs, a weight heavy enough to make his neck ache.”'? But there are occasions when the spirit, like sleep, is wooed in vain. Other writers have, more or less explicitly, made use of various combinations of the conditioned reflex theory inherited from Herskovits, that of the neurophysiological effect of drumming taken from Neher, and that of the total situation taken from Bastide. Thus Gisele Cossard, whose interpretations are especially interesting because they are based on the personal experience of being initiated into the candomblé, on the one hand writes (1967, 175) that “at the time of initiation a correspondence was established between the rhythm and the trance state,” and on the other (ibid., 162) that “one is inclined to wonder if there is not some physiological action of certain sounds on the organism.””° The reference she then makes to “low-frequency vibrations” echoes the Neher theory,?! although she does not name him. Indeed, she then goes on to say that “when the person goes into trance he makes the characteristic gesture of putting his hands over his ears as if to protect himself from the sounds besieging him.” Neverthe- less, for Cossard music ultimately is only one element in a whole set of stimuli made up of “auditory sensations: rhythm of drumbeats, song, ringing of the adza bell, cries of greeting to the orisha; sensations of taste and smell: smell and taste of the abo;”? visual sensations: sight of the consecrated objects representing the orisha or used to adorn him” (ibid., 192). Another category of explanation highlights the disturbances music— and also dance—produce in the inner ear. For Zémpleni, in the ndép, where “the ritual crisis is the normal termination of the dance and collapse is the natural conclusion of the ‘crisis’” (1966, 414), the “physiological trigger of collapse” is “vestibular autostimulation,” which, “owing to the increasing volume and pace of the music,” leads or rather “drives” the pos- sessed person to “extreme muscular exhaustion and spatial disorientation” (ibid., 417).?? This “spatial disorientation” thus seems to be caused partly by music acting (at the physiological level) on the ear by means of its volume and intensity, which can attain an “almost intolerable” level (ibid., 359), and partly by the set of motor behavior patterns centered around dance and constituting what Zémpleni calls “the labor of crisis” (ibid., 415). The interpretation proposed by Francis Huxley in relation to Haitian voodoo is very similar. For him, trance is largely due to perturbations in the inner ear produced by drummers who manipulate the music until the “buffets” of the sound have achieved their full effect (1967, 286), while drumming, dancing______ However, he also says that the drummers succeed in setting off this dissociation only in those who are “ready” for it. In other words, Huxley introduces a restrictive clause similar to the one asserted by Bastide when he writes that if a set of conditions is not completely realized, “music has no effect at all.” For the same reason that I doubted earlier the existence of a “conditioned reflex,” I am now skeptical about the reality of these “perturbations of the inner ear”: either they exist and do in fact induce the trance, in which case they should have the same effect in all circumstances, or else they do not always have this effect, in which case why resort to them as an explanation, since it is in any event no more than hypothetical? We might as well do away with it.

I should point out, however, that this theory of trance as being caused by perturbations of the inner ear was advanced as early as 1948 by Dr. Aubin, a physician, but only in relation to the dance element, which he described as including “movements of neck and torso both resulting in frenzied movement of the head, which is subjected to truly vertiginous gyratations and repeated shaking in every direction.” “This orgy of movements” results, he says, in “a violent excitation of the labyrinth.” “We know by the same token that it [the excitation] engenders, from the psychic point of view, a special state of exaltation,”** concludes the author who, as we can see, confounds reasoning and tautology.

However, I had better make my position clear. Though I am skeptical about perturbations of the inner ear, I do not necessarily deny that certain movements (particularly rotating the head or spinning round and round on the spot) do in fact produce them. What I am disputing is that these perturbations should be seen as constituting trance, and that they are held to be automatic. In the zar cult, the gurri (the dance in relation to which Leiris quotes the passage from Aubin given above) marks “the departure of the spirit as well as its arrival” (1958, 18); in other words it is associated as much with the end of the trance as with its onset. This fact alone is proof enough that it does not inevitably produce loss of balance in those who perform it.

It is, moreover, necessary to distinguish between two aspects of these perturbations of the inner ear. One is linked with the movements just described, and within the limitations I have mentioned there is no reason to doubt their existence; the other is attributed not to the movements made by the subject but to the sounds he is made to hear. The intensity of these sounds is such, the argument goes, that they engender an “oversaturation” of the ear that causes people to lose their balance. That is the theory. I will not repeat the objection I made to it in an earlier chapter, and which questions why this oversaturation affects only one particular person and not all those around him. This objection alone demolishes the thesis. What I think ought to be stressed here is the very subjective nature of this theory. Everyday experience tells us that such intensity of sound judged to be intolerable by some people can be considered extremely desirable by others. Witness our present-day pop concerts, in which the sound level, to the delight of the fans, reaches a threshold that is to me personally (in all my subjectivity) intolerable. It is to be feared that in judging the “violence” of the drumming that so often accompanies possession dances, those who see it as a factor in producing sensorial perturbation are only interpreting the facts in a very subjective manner. Alongside, or in opposition to, the various theories I have listed so far, all of which claim the onset of trance results, at least in part, from the physical action of music on the nervous system, there are others that make absolutely no use of this kind of explanation. This holds true particularly of the thesis of Jean Rouch, for whom the onset of trance results from psychological much more than physiological manipulation of the subject by the zima; that is to say, by the priest-musician officiating at the ritual. That Rouch should opt for such an interpretation is made all the more interesting by the fact that possession music among the Songhay is, in fact, characterized by very violent drumming." This drumming is provided, as we know, by large gourds upturned on the sand and fitted with a device that increases their resonance." The drummers play them with sticks arranged in a fan formation, which enables them to obtain percussive effects of unusual intensity. As for the dance, it too is characterized by violence, and often entails rotation of the head at the neck. 'All these conditions might well prompt an observer to evoke perturbations of the inner ear caused both by sensorial oversaturation and physical overexcitation. Yet Rouch does not once allude to any phenomenon of this kind.

Having observed that "a possession dance can last for several hours, even for several days, without success" (which excludes, ipso facto, that the dancing and music mechanically produce an effect), he goes on: "But when the zima know their job well, these failures are rare: the music, the words of the mottoes; the steps of the dance, trigger the strange mechanism" (1960, 148). There then follows a description of entry into trance that I must quote in full:

At an imperceptible sign, the priests and musicians sense that one of the genii summoned is beginning to manifest itself (they feel "a cool breeze" on their faces); at this, they dispense with the usual order of the dances, the band now plays only one theme, the zima recite only one motto. The dancers as a group continue the steps they are performing, of course, but one of them, and he alone, has now become the object of the priests' solicitude; they surround him and recite increasingly efficacious mottoes to him while pointing alternately to his left and right: the genius must come neither to the left nor to the right, but in the middle, onto the dancer himself. Abruptly, the latter quivers, weeps, and halts. Already his movements are no longer those of dance but those of convulsion, and when the trembling reaches paroxysm the dancer rolls on the ground and howls: the dance is over. At this very moment a god incorporates himself in the man's body. When he has been calmed somewhat by the attentions of the 'quiet women' and risen to his feet again, the Holey's behavior, voice, and gait become completely different from what they were before his possession, They are characteristic of the genius present within him, and enable this deity to be recognized with unfailing accuracy: for example, the paralytic Hargey stay on their knees and move about by hopping on them; Kyirey, who has only one eye, keeps one eye closed; Zatao covers his head with dust and eats earth; Nyalya, who is a coquette, on the contrary shakes off the dust that soils her; Sadvara, who is a snake, crawls on the ground; Dongo, the spirit of thunder, points at the heavens and groans . . . all specific patterns of behavior: myth materializes in the most singular way, its invisible characters appear to all the world as they are. And so that this identity can be even more complete, the genii themselves are the ones who demand their ritual vestments and props, in that [type of] voice which also is halting, alien, and distant. From the viewpoint of our present subject, what is striking in this description is that Rouch lays no stress either on the frenzy of the dance (even though he does describe it a short while before) or on the violence of the drumming. What he highlights is the fact that the band concentrates on a single tune and that the zima only recite the one motto. Tune or motto, it comes to the same thing: a musical message, which is a sign and which has a psychological, not a physiological impact on the subject whose entry into trance is being prepared.

In fact, this description might have been made to illustrate our Rousseau quotation earlier: “for each needs the airs of a melody known to him and phrases that he understands.” As for trance, it is described as being made up, first, of a crisis, which is an emotional paroxysm, then of a change of identity, which, of course, also has much more to do with psychology than physiology.

Another example of an interpretation of the role of music that makes no reference to any kind of “physical power of sounds” is provided by an African ethnomusicologist, J. H. Kwabena Nketia. Talking of possession in African society in general, but with particular reference to Ghana, he writes: “it is believed that the state of ecstasy or of possession can be quickly induced and sustained by means of special music closely correlated with specific forms of bodily action. It is believed also that the gods are sensitive to this music. Opportunities are, therefore, sought to call to them while the dancing is going on, in the hope that they will ‘possess’ the dancers as they are emotionally prepared to receive them” (1957, 5). Here, then, music and dance act in conjunction to produce an emotional state favorable to possession.

Curiously enough, the emotional component of trance plays almost no part at all in interpretations that have been made of the onset of possession, and Nketia is an exception in thinking, as he does, that music paves the way for it at an emotional level. On the contrary, one of the principal accounts we have of shamanism, that of Shikogoroff, places a great deal of emphasis on this component, and presents music as contributing in a decisive way to this “growth of emotion” that leads to trance. But here again, as we saw, the restrictive clause we have already mentioned twice comes into play: the shaman still has to will his trance.

In the second part of this book, in the chapter concerning the Arabs, we shall be dealing at length with musical emotion as a factor in triggering trance. For the moment I will limit myself to underscoring the fact that with this emotion we enter the psychological dimensions of trance, and—The Strange Mechanism 183 to use Rousseau's terminology once again—that in this case it is the “moral action” of the music that is at work, not its physical action.

Ultimately, then, one might search in vain for the reasons why the role of music in triggering the “strange mechanism” has so often been viewed as physiological in nature and, consequently (the final point I wish to make in this chapter), as more or less comparable in its action to the use of a drug. Yet this is implicitly the interpretation that Lewis, for example, arrives at when, in listing the various means used to induce trance, he comes to music (and dance) just after having cited “the inhalation of smokes and vapors” and just before going on to “the ingestion of such drugs as mescaline or lysergic acid” (1971, 39). Nor is it by chance that we read, in a passage devoted by Lenora Greenbaum to possession in sub-Saharan Africa, that possession trance "may be induced by drugs, music, or other methods external to the individual" (1973, 42). To express things in this way is to imply that the action of music is of the same order as that of a drug, which does, incontestably, act in a "physical" way. Although it is perfectly permissible to say, metaphorically, that music is a drug, in the present context, which is not that of metaphor, it simply contributes to general confusion. I hope I have demonstrated by now that nothing authorizes us to think that music—at least insofar as it is being heard, not made, which is the case in possession—plays any direct role in the onset of trance other than by means of its "moral action."

In ancient Greece, trance, although this is too often forgotten today, constituted a very important aspect of religious life. Dionysiac practices, with their wild behavior and violence, do of course form an integral part of the picture we tend to have nowadays of Greek religion. Rohde, and many others after him, have given accounts of these practices. Nietzsche celebrated them at length. Even though Jeanmaire and Dodds (respectively in Dionysos and in The Greeks and the Irrational, both published in 1951) made it quite plain more than thirty years ago, we still too often ignore the fact that possession trance was the mainspring of the cult of Dionysus-Bacchus. That Bacchus was the god of the vine and wine is obviously no mere chance; to get drunk is ultimately no more than a particular way of no longer being oneself. But Dionysiac frenzy can no more be reduced to drunkenness than Dionysus can be reduced to Bacchus, contrary to what the current usage of his Latinized name would lead us to believe.

From the standpoint of the history of religions, the feeling of elatedness due to wine is no more than an anecdotal and fairly recent aspect of the much more ancient, and much more universal elatedness due to trance. Moreover, religious frenzy was not limited among the Greeks to the worship of Dionysus. Everyone knows that the actual functioning of the Delphic oracle, another essential aspect of Greek religion—this time linked with Apollo, god of music—relied in part at least upon the practice of mediumistic trance. In addition, like so many other peoples, the Greeks regarded the inspiration of the poet (and of the musician, since the two were for a long while inseparable) as being nothing other than a trance. Finally, Plato, as we shall see, held that there was no true love other than mad love, and that this madness, also stemming from the gods, was a trance.

It is of particular interest for us to examine the relations between music and trance in ancient Greece more closely than it has been hitherto. First, because of the importance Greek civilization has for us. Second, because of its key position, both in space and time: at the juncture of archaic societies (those that have constituted the main areas of our observations up till now) and the Middle East, hence the Arabs, who undoubtedly owe certain aspects (recent ones, actually) of trance as practiced by the Sufis to the Greeks, but who, above all, have profoundly affected trance as it is observed today in large sections of Africa, both black and white. Finally, because we are indebted to Plato for the most ancient theory of the relations between music and trance, we must understand his perspective. His theory, first, as a observer who did not practice trance himself but belonged to a society where it was an everyday occurrence; and second, as a philosopher who integrated the irrational into a rational system of the world.

The word "system" is important, as it represents the tireless quest for a vision of things and men at once all-embracing and unified, which is the hallmark of Plato's thought. His theory of the relations between music and trance is not separable from his thoughts on music, trance, and his general theory of the world.

To reach the heart of the matter, we must start from the beginning. The word "mania" among the ancient Greeks meant what I have been calling "trance" throughout this book. Plato's conception of mania is what we ask ourselves about. Although "mania" can be considered as the exact equivalent of "trance," depending on the context, it can also be translated as "madness" or "frenzy."

During the Renaissance, translations of the Greek mania included "fureur" and "furore," both legitimate translations. Today, "Orlando furioso" should be translated as "Mad Orlando" rather than "Furious Orlando."

Plato's definition of mania can be found partly in the Timaeus (86b). He discusses the diseases of the body (sdma nosémata) and the soul (psyché). The specific disease of the soul is dementia (anoia), which is of two kinds: either madness (mania) or ignorance (amathia). He adds that any affection a man suffers from, if it involves either of these conditions, must be termed "disease"; and we must maintain that pleasures and pains in excess are "the greatest of the soul's diseases."


It contains no allusion whatsoever to something found in the Phaedrus, a much earlier work, in which he makes what is for us a crucial distinction (265a—b) between two different kinds of mania, one arising from human diseases (nos@mat6n anthropindn) and the other from a divine state (theias exallagés) “which releases us from the customary habits.” He then divides this state into four sorts of mania, four different kinds of madness each inspired (epipnoian) by a God: “mantic,” (by Apollo), “telestic,” (by Dionysus), “poetic” (by the Muses), and ‘“erotic” (by Eros and Aphrodite). This is how in a celebrated and often quoted passage, Socrates summarizes and characterizes in one word the four forms of madness he had just described in his discourse to Phaedrus on love.

This manner of characterizing the four forms of madness merits closer attention. Three of the four are defined by means of epithets concerning their function: the one leading to divination is called “mantic,” the one stirring the poet to creation is “poetic,” and the one inspiring the lover to transports of frenzied love is “erotic.” The fourth, however, is defined from a quite different standpoint, a formal rather than a ‘functional one: It is called “telestic,” meaning it entails teletai, or rites. In other words, it is “ritual” madness. As we shall see before long, this telestic frenzy is nothing other than what we have been calling possession trance. For Plato, then, that which characterizes the possession trance first and foremost and distinguishes it from other forms of trance, is the fact that it is ritual. About these rites themselves, he provides few details, no doubt considering it pointless to elaborate on facts with which the reader of his day would be familiar, and presuming that the latter would know them well enough. Fortunately, he nevertheless writes enough about them (Laws 791a—b) for us to know they essentially consisted of sacrifices, dances, and music. We can also be sure, moreover, whatever the arguments aroused by the interpretation of the word teletai (we will return to it), that these rites also comprised an initiatory aspect, of varying importance, and that they must have been secret, to some extent at least.

Now that we have defined each of the four forms of mania, and in particular telestic mania (possession trance), let us return to what they have in common. Divine madness is the lot assigned to certain humans by the gods; it is their personal and divinely ordained fate (theia moira) and at the same time a manifestation of “enthusiasm” (enthusiasmos), which is to say the presence of a god in the person who is prey to this frenzy. That person is in fact entheos or “engodded,” as we ought to be able to say in order to convey that “the god is in him.” This is the word that Plato utilizes to designate the Sybil prey to mantic madness in the Phaedrus (244b), the lover prey to mantic madness in the Symposium (179a), and the poet poss (We will come back to this fault later on.) But let us return to Plato and the Ion. In this dialogue Socrates pokes fun at a rhapsodist named Ion who is utterly astonished to learn from him that when he recites the Illiad, he is possessed by Homer (Ion, 536b). Here the words “enthusiasm” and “enthusiastic” alternate with “possession” (kato- koché), which stems from the verb katechd, meaning “to hold firmly, retain, contain, detain, possess, take hold of, occupy a place,” in the military sense of the word, and from there, “to possess,” in the sense we use it here. When this passage of the Ion deals with poetic madness, enthusiasm and possession are synonymous. When he is inspired, the poet is said to be entheos: (“enthusiastic”), katechGmenos (“possessed”), or mainomenos (“enmaddened”), a word not only reserved for humans but also applicable to the gods, as is attested by the appellations of both Dionysus and Heracles Mainomenos. : : Other Greek words also serve to signify the state of possession.

In the Ion (536a—b), speaking of the relation existing between the poets and the divinity inspiring them and describing it under the form of a “mighty chain” hanging down, Socrates says: “One poet is suspended from one Muse, another from another; we call it being possessed, but the fact is much the same since he is held.” And he adds that some poets “are filled with inspiration” by Orpheus, others by Musaeus. “But the majority are possessed and held [katechGntai te kai echontai] by Homer.”

Alongside the verb eché, carry, lead, grasp; hold,” which also forms part of the verb katechein,* which we have already mentioned and which is probably most frequently used with reference to possession, the Greeks also used lam- band “take in one’s hands, grasp, take possession of, occupy,” and hence “to take hold of, possess” in the sense we use it in this book. This term is attested in one of the oldest Greek texts we have on possession, that by Herodotus (consequently, one century before Plato), in which we read, in Music and Trance among the Greeks 191 the famous passage recounting how the Scythian Skyles was punished by his own people for having been initiated into Greek possession rites: “You mock us, Scythians, because we give ourselves up to Bacchic transports and the god takes hold [/ambanei] of us . . .” (Herodotus, 4. 79).

To convey the fact that the possession state has become total, that it is at its height, Euripides writes that the god “in his fullness floods” the human body (s6m’ elthé polys) (Bacchae 300) of the one he possesses. And the latter, he notes, is then able to “tell the future,” an observation tied to what I said earlier concerning the transition linking possession and mediumship. Among the Greeks, as elsewhere, there is no break in continuity between the two, but only complete possession leads to mantic states, in other words the kind of possession that presupposes a long experience of trances and that is for this reason characteristic of officiants and not neophytes.

The term theoleptos, “seized by the god,” which expresses the idea that the god is present in the person subject (entheos) to frenzy and that the latter has been invested or seized by this god, is more recent and does not occur under this form in Plato. But in the Phaedrus (238c) Plato has Socrates say, in a joking mood, that he would nearly feel like a “nympholept,” that is to say possessed by a nymph.

Alongside the words mania (“madness”), enthusiasmos (“enthusiasm”), and katokiché (“possession”), Plato uses, albeit less frequently, another term also important for our purposes: epipnoia, “inspiration,”______ "He, in fact, uses this word in the famous passage from the Phaedrus already mentioned (265b) to describe the four manias: each is an epipnoia, an 'inspiration.' The effect of epipnoia is to put the subject 'out of his senses' (ekphron). Thus, Plato says of the poet that he is 'never able to compose until he has become 'engodded' [entheos], and is beside himself [ekphron] and reason is no longer in him' (Ion 534b).

Again, of the Delphic Pythoness and the priestesses of Dodona, he writes that 'when they were mad [maneisai] they conferred great benefits on Hellas, both in public and private life, but when they were within their senses [sOphronousai] few or none' (Phaedrus 244b). In the same passage of the Phaedrus, the opposition of 'out of' and 'within' one's senses also occurs a few lines earlier, to characterize the madness of love.

And in the Laws (790e-791b), Plato refers to this same loss of reason, when instead of poetic, mantic, or erotic mania, he speaks of telestic mania, or possession trance: the Bacchantes, he says, are ekphrones or 'out of their senses,' and it is the combined action of music and dance that restores them to their senses, so that they are emphrones. Thus, the four kinds of mania—that is, of trance—all have the effect of throwing the affected person into a state of unreason.

This madness, however, manifests itself in very different ways depending on which mania is at work. Neither the poet in his state of inspiration nor the lover prey to mad love is ever described as being in the state of frenzy that manifests itself by foaming at the mouth and rolled-back eyes, as is the case with Agave when she is possessed by Dionysus-Bacchus and is about to dismember her son Pentheus (Bacchae; 1122).

Neither the poet, the lover, nor the Pythoness is ever depicted in the attitude of crisis characterized by a flung-back head and an entirely arched body, so often seen in the possession scenes painted on vases. None is described as undergoing the effects of music, or as having dance as his or her principal activity. All these manifestations are symptomatic of telestic mania, which expresses itself through a set of particular behavior patterns totally different from those produced by the other kinds of mania.

The amnesia suffered by a possessee upon emerging from his trance is also one of the characteristic features of telestic mania. Witness the dramatic account of Agave's horrified surprise when she learns, from the lips of her father Cadmus, that in her murderous frenzy, having taken her son Pentheus for a wild animal, she had dismembered him and wrenched off his head.

But what distinguishes telestic mania most radically from the other three is that it is the outcome of an offense, of misconduct toward the god, who then manifests his anger by striking the guilty person with madness. The same could never be said of the other three mania. That it is characteristic of telestic madness is formally confirmed by Euripide's text cited above: 'Would it be some offense committed against the ardent huntress Dictynna for not having sacrificed a victim for her,' the Chorus asks the 'engodded' (entheos) Phaedra. This is also attested by Plato's well-known text, which we will now examine at length.

In summary, Plato's text describes a process where trance, divinatory trance, and possession are used to help individuals suffering from diseases and woes. The text discusses the importance of prayers to the gods, purifications, and rites in bringing relief and recovery to those who are correctly entranced and possessed. The "telestic" trance (mania) that Plato is dealing with in the Phaedrus is the one he later says is "inspired" by Dionysus. Plato sees mania as a result of fright, which he considers a "defective disposition" or a "weakness of the soul." In the Phaedrus, Plato sees this weakness as hereditary, at least in part. The difference between the concrete example of trance described by Euripides in the Bacchae and the abstract tableau drawn by Plato in the Phaedrus is due to the fact that Euripides refers to legendary time, when the cult of Dionysus was in the making, whereas Plato refers to historical time, when the cult had already long been instituted.

In the first part of the present text, Plato describes a situation corresponding to the one often seen in the first half of this book, where "histories of illness" result in "crises." The crisis that affects Agave in the Bacchae is particularly tragic, but Greek antiquity offers numerous comparable examples.

The second part of the text poses the problem of knowing exactly who the people are that Plato designates as "usually indulging in trance," which gives them "prophetic power." Translators and commentators have generally understood that the people concerned were the same as those mentioned in the previous phrase, those suffering from the woes of mania. However, this is not the case. Plato's general discussion of mania, which almost immediately precedes the passage, indicates those whom prophetic trance affects, giving examples such as the Delphic oracle and that of Dodona. Consequently, the people he has in mind are the diviners. But here he refers to the diviners in general and not necessarily to the two just mentioned, for as Dodds, who is evoking Plato, tells us: “Nor was prophetic possession confined to official oracles. Not only were legendary figures like Cassandra, Bakis, and the Sibyl believed to have prophesied in a state of possession, but Plato refers frequently to inspired prophets as a familiar contemporary type” (1951, 71). The second reason for considering that mania having “prophetic power” concerns diviners and not the diseased springs from the very logic of the system, which would have it that everywhere, and not only in Greece, the diseased come to consult diviners and ask them what to do. In this respect, Boyancé (1936, 66) cites a case that perfectly illustrates the rule and concerns Athens itself: The legend that concerns the introduction of a cult originating in Eleutheria conforms to the habitual scheme: A fault; the Athenians refuse to welcome with honor the statue of the God brought to them by a certain Pegasus; the result is a disease that in this case affects not the spirit but the body. . . ; recourse to a prophetic and inspired authority, this time as so often before, the Delphic Oracle. The consequence in the institution of the cult and the healing of the disease.'* Exactly what role did these diviners have? Among the Greeks as elsewhere, it is clear that they were first asked to identify the deity responsible for the woes afflicting the diseased person in order to know to whom prayers should be addressed, a preliminary requisite to any hope for healing.'* [3] After the sick persons have sought consultation, the diviners, having expressed their opinion, prescribe purifications (katharmoi) and rites (teletai). What exactly were these teletai so characteristic of this mania that Plato would call it “telestik@”? Or, if one prefers, what were these rites so characteristic of this trance. that Plato would call it “ritual?” In the Bacchae, rites are frequently mentioned. In the beginning verses of the tragedy, Dionysus presents himself and says: “To this of Hellene cities first I come, having established in far lands my dances and rites, to be God manifest to men” (Bacchae 20-23). The word teleté is frequently translated as “initiation,” but Boyancé (1932,°42) and Dodds (1960, 75-76), who both take a great interest in telestike, agree that the word generally designates the ritual of mystery cults. Prayers, sacrifices, purifications, dances, and songs are thus part of 196 CHAPTER FIVE the teleté. But Boyancé, who examines these rites in the Orphic context, in which they play an important role, emphasizes that they are expected to be effective. The word teletai, he writes (1932, 48), seems to designate “rites whose thrust is to more or less force the deity, rites whose most im- portant part is recourse to effective formulas.” He tells us elsewhere (ibid., 47, 161) that they are chanted formulas. But force the deities to do what? To manifest their presence. And Boyancé asks: “What exactly was this presence which, to our way of thinking, is the main goal of these rites that are mainly vocal and baptized by. the name of teletai?” (ibid. , 54). He an- swers: “We can only think about what the science of teletai, which became telestiké, is for the Neoplatonists. It essentially consists in provoking the arrival of the deity, but this operation is a very material one: the god ani- mates the statue representing him and telestiké is the art of consecrating statues. 

"It is not unreasonable to think that in Dionysiac cults the word teletai also served to designate rites aiming at “provoking the arrival of the deity,” but this time in a different way: by arousing possession trance. For Dionysianism, teletai could thus signify, in part at least, the art of consecrating not statues but initiates. We cannot state it definitely, but we can at least hypothesize it. Whatever the case may be, rites necessarily imply accomplishing a series of actions in a certain order, respecting the prescribed order, correctly following a certain traditional behavior. This aspect of things must above all be retained here; we shall soon see why. Let us now turn to the second part of [3]. The problem is to know exactly who is the one “welcoming” this trance and what aspect of trance, prophetic or telestic, is involved. Evidently, this trance that “brings recovery” is the one to which Plato actually refers, in other words, “telestic” trance. As for the one to whom this trance “brings recovery,” he can only be the one who needed it, that is to say, one of the people referred to in [1]. This sick person only recovers, the text says, if he “welcomes this trance for the present as well as for time to come.” What does this mean? Obviously, that the person concerned will have to, from then on, regularly comply with the rituals of telestic trance. In other words, he will recover only if he has been initiated and integrated into the cult of the god responsible for his woes; in brief, only after he has become a member of what the Greeks called a thiasos, let us say a “college of the possessed.” [4] We have just seen that the one who “welcomes” telestic trance “recovers.” But how is he “released from his troubles?” The last part of the text states this clearly: by being “correctly entranced and possessed,” in other words, by correctly (orthos) observing, the rites of the trance; in short, by practicing ritual trance. This is undeniably how this phrase, which has frequently been badly translated, must be understood. Let us emphasize here that if, in his last sentence, Plato speaks of a correct way of being entranced, he also implies there is an incorrect one. Otherwise his text would be meaningless. For:Plato, there thus existed two opposed aspects of trance, one ritualized and the other not. Among the Greeks, we once again:find the opposition of ritualized versus nonritualized trance, which, as we saw in the first part of this book, is one of the universals of possession. Now that we have completed our analysis, the scheme underlying Plato's text can be rewritten in a different way, one that will more clearly identify the nature of telestic trance. The episodes in the text succeed one another in the following manner: [1] diseases and woes (i.e.; nonritualized trance-crises) due to the offended god's anger; [2] consultation of the diviners, who through prophetic trance identify the god in question and prescribe the adequate prayers and cults needed to "secure deliverance" of the sick person; [3] purification and rites, which imply initiation and integration of the sick person into a "college of the possessed"; [4] practice of ritualized possession trance, healing. Before going further and leaving this highly instructive text, let us observe that the obscurity of this passage of the Phaedrus (244d—e) which has caused so much ink to flow is due ultimately to the fact that Plato, who will define four types of mania much later, here describes only its different aspects. And at this stage, which is that of divine mania in general, he does not distinguish between them. From one end of the text to the other, mania is the grammatical subject, but Plato does not specify the form of mania involved. It is up to the reader to know that in [1] he speaks of telestic trance in its non-ritualized aspect, in [2] of trance in its divinatory aspect, in [3] of both aspects one after the other, first of divinatory trance, which prescribes the rites, second of telestic trance which brings recovery, and lastly in [4] of ritualized telestic trance. For Plato, telestic trance thus appears to be profoundly ambivalent. It is at one and the same time sickness and healing of sickness, which should not surprise us. Let us say, using Zempléni’s term, that its main dimension is therapeutic. But among the Greeks, this “therapeutic dimension” could very well be a later aspect of possession trance since the latter did not always have the ambivalent character, both divine and shameful, that it had in the ‘days of Plato. He himself tells us so, still in the Phaedrus (244b), where we can read: “madness was accounted no shame nor disgrace by the men of old who gave things their names.” It is clear that if Plato feels obliged to write that in olden times mania was “accounted no shame nor disgrace,” this is because in his time it was, if not by everyone at least by some, and not without conflict as the very subject of the Bacchae tragedy demonstrates. Indeed, Plato himself seems to have had ambivalent feelings, if not toward mania—“madness” in general—at least toward its telestic form; in other words, toward possession trance. These feelings explain, at least in part, the conception he had of the relations existing between this form of trance and music and dance. It is therefore important to know them. In the Phaedrus, which, as we know, is the dialogue in which he sets forth his conception of love, Plato precedes Socrates’ discourse on the four forms of divine madness (mania) with a shattering preliminary statement. Having said that, contrary to what certain people think, the beloved would be wrong to prefer the lover “in a calm state of mind” (sophronei) to the one “made mad” (mainetai) by love under the pretext that madness is an evil, Socrates declares: “In reality, our greatest blessings come to us by way of madness [manias] which indeed is a divine gift” (Phaedrus 244a). Here we are back to the conception of madness as a “divine lot” (theai mora) resulting from a “divine force” (theia dynamis), an idea we already encountered in the Ion (5534c). A fine “praise of folly,” as Erasmus would have put it! But is it sincere? Dodds (1951, 64) sees it as a “conscious paradox,” a deliberate provocation that “startled the fourth-century Athenian reader hardly less than it startles us.” But matters may not be as simple as that. If we look more closely, we quickly see that everything depends upon the kind of madness we are talking about. Socrates, as we saw, distinguished between four different kinds. Everything indicates that his eulogy of “erotic madness” is perfectly and unreservedly sincere. “Of all forms of enthusiasm,” he tells us, it is “the best.” Through it, when one “sees beauty on earth, remembering true beauty, one feels one’s wings growing” (Phaedrus 249d-e). For Plato, indeed, the madness of love is the direct result of contemplating beauty, and beauty—that of the young beloved—is the best access to the good and the true, which is to say that which is most important in the world, the essential, in the strict sense of the word. It is easy to understand why Plato considers mad love, or erotic madness, as a gift from the gods, an inspiration, and an enthusiasm. It is less clear when we move from erotic madness to poetic madness. Socrates pokes fun at the unfortunate Ion when he tells him that it is Homer who possesses him. Socrates describes something real, which exists, and is only half-joking. He mentions that music, or "music technique," is also "a science of love matters." Both music and poetry proceed in part from love, and it is logical that both erotic and poetic madness are dear to Plato's heart. However, he never jokes about the first, but he does about the second.

Socrates mocks Ion, who is a rhapsodist and not a creator. He mocks possession and enthusiasm through Ion. Socrates is no longer completely serious here. As for mantic mania, or divinatory frenzy, Plato seems to hold the same opinion as poetic frenzy. He believes in it but does not hold the prophetesses of Delphi or Dodona in esteem. He claims that while they were mad, they conferred great benefits on Hellas, but when they were in their senses, they conferred few or none.

When Plato deals with telestic mania, or possession trance, it is qualified as "inspiration" because it is part of divine mania in general. However, it is not called "enthusiasm." It is "possession." This is the word Plato constantly uses to speak of it, and that's all. This is significant in itself, but there is more. To what exactly is this mania, which like all divine mania is a gift from God, tied? To fright, Plato says in Laws (790e), a fright resulting from a certain “weakness of the soul” and that is the “practice of cowardice” (ibid. 791b). Plato puts those who suffer from this fright in the same group as crying children rocked to sleep by their nanny—a comparison hardly flattering for the Bacchantes. How then shall we classify those Bacchic dances which “mime drunken people” and whose rhythms (rythmoi) are equally “appropriate to illiberality, and insolence or madness or other evils” (Republic 200 CHAPTER FIVE 400b)? Well, it would be best to “separate it off both from pacific and from warlike dancing, and to pronounce that this kind of dancing is unfit for our citizens” (Laws 875c-d). Plato.thus did not hold these bacchic dances in great esteem.

Thus, when Plato says that mania is for us “the greatest blessing and a gift from God,” there is indeed “a conscious paradox.” In making this statement, he sincerely has in mind the three mania, erotic, poetic, and mantic; as for telestic mania, his feelings are certainly mixed. Plato uses two words to designate the possessed, or, more generally, adepts of possession cults: “Bacchantes” (bacchoi), which of course is derived from Bacchus, and “Corybanters” (korybantiOntes), or those who act as Corybantes, the two words being more or less synonymous as he uses them. Oddly, however, he never uses the word maenads (mainades, from mania)—that is to say, the mad, frenzied, or crazed female companions of Dionysus so often depicted in paintings and symbolizing the trance state in Greek religion—even though they occupied the place they did in ancient Greek literature. Why? Perhaps because the word mainades designates very particularly, it would seem, Dionysus’ permanent companions who had come with him from Lydia (Bacchae 55), whereas bacchae, which also designates them, could be indiscriminately applied to all female adepts of his cult—or at least this is what emerges from a reading of Euripides.

The words “Bacchant” and baccheuein (“to behave like a Bacchant”) were not only reserved for Dionysus-Bacchus; they were of general use and could as well apply to the worship of another daimon, in particular to the Corybantes and to adepts of Cybele worship. If Plato abstains from any reference to the maenads, it is perhaps because they have no connection—or in any case have much less connection than Bacchants or Bacchantes—with the therapeutic dimension of trance. To speak of “Bacchantes” or of “those who behave like Corybantes” (korybantiontes), and thus implicitly to refer to the cult of Cybele, “Mother of the Gods,” is, on the contrary, to refer to a form of possession whose therapeutic dimension is primordial. Dodds points out that the worship of Cybele should, in fact, be viewed from this angle. Having observed (1951, 77) that other deities besides Dionysus could “cause mental trouble” and that “presumably all could cure what they had caused if their anger were suitably appeased,” he tells us that “by the fifth century the Corybantes at any rate had developed a special ritual for the treatment of madness. The Mother, it would appear, had done likewise (if indeed her cult was at that time distinct from that of the Corybantes).” In The Wasps (119-20), what is Aristophanes’ point of reference when he wants a typical situation to express a son’s efforts to cure his father, Bdelycleon, of his mania for judging? Quite naturally, the Corybantes. "The son makes his father “corybantize,” but the latter resists and “runs off with the drum.” What does Plato do, when he wants to characterize Phaedrus’ mania for speechifying? He depicts him as delightedly “syncorybantizing” with another person “whose sickness [xosounti] is wanting to listen to speeches” (Phaedrus 228b-—c). All this sufficiently demonstrates how far “corybantizing” and being afflicted by mania—as well as being cured of it—were, in Plato's time, synonymous.

Now that we have dealt with the words, we can come to what Plato thought about the relation of dance and music to trance. Music and Trance: Plato’s Theory

Plato never gathered together his ideas about the relation of trance to music and dance into an organized and, as it were, autonomous whole. The fact remains, however, that these ideas do form a coherent whole that is nothing less than a theory. This becomes quite apparent if one takes the trouble to collate and logically articulate a number of passages dealing with telestic madness that occur in the Phaedrus (something we have already seen at length), in the Laws, and in the Ion.

This is what I now propose to do, and the best starting point is a passage from the Laws (790d-791b), consisting of about twenty lines, which should be quoted in full.

Dealing with the exercises that should be used to form the souls of very young boys, Plato examines the methods of raising infants, and, in this context, advocates the virtues of continuous movement, which is “in all cases salutary” but especially in the case of the newborn “because it is as if they were always navigating.” Experience, he says, has brought home the advantages of this method to “those who nurse small children” as well as to the women who ritualize [telousai] in the healing [iamata] of the Corybantes. For when mothers have children who suffer from insomnia and want to go to sleep, they bring them not stillness, but this very movement [kinesin], for they rock [seiousai] them ceaselessly in their arms [they bring them] not silence, but melody [melodian], [so that they] “en-aulize” [kataulousi] the children just as [is done to] Bacchantes out of their senses [ekphronon], by using this cure [iaseis] [constituted by such forms] of movement [kinéseds] as singing- and-dancing [choreia] and “musia” [mousé].

The reason behind all this, Plato goes on, is that: the sufferings [pathe] of both are, in brief, frights; frights [deimata] that come from, a defective disposition [hexin phaulén] of the soul [psyché]. So when one applies an external shaking [seisos] to sufferings of this kind, the external movement [kinésis] overpowers the internal movement [kinésin] of fear [phoberan] and madness [manikén] and by thus overpowering it, it brings about a manifest calm in the soul and a cessation of the grievous palpitations of the heart, which had existed in each case. Thus, it produces very satisfactory results. It [the movement] brings sleep to the ones [the newborns] while to the others [the Bacchantes], set to dancing [orchoumenous] and listening to the aulos [auloumenous], it brings wakefulness [and], with the help of the gods, made favorable by happy auspices, and to whom each one offers sacrifices, it completes [for them] the enjoyment [ekein] of a sound state of mind [hexeis emphronas] instead of a state [diatheseon] [that is] in our eyes madness [manikon]. Just a word first to justify two oddities in this translation: the terms “en-aulize” and “musia.” The Greek kataulousi is always translated, whether in English or in French, by words referring to song or speech (such as “to cast a spell”), whereas in fact it refers to a musical instrument, the aulos. It is all the more important to respect the Greek text because the aulos, as we shall see later on, is the instrument par excellence of trance among the Greeks, hence the word “en-aulize.” As for the word mousa, the reason it has been rendered here by “musia”—meaning here “thing of the Muse”— and not, contrary to customary usage, by “music” is simply because it does not actually mean “music” (cf. Bailly’s dictionary), but rather “muse” first and foremost, and hence “science,” “art,” or “song,” or else “persuasive words.” There is every reason to think that the tunes played on the aulos during possession ceremonies were, as everywhere else, “mottoes,” or more precisely “persuasive words.” And what could there be in common between the melody made by nurses to the babies they are rocking—in other words lullabies—and the aulos themes played to the Bacchantes, other than the fact that both are “persuasive words”? If mousa had to be translated, in the present context, by an already existing term, then “persuasive words” is the one we ought to choose. Nevertheless, I prefer—still in this particular context of course—to use “musia,” which still stays very close to the word’s origin and does not prejudge what exactly Plato had intended to say. But in any case, there is no reason to translate it by “music.” Furthermore, to do so would:be to misrepresent Plato, since whereas he constantly uses the word mousiké, as we know, he abstains from doing so here. To conclude, we need to remember that in this passage there is no mention, strictly speaking, of music. It will be readily agreed that this is important. Movement, on the other hand, is repeatedly mentioned. Indeed, it is almost the main subject matter of the passage since it is to movement that song, dance, and “musia” ultimately lead, as Plato expressly indicates when he writes: “this cure [constituted by such forms] of movement as choreia and mousé.” But movement also ‘has a central place in his general theory of health. It is thus very significant to note that movement should also be at the very center of his theory of the relation between music and trance. In the Timaeus, which as we know contains an account of his general theory of the world system, humans included, Plato, after having dealt with human psychology, anatomy, and physiology then goes on to describe the diseases to which man is prone, those of the body first, then those of the soul (Timaeus 86g), and it is here that we find the definition of madness and its two aspects mentioned earlier. Immediately after that, he tackles the problem of health (87c). In order to maintain it, he observes, nothing is more important than to preserve a correct relationship between soul and body; and the means to this end is “never to move [kinesin] the soul without the body or the body without the soul, so that, each defending itself against the other, the two sides will retain their balance and their health” (88b). He then gives two concrete examples: “It is therefore necessary that the mathematician, and anyone who strenuously performs any intellectual activity, should also give movement [kinesin] to his body by practicing gymnastics. While the man who is diligent in molding his body must in turn provide his soul with movement by cultivating music [mousiké] and philosophy in general, if either is to deserve to be called both fair and good” (88c). Moving on then from the particular to the general, he sets out his principle of the complementarity—or the antagonism—of internal movement and external movement (Timaeus 88c-e):

The various parts, likewise, must be treated in the same manner, in imitation of the form of the Universe. For as the body is inflamed or chilled within by the particles that enter it, and again is dried or moistened by those without, and suffers the affections consequent on both these movements, whenever a man delivers his body, in a state of rest, to these movements, it is overpowered and utterly perishes; whereas if a man imitates that which we have called the nurturer and nurse of the Universe, and never, if possible, allows the body to be at rest but keeps it moving, and by continually producing internal vibrations, [he] defends it in nature's way against the inward and outward movements. . . . [88d—e]

And he concludes: “Wherefore the movement that is best for purgings and renovations of the body consists in gymnastic exercises; and second-best is the movement provided by swaying vehicles such as boats or any conveyances that produce no fatigue” (89a). All that, however, only concerns the “composite living creature and the bodily part of it” (89d). But now we find that the same treatment should be followed for our “three kinds of soul” (psyché) that “are housed within 204 CHAPTER FIVE us in three regions” and each of which “has its own movements” (89e). “We must therefore see to it that they all have their movements relatively to one another in due proportion.” As for the “most lordly kind” of our souls, which “raises us up from earth,” it too must retain “its own congenital movement.” These movements (kinéseis) which have an affinity with the “divine part within us. .:.are the intellection and revolutions of the Universe. These each one of us must follow,” and when they: are distorted they must be rectified “by learning the harmonies and revolutions of the Universe” (90a-d).

This summary of the Platonic theory of movement as the basis of health in man's body and soul makes it fairly clear that his other theory, that of movement as the basis of Corybantic healing, is nothing other than a particular case, a particular application, of the first. For the second does in fact contain the two broad principles of the first: on the one hand that of rhythmic rocking, on the other that of the antagonism between the two sets of movements, external and internal, that counterbalance-one another and thus reestablish equilibrium when it has been lost. The disturbances affecting those afflicted by telestic mania spring from the effect of a fright on a weak soul. This fright is an internal movement (kinésis). Dance and “musia” then intervene as an “external shaking” (seismos), and by virtue of their specific movement, which overcomes the earlier one, and “overpowers” it, restore calm and tranquillity. But how exactly does this external movement achieve such effects? Plato does not explain this here. But there is justification for thinking that, in accordance with terms of his general theory set forth in the Timaeus, they derive not only from the virtue sui generis of the rocking movement, but also from the fact that this movement is inseparable from the “harmonies and revolutions of the Universe.” "By virtue of their movement, dance and “musia” are thus able, in short, to reintegrate into the ordering of the Universe the individual who had become separated from it by the disordered movement of fright. To be sure, Plato feels bound to add (but giving the impression that for him it is just a matter of form) that the desired result does not occur without the benevolence of the gods. In any case, however, the teletai (rites) are aimed precisely toward this end. Such is the theory of Corybantic cure put forward by Plato in the Laws. “This is,” he concludes, “to put it shortly—quite a plausible account of the matter” (781b).

Following this text bearing upon the curative function of trance, and upon the central role played by movement and, therefore, above all, by dance (since music plays a secondary role and is not even mentioned by that name, we should stress), let us turn to another text, this time one that relates dance to what we shall call, for the sake of convenience, music, even though, here again, it is also not given that name. We read in the Ion (536c):

“Those who are ‘corybantizing’ (korybantiontes) have a sharp ear for one tune [mmelous] only, the one which belongs to the god by whom they are possessed [katechontai] and to that tune they respond freely with gesture [sch@matodn] and speech, while they ignore all others.”

What does this passage tell us? In the first place, that the possessed person reacts to one tune and one alone. Why? Without doubt because it is his. Taking advantage of what we have found to be the case everywhere else in these matters, I shall call this tune his motto. When he hears this musical motto, this tune, how does the “corybantizer” react? The text, and even more so the context—which I hope I may be forgiven for not quoting—indicate the answer to this quite clearly: he goes into trance. And how does he manifest this trance? By finding “gestures and speech” enabling him “to respond freely” to this tune, and, consequently, by dancing. We are therefore well aware of the role played by music in triggering that trance. It does not operate by means of some sui generis virtue or other that produces emotional effects of a specific kind capable of putting people beside themselves. It is: not as music—the word is mine and does not figure in Plato’s text—that it acts, it is as a melody that has a meaning to which it is necessary to respond; in short, it acts as a coded signal.

On the basis of the data given by the three above-mentioned dialogues (Phaedrus, Laws, and Ion), Plato’s theory of the relations between trance and music can now be formulated as follows: “People who are psychologically somewhat fragile, and who as the result of god’s anger suffer from divine madness, cure themselves by practicing ritual trance, which is triggered by a musical motto and takes the form of a dance; music and dance, by the effect of their movement, reintegrate the sick person into the general movement of the cosmos, and this healing is brought about thanks to the benevolence of gods who have been rendered propitious by sacrifices.”

Formulated in this way, Plato's theory on the relation of trance to dance and music appears at first to be very different from the one usually set forth; I shall later explain how. In the second place, it seems to coincide broadly with the theory proposed in the first part of this book, except on one essential point, which is that of the role assigned to possession itself in the healing process. Let us begin with what the two theories have in common. On the whole, they coincide with respect to the role allotted to music. Music does play a part, but it is no more than one element among others, which include rituals, dance, movement, and, of course, the benevolence of the gods. Music's role is so far from being predominant that the word "music" appears only once in Plato's texts. (I shall later return to Plato's way of referring to it in the context of possession, since it is significant.) It is the support of dance. Music also triggers trance; but never once is it presented as doing so by means of an emotional charge of any kind. It triggers trance because it is a motto, in other words, a signal.

Let us now come to the divergences. The central point of my theory is that music, by acting as both the signal for trance and the support for dance, essentially allows the possessed person to publicly identify himself to the god possessing him or her. It is this process of public identification with the god that is for me the mainspring of possession trance, and when this possession has a "therapeutic dimension" of any importance, it is this public identification that is the principal agent of the cure.

In Plato, the gods play a part, it is true, but only—and this barely indicated—in order to strike people with madness. At the healing stage, their role is limited to viewing things with benevolence. At the outset, when defining the four mania, Plato does mention "enthusiasm" and "inspiration," and mania is presented as caused by the gods. Here, however, in the texts concerned solely with telestic mania—possession trance—nothing of the sort is evoked. Telestic mania appears to be emptied of its religious content. Seen in terms of its therapeutic dimension, it appears as an almost purely profane and mechanical affair.

If I had to draw a parallel between Plato's theory and my own, I would say that, for him, the healing process is achieved by reinsertion of the individual in the cosmos as a result of the movement of dance and music, which reestablishes harmony with the universe, whereas for me healing is achieved by the reinsertion of the individual in society as a result of the movement of music and dance; which provokes identification with the god. The difference can be expressed as in Figure 5.1.

To sum up, Plato's theory is both physical and metaphysical, whereas mine is both psychological and sociological; both are equally physiological. The question that confronts us now is whether possession among the Greeks displayed certain characteristics that would explain why Plato ignored what I see as one of its universal characteristics: identification with the god. If this were the case, then the Greek system would be an exception that would certainly have to be taken into account. If this were not the case, then we would first have to prove it. This is what I will try to do now.

Dancing and Identifying Oneself with the Gods

1. The concept of "identificatory" possession is exemplified by the terms "bantize" or "to act like a Corybant," which should be translated as "Corybantizers" or "those who act like Corybantes." The idea of "acting like Corybantes" implies identifying with them internally. Similarly, the words "bacchei6n," "Bacchant," and the verb "baccheuein" express the idea of identifying with Bacchus. The process and state of identification with the god possessing the entranced person are at the center of any possession cult.
2. Among the epithets of Dionysus, we find "Bromius," the "Roarer." Dionysus is also called "Bromius" in the Bacchae, where the chorus says: "Whosoever leads the worshiping companies [thiasos] is Bromius." According to Dodds, this means that the leader of the oreibasia identifies with the god.
3. The exarchos, who led the dithyramb, was also the one who led the oreibasia. Dodds believes that the oreibasia was originally a women's rite with a single male celebrant, who identified himself with Dionysus during his trance.
4. The maenads, or some of them, identified themselves with Semele, mother of Dionysus, or with a cow. Dodds wrote that the maenads or thyiads became, for a few hours or days, what their name implies—wild women whose human personality has been temporarily replaced by another.
5. Telestic mania, "inspired by Dionysus," is indeed a possession trance corresponding to the definition given at the beginning of this book; it is "identificatory." The originality and newness of trance tied to the cult of Dionysus stem from its close association with wine and drunkenness. 

Pentheus himself, the tragic hero of the Bacchae, exclaims with virtuous indignation: “When in festivities wine is served to women, | say that then there is nothing wholesome in their mysteries” (1. 261-62). Symbols of te- lestic trance in Plato’s days, the Bacchantes must also :be:seen as the pro- moters of what we should call alcoholic trance, which in our days cer- tainly is one of the most widespread forms of mania.** Let us now turn to dance. Be it in writings or paintings, the Bacchantes and the maenads are usually represented as dancing.** Evidence from vase paintings show that among the Greeks and elsewhere (and we have already spoken of this “elsewhere” in a previous chapter), possession dance had two main aspects, which I shall here again call, abstract and figurative. The abstract aspect is constituted by a repertoire of movements devoid of any figurative function, in other words representing nothing other than themselves: wild spinning, wide swinging of the arms, abrupt flinging back of the head—the movement “that dislocates the neck”* described by Pindar in a dithyramb—violent arching of the body, abserit and convulsive attitudes: these are the principal—and well-known—features of the abstract part of possession dancing among the Greeks. As we can see (and this is an often-repeated point, by Jeatimaire in particular), there is great similarity here with the behavior still observed in so many possession dances, from Bali to Brazil, passing through the Middle and Near East, the Mediterranean basin, and both black and white Africa. In this way, savagery and aggression are externalized by means of scant gesticulation that makes use above all of movements expressing agitation and frenzy. Presumably among the Greeks as elsewhere this was the way of expressing the “fury” of the god, and hence his terrible and redoubtable nature—ultimately, his power. Athenaeus, the Egyptian-born Greek who lived in Rome during the later years of the second century A.D., whose Banquet of the Deipnosophists is an invaluable repository of information on dance in antiquity, classified possession dances under the generic heading manio-deis orcheseis, which we might translate by “frenzied dances.” L. Sechan, the great specialist of Greek dance, translates it as “danses furieuses” (1930, 83), making it quite plain that he considered violence as its most important feature. However, possession dance also had another equally important aspect, which consisted in executing figures that were either symbolic or imitative. For Plato, to imitate “Nymphs, Pans, Sileni and Satyrs” by means of mime is the very definition of “Bacchic dance” (Laws 815c). We have the evidence of a famous cup, made at the time of the Median wars, that depicts a figure with the dress, hair, and accoutrements of Dionysus-Bacchus, playing the lyre, dancing with his head flung back in the characteristic trance attitude, and flanked by two naked and staggering Bacchantes. Is it the god himself who’s thus represented? Is it a Bacchant, and thus an exarchon? In this last case, it would mean that Dionysus also could be imitated while dancing. But Dionysus was not always represented in his human form. There is evidence that in Thrace, if not in Athens, during certain ceremonies people wore ox horns in order to imitate the Bull-Dionysus (Pearson 1918, 127). The panther, another wild animal, was likewise imitated by means of dance. There is a red-figure vase that depicts a maenad dancing with a pair of clappers in each hand and wearing a panther skin. In Chapter Five, "Is it not clear," Sechan observes, "that she resembles this great wild animal less as a result of this external attribute than on account of the lithe and feline movement of her dance, which must have been punctuated, imagination tells us, with sudden catlike bounds" (1930, 74 and fig. 11). One cannot help but think that some maenads were possessed by a panther at one moment or another of the ceremony. It might seem surprising that a maenad—a companion of Dionysus, one of those he addresses in the Bacchae (55-56) with the words "O my sisterhood of worshipers, whom I lead with me from barbaric countries, . . who live and travel at my side"—can be possessed by a panther, or rather, for this seems to express better the spirit of the system, by the soul of a panther.

Without making any diffusionistic connection between the two facts, I would like to cite an exactly parallel case observed in Dahomey, when, during a ceremony for Sakpata the divinity of earth and smallpox, a woman embodying one of. the "kings of the waters" (toxgsu) before my very eyes publicly performed a panther dance, thus demonstrating that at that moment she was possessed by this wild animal, and consequently identified herself with it. The fact that in Greece a woman embodying a companion of Dionysus is depicted as possessed by a panther, or-that in Dahomey a water divinity fleetingly embodies the spirit of a wild animal, shows, once again, that the themes of possession are universal and that the fury of wild beasts is one of its favorites. It further demonstrates that possession is accompanied everywhere by a broad movement of exchange, by a coming and going of souls,*° a process that is certainly within the logic of a system whose mainspring is a change of personality.

The dance repertoire of the maenads has another aspect as well. The lat- ter are depicted performing what Maurice Emmanuel has called the "joined hands dance" because of this characteristic gesture that still re- mains enigmatic (unless I am mistaken) but that undoubtedly had a precise symbolic meaning. As for the dances performed by those who imitated sa- tyrs and sileni, they were made up of a variety of steps. These dancers, ac- cording to Sechan, "also on occasion practiced the dance with a forward bending and back arching of the body. But in general they favored abrupt crouching on one leg, followed by leaps that straightened the bent leg and bent the previously straight one, wild caperings in which they often had maenads as partners, together with various contorsions and swaying movement of the hips accentuated by angular movements of the arms" (ibid., 173).

Here, however, a cautionary remark is in order. Jeanmaire, whose au- thority. on the subject of Dionysianism is well known, asks (1951, 292) if in their analyses of these orgiastic dances, the authors I have been quoting (and others too) have not perhaps committed the error of "sometimes reasoning as if the choreography of the Bacchants and Bacchantes was a learned choreography, or at least one that was regularly taught and whose elements could be broken down into a set series of steps and attitudes." In other words, for Jeanmaire the Bacchic dance could only be disorder. In fact, besides the evidence already cited, other arguments also run counter to his thesis. The reader will pardon me, I hope, for taking him once again to Benin, but as an eyewitness I can confidently say that in this country, the possession dance performed during public ceremonies—which often constitute what amounts to theatrical performances: opera-ballets whose sumptuousness is displayed in a large square specially set up for the event, and before an audience of several hundred people—makes use of an extremely complex choreography, whose steps and figures, diligently learned, are all charged with symbolic meanings. This applies, moreover, not only to the orisha cult (Yoruba) but equally to the vodun cults (Fon and Gun), and also, in fact, to many other African cults, such as that of the "hole" among the Songhay of Niger, for example, as Jean Rouch will attest, or that of the "zar" as described by Riya Salima in Harems et Musulmans d'Egypte.*

We have no reason to believe that among the Greeks, where possession also displayed many institutionalized aspects, the Dionysiac dance was any less "learned" than other dances, whether religious or profane, or that it consisted of no more than a few elementary movements conveying agitation and frenzy. The indications I have listed so far tend to prove just the contrary, and comparison with what we know happens elsewhere demonstrates that this was simply not the case. On this point, Jean-maire seems to have been less perspicacious than he usually was.

Now that I have concluded this digression—and it was not without importance—I shall return to my argument. In the art of dance, "orchestics," the Greeks made a distinction between two fundamental elements (Sechan 1930, 64): the "movements" on the one hand (phorai), the "gestures, figures, attitudes" (schemata) on the other. We may reasonably presume that within the context of possession, phorai served to denote the non-figurative movements (the abstract aspect of dance) since it is clear that schemata or "figures" denoted its figurative aspect; Plato uses the latter word in the Ion (536b) when describing the dance of the "corybantizers" who, in order to conform to the tune of the god possessing them, "have no difficulty finding the right gestures [schematon] and speech."

We have already seen how varied these schemata were. Contrary to what Plato would have us believe with his usual ill will toward telestic mania, they did not consist only in "miming the actions of drunk people." Of course, one would expect that in Dionysiac rituals drunkenness would indeed be a habitual theme of imitation, the mimesis, which was an essential feature of dance among the Greeks. Plato tells us so himself (Laws 816a):*

But Bacchic orchestics was by no means confined to drunkenness and frenzy. If it had been, why would Plato have stressed, 212 CHAPTER FIVE as he does in the Ion (536b) that "corybantizers" (read: the possessed in general) "have a sharp ear for one tune only," the one which belongs to the god by whom they are possessed. And what merit would there be in their "responding freely" to that tune with gesture and speech, unless those figures were both varied and characteristic? Here Plato is flagrantly contradicting himself. Indeed, it seems that, Plato's ambivalent feelings concerning telestic mania—or if one prefers, possession trance—lead him to contradict himself. On the one hand, he celebrates mania in general as being a "gift of the gods"; on the other, he takes every opportunity to cast a negative light on the behavior of telestic mania. To be sure, he considers the latter as being both sickness and the way to cure sickness, but he does not attribute the curing process to the intervention of the gods, who are only asked to be “benevolent.” Rather, he attributes it only to the dialectics of movement, which is a purely profane explanation. Ultimately, the real paradox in Plato is that he withdraws the gods from possession, or more precisely, from its therapeutic dimension, whose importance he himself fully recognizes. The reason is that, as Dodds has shown (1951, 217-18), he is divided between his search for rationality and his desire to find a slot for the irrational in his system. His moral fiber disapproves of the excesses, frenzies, and unbridled behavior of telestic trance. Everything happens as if within himself, Plato does not really believe in possession; as if he cannot really admit that these “mad” behaviors are due to the presence of a god—or rather a daimon, since for him the only real gods are the Demiurge and the planets.

Despite its contradictions, Plato’s theory does have the immense merit of showing that possession essentially is a process through which the individual is reinserted into the whole that surrounds him, and, as a corollary, that the role of music and dance is to reconcile the torn person with himself. Whether the “whole” referred to in this reinsertion process is the cosmos, as Plato thinks, or the society, as I do, is of secondary importance. Whether in the first case reinsertion is due to harmony with the universe, resulting from movement, or whether, in the second case, it is due to identification, with a god, the primary function of dance, is also of little importance. In both cases, the “symbolic efficacy,” as Lévi-Strauss would say, is of the same order and direction.

To end, let us note here, since this involves another aspect of the mimésis of which Plato spoke, that imitation of the gods occupies an essential place in Strabo’s “theological excursus” (book 10 of his Geography), which according to Jeanmaire (1939, 596), constitutes a veritable “theory of orgiastic cults.” A product of “enthusiasm,” “the state of happiness indicated by the word eudaimonia, is, above all, imitation of the divine state,” Jeanmaire writes in the summary he gives of this text. Defined as “the art of the Muses in the broadest sense,” in other words including “dance, music, and song,” music is regarded by Strabo as a way of establishing “contact with the divine by means of the pleasure it procures and because it is art at its most perfect.”

Curious though it may seem, the word music (mousiké) does not occur once in Plato’s writings in the context of possession. The only word approaching music—and approaching it very closely, but differing nevertheless—is mousa, which occurs once, and only once, in the Laws (790e), and which I translated earlier as “musia,” for reasons I gave at that time. Plato speaks too willingly of music and uses the word itself too frequently elsewhere for this fact not to be significant. When referring to what I am calling music in this book—and how, among the Greeks or anywhere else, is one to talk about possession without mentioning music?—what terms does Plato use? As we saw, he uses “musia,” “aulos” (in its various forms), “melody,” and “rhythm.” Of these, however, aulos is by far the most frequently used. In direct or indirect association with trance, it occurs eleven times in his works, whereas melos, in this or a derived form, appears only four times and the word rythmos once. 

[Chatbort] It is important to stress that whereas Plato links trance closely with melody or a melodic instrument, he rarely associates it with rhythm. In connection with trance, not once does he make any reference to such percussion instruments as drums, cymbals, or clappers, all of which are frequently mentioned or depicted in this context elsewhere. Again, this fact is significant. For Plato, it is the tune, the melody played by the aulos that counts. It is when he hears it that the “corybantizer” begins to dance. Plato makes no mention either of the sound intensity of the drums or clappers (instruments the Greeks must surely have played just as loudly as other peoples) or of the frenzied aspect of the rhythm (which also must have gone through the same paroxysmic phases as elsewhere in the world) as the dancing figures painted on Greek vases eloquently attest. Indeed, Plato accords such slight importance to rhythm in possession rituals that when it comes to identifying rhythms, or more precisely, to saying which of them “is appropriate to illiberality and insolence or madness or other evils” (Republic 400b)—since that is how these things appear to him, we must remember—he simply refers the reader to Damon and passes on. In fact generally speaking, the ethos, as it was to be called later, of rhythms is of scant interest to him altogether: “But which [rhythms] are imitations of 214 CHAPTER FIVE which sort of life, I am unable to say” (Rep. 400a—b). When Plato writes about possession, it is to the aulos first and foremost that he makes reference. Rhythm leaves him indifferent, and he says nothing about percussion instruments. Aristotle was to take much the same course in the Politics (8), in which he deals with rhythm merely in passing, and as a wholly secondary aspect of music seen in the context of its relation to enthusiasm. But it is not only in the work of these two great theoreticians of the relations between music and trance that the aulos is presented as the instrument par excellence of mania. The same is true for the works of the tragic poets. Aeschylus, in the only surviving fragment of his tragedy The Edonians, mentions the bombyx and its melody (melos) whose call “leads to madness [mania].” (The bombyx was a type of aulos, a single clarinet with a long body and removable reed; it had movable metal rings—bombykoi—that acted on the side holes rather like modern keys.) Sophocles, for his part, says of Ajax, when he was seized by a murderous frenzy, that he was literally “synaulized” by “divine madness” (Ajax, 610). Euripides, in the Bacchae, specifically names the aulos several times, and also the lito (160), which was probably a particular variety of the aulos. But to be honest, although in this tragedy wholly centered on possession he talks of the aulos as an instrument typical of Dionysus worship, he also says the same of the drum, “that hide-stretched orb” (ibid., 123), and nothing is ever explicitly said about the exact relation that either instrument had with trance. In Heracles, on the other hand, the murderous frenzy of the hero is directly related, three times in succession, to the aulos. Moreover, it is explicitly stated that no drums will take part in the sinister dance that Lyssa promises (Heracles, 891). Thus the bloodthirsty mania that grips both Ajax and Heracles, when the latter are in the power of Lyssa, the “rage,” is presented as linked with melody and not, in any way, with percussion. All this, once again, contradicts the myth that trance is triggered by drumming and its supposed effects on the brain's alpha rhythm. The trances with which we are dealing here have a quite different explanation, despite Neher's and his disciples' opinions.**

The unanimity shown by Plato and Aristotle on the one hand, and by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides on the other, in presenting the aulos as the instrument of trance, is certainly significant, and it must reflect what was commonly believed at the time and ultimately, the actual musical practices current in Greek possession cults. Whether an aulos, bombyx, or lotos, it was a melodic instrument that the Greeks credited with triggering trance. Neither rhythm, nor sheer volume, nor the frenzy of the percussion instruments—all of which were frequently used in possession ritual as we know from so many paintings—were seen as having this effect.

What exactly was the place of the aulos among the ancient Greeks? Both textual and pictorial evidence clearly show that it was closely associated with trance, but that it was not linked to it exclusively, and that it was not reserved solely for possession rituals; far from it. In fact, the aulos was a very popular instrument in Greece, at least in its simple forms; we may well suppose that the instruments of more complicated construction, such as the bombyx Aeschylus mentions, were played only by top-flight professionals. And although after the fluctuations in popularity it underwent in Greece at the time of the Persian wars—Aristotle (Politics 8. 6) explains this very clearly—it did become the object of a kind of craze among the upper classes,* it was a generally despised instrument.

Whether they were men or women—for it is often depicted as being played by women—those who played it during banquets were either slaves or people of very low estate. What Eriximachus, in the Symposium (176e) says when he proposes “that we should send away the flute girl [au/os girl] who has just come in—let her play to herself or, if she likes, to the women of the household,” clearly demonstrates the small regard accorded to aulos players. This same aulos player was to return later (Symposium 212), accompanying a band of revelers creating a great din and supporting a very drunk Alcibiades. The role assigned to her is significant.

In about 500 B.C., in other words more than a century before the Symposium was written, Pratinas of Phlius, the master of the Athenian satyric chorus, had already written: “Song, the Muse had decreed it king, let the aulos keep its second rank for it is its servant. Let it only take command in unruly processions, and the fistfights in which drunken young men indulge on the doorsteps of whore-houses.” The aulos was thus, broadly speaking, linked with debauchery.** It was also associated, nonetheless, with military exercises, with war, and consequently with courage. It accompanied the pyrrhic dance, which had spread from Crete, said to be its country of origin, to all of Greece, and in particular to Sparta, where it was considered “as a propaedeutics of war” (Moutsopoulos 1959, 146), and to Athens, where “it enjoyed great success in the Panathenian festivals.” Plato was particularly appreciative of this dance which was responsible for “physical beauty and nobility of character in the young, because it imitated the gestures of valiant warriors” (ibid.). When accompanying the pyrrhic dance, the aulos, it is true, combined its sound with that of the lyre, but it was nevertheless so closely identified with this dance that “it was referred to indifferently by the two terms aulos and pyrrhikine” (ibid.). Moreover, a vase depicts an aulos player in the midst of armed, charging warriors, playing his pipes toward the sky (Séchan 1930, 107). Lastly, the aulos was also sometimes associated with a sowing dance (ibid., 100). The aulos appears, then, to have been a popular instrument associated not only with trance but also with the theater, debauchery, war, and agricultural rites. The least we can say is that its use was not a specialized one. As to its timbre and the manner in which it was played, we can say, without fear of error, that they were as piercing and as shrill as they are still are throughout the Mediterranean basin in our own day. Paintings depict aulos players blowing their instruments with puffed-out cheeks, indicating that, as is almost universal with this instrument, they practiced circular breathing, which enables one to play without taking breaths, and thus without stopping. As played in the Mediterranean manner, let us say, the double clarinet and the oboe have very vehement intonations, a forceful and rasping tone, and an emotional intensity enhanced still further by the fact that the instrument can be played for hours on end without interruption. In Turkey, a bagpipe—another form of the clarinet or oboe—is used to incite camels to battle. It is tempting to think, in view of its shrill volubility, its eloquence, its intensity, which makes the air positively vibrate and can be deafening, and its insistence, which can become almost obsessive, that this instrument is particularly suited to the task of making people’s heads spin and to triggering trance. This would explain the close association of the aulos with possession. In fact, such an interpretation might as well be the pure product of our imagination. Nothing proves that the sound of the aulos is experienced in this way by people actually hearing it, and nothing in the texts demonstrates that this was the case in ancient Greece. To be sure, Aeschylus, as we just saw, says that its calls “lead to madness,” but Euripides in the Bacchae (127-28) speaks, on the contrary, of “the sweet calling breath of Phrygian flutes [read aulos].” If the role of the aulos in triggering trance had been due to its musical characteristics, and in particular to its timbre, then its relation to trance would have been doubly exclusive. Its use would have been reserved solely for possession and, reciprocally, possession would have been induced by no other means. But this was not the case. We have seen that the aulos was used in a great many other contexts. Trance likewise was occasionally accompanied by a quite different instrument. We know that in Greece, the opposition between aulos and zither, between aulos music and zither music, between Dionysus and Apollo was strongly emphasized. And yet, as surprising as it may be, we find that the lyre could occasionally be associated with Bacchic trance. This is shown by a painting I mentioned earlier, the one on the red-figure cup in the style of Brygos and dating from the time of the Persian wars, representing Dionysus in a state of trance and playing a seven-stringed lyre. Once again, we see that in ancient Greece, as elsewhere, the relations between music—here the instrument of music—and trance were not ruled by natural constraints but by cultural arbitrariness. It is nevertheless true that this representation of Dionysus holding a lyre is surprising. Why is the god playing this instrument? To what mythological context does this refer? For all I know, the question awaits an answer. Let us now pass on to Plato's thoughts on the aulos. Taking as his starting point the passage in the Symposium (215c) where we are told that the melodies of Marsyas played on the aulos are the only ones capable of inducing possession by reason of their divine origin, Moutsopoulos (1959, 10) concludes that "thanks to this religious aspect of their art, aulos players, having been banished from The Republic, reappeared in the Laws"—a conclusion somewhat swiftly drawn. It would be very surprising if Plato, whose feelings concerning trance were so mixed, had seen in its association with the aulos a good reason for rehabilitating the instrument. The matter should be viewed somewhat differently.

The aulos is indeed condemned in The Republic (399c-d), but this judgment is only made as part of a general condemnation of all "polyharmonic instruments," a condemnation that applies just as much to "instruments of many strings" as to the aulos—the most 'polychord' of all. And Plato asks: "Do not panharmonic instruments imitate the aulos?" We know that Plato accused aulos players of having introduced all sorts of innovations into music, notably new "harmonies" requiring more notes than the only two modes that "should be kept," that is to say, the Dorian and the Phrygian. In this passage, then, Plato has in mind instruments of recent and complicated workmanship, furnished with a great many side holes (possibly the bombyx with its long tube and mobile rings mentioned earlier). But he is not attacking the simple aulos, with its small number of holes, any more than he is the lyre or the zither when they have a small number of strings. He is attacking the virtuosos and their sophisticated instruments that upset tradition. He is not attacking traditional instruments in any way.

And this explains why, when he is dealing with the organization of competitions "for both men and horses" (Laws, 764d-e), he groups "rhapsodists, zither and aulos players" together and thinks there should be "a separate umpire" for this group. It is therefore not quite correct to say that the aulos is banished from The Republic and reappears in the Laws. If we look more closely, we see that a different instrument is involved in each of the two cases: in one it is indisputably the instrument played by virtuosos; in the other it is the traditional folk instrument. The two were very different.

Nonetheless, the musical instrument dear to Plato was the lyre or zither, in short a stringed instrument (as long as there were not too many strings!). By their very nature as stringed instruments they were associated with ideas concerning the simple relations of lengths measured on a vibrating string, and hence to mathematical speculation about numbers; thereby they were connected with the highest aspect of music, the one concerning the relations of man with the cosmos and the great laws of the universe. The aulos, on the other hand, is a musically approximate instrument, and the relation between its sounds—sounds that are easily altered by blowing differently or by differently covering the side holes—are more difficult to express in numbers. In the Philebus (56a) we read that the art of the aulos is one of adjusting its harmonies not by measurement but by "empirical conjecture." Added to its association with trance and debauchery, this aspect of the aulos would certainly not have led Plato to rank it high among musical instruments. However, in his respect for tradition and traditional music, he accepts the aulos willy-nilly, and carefully marks its place in the Laws, as we just saw. Meanwhile, his real feelings burst forth in The Republic (398-99) when he proscribes it, without stipulating that he is in fact referring to the modern, virtuoso instrument. Forgetting what he has just said about “instruments of many strings or whose compass includes all harmonies,” and which “we shall not need in our songs and airs” because they are responsible for “dirgelike modes of music that are useless even to women,” he asserts that “in preferring Apollo and the instruments of Apollo to Marsyas and his instruments”—meaning the lyre and zither to the various forms of aulos—he is simply “purging” the city of the “luxury” infecting it. One could not judge the aulos more severely. Plato, nevertheless, nurtured a tender feeling for this instrument. Witness in the Crito (54b) the last words he has Socrates utter before his death. Resisting the appeals of Crito, who urges him to flee, Socrates decides to submit to the sentence of his judges, however unjust it might be; he tells Crito what the voice of his conscience is dictating to him and concludes: “That, my dear Crito, is what I seem to hear, just as it is said that those who corybantize seem to hear the aulos.” As we see, Plato’s feelings about the aulos were as mixed and as contradictory as those he had for possession. As for Aristotle, he was not very fond of the aulos either, though for different reasons. Recalling the story (Politics 1341) of Athena who threw away the aulos after she invented it because, as she played it, she saw the reflection of her disfigured face in a spring (which showed that she was blowing it with puffed-out cheeks, the usual technique of aulos playing), Aristotle notes that although the goddess certainly did this out of annoyance because of the ugly distortion of her face, the real reason was that “education in flute playing has no effect on intelligence,” something that would indeed disgust Athena, the inventor of the sciences and arts! (According to another version of the legend,*’ Athena flung the pipes away from her with these words: “Far from me, shame and taint of my body, I do not indulge in such indecency!” which again is hardly complimentary to the aulos.) Elsewhere, again in the Politics (1341a), other reasons lead Aristotle to depreciate the aulos. This time, the instrument—which should be used only when “cathartic rather than educational effects” are required— should be excluded from the educational training of young men because one cannot speak while one is playing it; this obviously implies that such a defect does not apply to the lyre or the zither, since both are the instruments par excellence for accompanying singing. The aulos is thus condemned to be an instrument played only by professionals, slave musicians, or people of low estate. In fact, Aristotle’s entire chapter on the education of young men, and particularly education through music (in the Politics), is impregnated through and through with a very marked class prejudice. Nobles and common people, slaves and free men are constantly being contrasted: “But professional musicians we speak of as vulgar people, and indeed we think it not manly to perform music except when drunk or for fun” (1339b), and further on he writes: “we do not consider performing to be proper for free men” (1341b). Still further on (1342a), dealing with theatrical music, he concedes the necessity of providing "cathartic" harmonies and melodies (meaning Phrygian, and thus suited to the aulos) in order to satisfy the tastes of "the vulgar class composed of artisans and laborers and other such persons." Plato, as we have seen, had little esteem for Bacchic dances—accompanied by the aulos—which are unsuitable for citizens. We also saw the lack of respect he had for the aulos player in the Symposium. In the Theaetetus (173d) he associates the instrument with the hetaera. For Plato as well as for Aristotle, both of high social status, the aulos was contemptible because it was the instrument of the lower classes and of slaves. In a sense, the aulos had in ancient Greece the same position the accordion now has in France. As for Dionysiac songs, they were essentially popular, as Nietzsche saw quite well in The Birth of Tragedy. Here once again we find what was said earlier about the highly popular character of possession music.

Let us return to the relation of the aulos to mania. Apollo was seen among the Greeks as the inventor of the lyre and Marsyas the Silenus as the inventor of the aulos. And about the melodies* of Marsyas, Plato categorically says: "whether played by a fine aulos player or a paltry aulos girl, they are the only ones capable of inducing possession, because of their divine origin, and to indicate those who are recipients of the deities and their [proper] rites" (Symposium 215c). Why is this? Because they "are themselves divine." An explanation as unexpected as it is peremptory! But who provides it? Alcibiades, who is drunk and delivering his celebrated and highly ironic speech in praise of Socrates. In other words, it should not be taken seriously.

In short, Plato tells us that tunes on the aulos entrance people, and this is corroborated by too many other sources for us to doubt it; but he abstains from explaining this particular effect of aulos music. This fact is important and deserves to be stressed. Although Plato has a theory of the effects of music and dance on the curing of madness, as we have seen, he lacks one to explain the effects of music on the triggering of trance (though as we shall see, others would later formulate one in his place). Aristotle, on the other hand, had very precise ideas on the subject, so we will now turn to him.

Aristotle, the Ethos of Modes, and the Phrygian Mode

Plato tells us that if the "productions" of Marsyas have the strange power of causing trance, this is "because they are themselves divine." His explanation is a bit brief. Aristotle proposes a different view of the matter. In the Politics (1340a), having talked about the tunes composed by Olympus,* "which make our souls enthusiastic," and having given a long account of the imitative virtues of music and the nature of "harmonies"—or musical modes—he makes the general statement that "the Phrygian mode makes men enthusiastic [enthusiastikous]" (1340b). Marsyas the Silenus and his pupil, Olympus, are both, as we know, Phrygians. The aulos is Phrygian in origin. If the tunes of Marsyas and Olympus induce trance, they must do so because they are in the Phrygian mode—a more interesting explanation, it will be conceded, than Plato's. And all the more so because it is part of a general theory of music's effects based on the idea that music is able to "represent" and "imitate" states of the soul. Melodies (Melé) "do actually contain in themselves imitations of character" (mimémata ton éthon), Aristotle tells us, and in "melodies there are differences, so that people when hearing them are affected differently and do not have the same feelings with respect to each of them" (1340ab). The same is also true of rhythms. He adds, returning a little later on to the Phrygian mode, he writes (1342b): “the Phrygian mode has the same effect [dynamin] among harmonies [harmonion] as the aulos among instruments, both are orgiastic and passional [orgiastika kai pathetika]. . .all Bacchic transport [bac-cheia] and all movement of this sort belongs to the aulos more than any other instrument, and find their suitable accompaniment in tunes in the Phrygian mode among the harmonies.” Being “passional” or “pathetic,” the Phrygian mode is thus opposed to the Dorian mode, which is “ethical.” Properly speaking, then, the Phrygian mode is not endowed with éthos or moral character, but with pathos or passion. For this reason, unlike melodies in the Dorian mode, which the man or youth of high birth may learn because they are “ethical” (@thi- kOtatai) and therefore suitable for educational purposes, those in the Phrygian mode must only be listened to, and their performance must be left to musicians of servile or low condition. It is worth noting, in passing, that here we return, though by an unexpected path, to a fact we established in an earlier chapter, namely that possession music is music one listens to and that is played by others.

Aulos music is Phrygian, then, and it excites “enthusiasm” among those persons in whom the effect of the “sacred melodies” (hierdn melon) incite that kind of emotion. Those persons are then thrown into a state comparable to that produced by administering a remedy or purge (katharsos), and the result of these “purgative” or “cathartic” melodies is to produce a feeling of liberation in those to whom they are administered. Briefly summarized, this is the well-known theory of the relations between music and trance that Aristotle advances in book 8. 7 of the Politics.® Clearly it is very different from Plato’s. Not a word here of either dance or movement: everything centers upon a theory of the effect (dynamis) of music, which is ethical when the mode is Dorian, orgiastic when the mode is Phrygian. In Plato, this aspect of the matter is not even mentioned, the reason being that he does not hold the same views as Aristotle on the ethos of modes.*' Aristotle is at the same time clearer and more liberal. For him, the Dorian alone is “ethical,” which is to say moral and worthy of figuring in the educational program of well-born youths. The Phrygian, being “orgiastic” and “passionate,” must be excluded from such a program, and should only be listened to when played by employees of low estate or slaves. This said, however, all modes are good provided they are used in the correct way at the right time. In Plato, things are rather different: he too places the Dorian above all the other modes, but his opinion of the Phrygian, which is much less clear-cut, fluctuates over the years. In the Laches (188d-e), the Dorian is presented as the only mode that “is truly Greek,” while the Phrygian is presented as being as little worthy of respect as the Lydian and certainly rated lower than the Ionian. In The Republic (399), which is to say much later in his life, Plato rejects both the Ionian and Lydian as being “soft” and fit only for drinking to, so that the only two with which he is left are the Dorian and Phrygian, of which he says: “Leave us these two modes—the enforced and the voluntary—that will best imitate the utterance of men failing or succeeding, the temperate, the brave—leave us these. Here, then, Plato is putting the Dorian and the Phrygian on the same footing. It is also worth noting that whereas, as we have seen, Aristotle identifies the aulos with the Phrygian mode, Plato, on the contrary, never once associates the words "Phrygian" and "aulos." Similarly, Aristotle's repeated emphasis on the Phrygian's connection with enthusiasm is matched by Plato's total silence on this subject: the latter never once associates Phrygian music and trance. And just as the explanation of trance onset through the effect of the ethos of modes is central in Aristotle, so again it is entirely absent in Plato. Plato's and Aristotle's interpretations of the relations between music and trance are thus quite different. Plato's theory of movement in harmony with the cosmos carries on the Pythagorean tradition. By systematizing the ideas inherited from the past concerning the ethos of modes, and at the same time relativizing them, which is to say giving them a much more psychological than moral content, Aristotle branches off in a quite different direction. We are not concerned here with deciding which theory is the better. What is interesting is to observe the extent to which the views of the two philosophers differ on the subject of music's relation to trance, even though they are separated by only about fifty years, and they both interpret what must have been currently observable facts presenting much the same aspect to each of them. For Aristotle, then, it is the Phrygian mode that triggers trance, by its sui generis virtue. This being so, a question naturally poses itself: What were the specific musical characteristics of this mode that enabled it to produce such effects? That is the question I shall now try to answer. First, it should be noted that the term Phrygian undoubtedly changed its meaning over the centuries in ancient Greece, and that if it designated a certain mode in the time of Plato and Aristotle, it certainly designated another one in the time of Aristoxenes. Needless to say, our question applies only to the, let us say, primitive Phrygian mode, the one to which our two philosophers referred. Let us thus turn to two sources dealing with data considerably earlier than Aristoxenes: first, the comparative table proposed by F. Lasserre (1954, 40) of the six Greek modes as they would have been at the time of Lasos of Hermione, which is to say at the end of the sixth century; second, that presented by J. Chailley (1960, 42) of Plato's six harmonies as transcribed by Aristides Quintilian in the second century A.D. If we restricted ourselves to these data, which represent the traditional views on the Greek modes, the question we raised would remain an enigma. Aristotle makes the most clear-cut distinction between the Dorian and the Phrygian with respect to their psychological effects. One would therefore expect the two modes to be equally distinct with respect to their musical structures. But this is not the case. If we are to believe these two tables, the Dorian and the Phrygian would then both have the same sequence of intervals (tones, quarter-tones, thirds), with the single difference that the final interval (going up the scale) would be a major third in the Dorian and a full tone in the Phrygian. Thus as Chailley observes (1956, 158), the Phrygian would have differed from the Dorian "solely by its final upper note, a re instead of a mi." Lasserre's table, on the other hand, establishes a difference of relative pitch between the two modes, with the Dorian being a fourth lower than the Phrygian. Quintilian's table shows no difference of this kind. In any case, this difference is not significant with respect to musical expression, since it does not affect the relations between the notes that constitute the mode. Clearly, then, the Dorian and the Phrygian, according to our two tables, were almost identical in structure. Their expressive possibilities would thus also have been much the same. Only a very experienced ear could have made a distinction between them. Under these conditions, it is difficult to see why the Phrygian should have been the mode of madness, let us say, and the Dorian that of serenity.

That two modes so indistinguishable from each other musically could have been endowed with two ethos as different, and indeed as opposed to one another as Aristotle described them, remains incomprehensible. For Aristotle (Politics 4. 3), since it is to him that we must turn once again, the difference between Dorian and Phrygian is comparable to that between a north and a south wind. We are not, therefore, dealing with mere nuances. In his eyes (or ears), the difference between what was called the Dorian and Phrygian in his time must have been musically ear-shattering.

As we have seen, the traditional interpretations of what the Greek modes were offer no explanation at all of this difference, but another solution exists. Indeed, the very data underlying the problem have been recently renewed by Samuel Baud-Bovy's research based on a first-hand study of Greek peasant music as it can still be heard today, which in itself is an extremely interesting and innovative procedure.

Commenting on the coexistence in Greece of two different musical systems, one penta-tonic and without semitones (anhemitonic), the other diatonic with semitones, Baud-Bovy (1978, 189) advances this hypothesis: "that such an opposition already existed in the music of ancient Greece, illustrated by the rivalry of Apollo and Marsyas, with the aulos of Marsyas the Microasian, a diatonic instrument by nature, opposing itself to Apollo's lyre, whose strings, however many in number, certainly did not produce anything other than sounds belonging to the anhemitonic systems."

According to Baud-Bovy, the primitive Dorian must have been "a pentatonic anhemitonic mode, whereas the Phrygian was a diatonic mode. Apollo and his lyre triumphing over Marsyas and his aulos would then symbolize a victory of the Ancients over the Moderns." There is every reason to believe that this Phrygian mode with semitones was a heptatonic. The Dorian versus Phrygian opposition would thus be the same as that distinguishing between a pentatonic mode without semitones and a heptatonic mode with semitones. Musically, the difference is considerable. It is comparable to the one made today in Java between the slendro and pelog modes. And it is much more marked, for instance, than the already very perceptible opposition between major and minor mode in Western music.

Under these conditions, one can readily understand why the Greeks so clearly, and in so many respects, distinguished between the Dorian and Phrygian. The difference was quite perceptible. We now need to know why this Phrygian "harmony," having the clear-cut musical characteristics just described, was in Aristotle's terms "pathetic," "orgiastic," and "enthusiastic"; in other words, since this is our concern here, suitable for inducing trance. Musically, it is clear that a mode able to make tone/semitone contrasts must offer much greater expressive possibilities than one that lacks this possibility. The au/os, a Phrygian instrument, is more expressive than the lyre, a Dorian instrument. The Phrygian aulos players, as Louis Laloy® observes, were the "true gipsy [fiddlers] of antiquity." The instrument's technical possibilities, the quality of its timbre, and the wealth of its inflections, in conjunction with the expressive possibilities of the mode, allowed players to produce melodies of great emotional impact. The Phrygian was—and here we concur with Jacques Chailley—as much a style as a mode.

Using Isobel Henderson's terms (1957, 382), the word harmonia did not only designate a certain scale but also an "idiom." Can we conclude that Phrygian melodies were so charged with expressivity and emotional content that they were capable of inducing trance by virtue of this quality alone? This would mean accepting the idea that music has a power sui generis, an idea refuted at length in earlier chapters. But this, one may say, is nevertheless Aristotle's theory!

Not quite, I would reply. True, he writes (Politics 1340a) that the tunes of Olympus make men's souls "enthusiastic" and enthusiasm is an affliction (pathos) of the soul. True, he repeats elsewhere (1342a) that under the influence of these "sacred melodies" certain persons are "possessed" by a form of agitation known as enthusiasm. But he presents this effect of the Phrygian only as a particular—and, without doubt, extreme—case of a more general action tending to produce emotion in those inclined to "pity or terror."

The well-known passage in the Politics (1342a) in which Aristotle's views on the relation of music to trance are expressed, is quite significant. The katharsis that occurs in possession rituals, as a result of "enthusiastic" harmonies and "sacred melodies," is presented as being of the same order as that which is at work in the theater. (In passing, let me point out that this is probably the earliest text associating possession and theater in this way.) More generally still, these "purgative melodies," which arouse "a pleasurable feeling of relief" in emotional people, provide men with "harmless delight."

The Phrygian mode thus covers a very broad musical field, one that includes trance music, theater music, the equivalent of variety show music (I mean those songs that move souls subject to "pity and terror," just cited), and last, dance music, when the latter is agitated or unbridled in character. Moreover, as it emerges from book 8 of the Politics, this Dorian/Phrygian opposition subsumes a whole series of other oppositions: calm vs. agitated, virile vs. effeminate, worthy vs. unworthy, aristocratic vs. plebeian, beauty vs. banality, educational vs. entertaining. The Phrygian side of this opposition could be summed up in one word: release. For Aristotle, then, Phrygian does not mean only "enthusiastic" in the religious sense of the term, but rather "orgiastic" in its general and rather late sense.

When Aristotle writes (1341a) that the aulos—and therefore the Phrygian mode— is not "a moralizing but rather an orgiastic influence," so that it should only be used for purposes of "purification rather than instruction," he is certainly not thinking only of Dionysiac ceremonies. He is also thinking of theatrical performances or banquets; in short, all situations in which people seek release. On the contrary, when he specifically targets possession (Politics 1339b) and the music that induces it, he does not merely talk about the Phrygian, but is much more specific: the tunes of Olympus are the ones that make our souls "enthusiastic." "Naturally, this must be set alongside the passage I have often quoted from the Symposium (215c) in which we are told that only the tunes of Marsyas are capable of "inducing possession." Why this insistence on the two names? Obviously because, by using them, Aristotle and Plato are indicating ipso facto that it is not just any Phrygian melody or just any au/os tune that triggers trance. By thus specifying that only the tunes of Olympus and Marsyas are capable of inducing trance, both writers obviously have a particular repertoire in mind. What might its characteristics have been? The texts tell us nothing. But the reference to two legendary characters, if not mythical, implies that the repertoire in question was ancient and traditional. This is not all, however. Marsyas and Olympus, and particularly the first, are strongly branded, if one may say so, as Phrygians. To mention Marsyas is almost to name Phrygia. And what was Phrygia if not precisely the homeland of Dionysus?* "From the fields of Lydia and Phrygia, fertile in gold, I traveled first to the sun-smitten Persian plains," he tells us himself in the Bacchae (14-15). And a little later: "O my sisterhood of worshipers, whom I lead with me from barbaric countries, from Tmolus, bastion of Lydia, who live and travel at my side. Raise the music of your own country, the Phrygian drums invented by Rhea the Great Mother, and by me." And lastly, in a later passage the chorus describes the Corybantes as "wedding their frenzies to the gentle breath of the Phrygian pipes." In the time of Plato and Aristotle, "Phrygian melody" clearly meant "melodies in the Phrygian mode," but not necessarily "melodies originating in Phrygia." Evidently this is what was meant by "melodies of Marsyas" or "of Olympus." As we have seen, the Phrygian mode was probably very recognizable as music, but it was less by virtue of being in the Phrygian mode than by virtue of originating in Phrygia that these melodies were endowed with the power of "inducing possession." In other words, their effect was due less to their musical characteristics than to the fact that they were signs: signs of Phrygia, the land from which Dionysus himself had come; in short, from the cradle of Dionysus worship. This process conforms with the general logic of possession which frequently makes a point of revealing the foreign origin of the god responsible for trance through all sorts of external signs. Possession is essentially identification with another. To assign 226 CHAPTER FIVE that other a precise homeland is to assert his identity and thus his reality. As we saw in an earlier chapter, in Benin, when people belonging to Gun tribes are possessed by Yoruba divinities, they speak Yoruba and sing Yoruba songs. In South Africa, when the Thonga are possessed by spirits of Zulu or Ndau origin, then they sing Zulu or Ndau tunes. In Greece, in order to become possessed by Dionysus, one needed tunes originating in Phrygia. Let me sum up. Dionysiac possession and the Phrygian mode are so closely associated in the literature of ancient Greece that this relation between music and trance would seem particularly interesting to us, since it springs from indigenous thought and attributes the onset of trance to a specific characteristic of music. In this case we would then have found—at last—an example in which the power sui generis of music is explicitly held responsible for trance. Things would seem all the more explainable because (1) this specific musical characteristic—the Phrygian mode—is easily recognizable and constitutes one term of a very clear opposition; and (2) this Phrygian mode seems to have, unlike the Dorian—the other term of the opposition—much greater expressive resources, thus making it more capable of producing an emotional arousal that can easily be imagined as leading to trance." A careful examination of the texts, however, demonstrates that none of this is actually the case. Whereas the texts confirm that all the melodies inducing trance were in the Phrygian mode, they by no means say that all melodies in the Phrygian mode induced trance. The writings of Plato and Aristotle effectively establish the first relation, or imply it; they do not establish the second. Indeed, had they done so, they would have run counter to the most elementary good sense, as a reductio ad absurdum will easily demonstrate. To assert that the Phrygian mode triggered trance by the operation of some mysterious musical power would have been also to assert that half of Greece was permanently thrown into this state. For, as all the facts show, aulos players of both sexes—and consequently Phrygian music—did not limit their activities just to Corybantic rituals. Their services were constantly sought particularly for banquets (or symposia) at which there is no record whatsoever of possession ever taking place. Both Aristotle and Plato, then, wisely refrained from asserting any such absurdity. Others, however, have not hesitated to do so for them, and in their name.

By recognizing, not without good cause, that music possesses great imitative powers, and by attributing ethos endowed with powerful effects to the modes, Aristotle opened the path to all sorts of exaggerated theories. During the Renaissance, in their wild admiration for antiquity, people hurled themselves down this path in an aberrant way. And it is to these aberrations, survivals of which are still discernible today, that I shall now turn.

© The Renaissance and Opera
FROM MARSYAS TO CLAUDE LE JEUNE; OR, THE EFFECTS OF MUSIC
Let us now leave Plato and Aristotle in order to move on two thousand years, or almost, to the Renaissance, when in Italy, as in France, Greece and the Greeks were being rediscovered. It is a Greece that had been strangely transformed, no doubt, over the centuries, in Alexandria first, then Rome, then by the early Church Fathers and their successors, but one in which we still find our principal themes: first “enthusiasm” or trance and possession, and second the ethos of modes and the Dorian/Phrygian opposition; in other words, the effects of music. The Renaissance occupies an important place in the history of the relations between music and possession for two reasons. First, it is the wellspring, unless I am much mistaken, of the ideas some people still hold nowadays about these relations; this is what we shall first try to demonstrate. Second, it was during the Renaissance that opera had its birth, as we all know; and in my opinion opera is nothing other, in many respects, than one of the avatars of possession. For in opera possession realizes one of its essential aspects, namely the identification of the subject with the hero by the combined means of music and drama. As Michel Leiris has so clearly shown, possession is fundamentally theatrical. Reciprocally, opera, as theater, is a form of possession. But this is a vast subject, and one that would lead us too far astray. I shall therefore limit myself to a brief sketch of the manner in which the problem can be raised in a short section at the end of this chapter. Before coming to the Renaissance, however, let us briefly consider some of the Latin and Greek writings that form milestones, as it were, along the path taking us from Marsyas to Claude Le Jeune, from Pythagoras to Mersenne, and from Plato to Pontus de Tyard. Plato, as we have just seen, never posited the slightest relation between the Phrygian mode and trance. Aristotle, on the contrary, did so, but in a rather nuanced manner. Let us say that, for him, the relation between the Phrygian mode and "enthusiasm" clearly exists, but that it nevertheless admits of a fairly large margin of indetermination.

With Plutarch, four hundred years later, the final step has been taken: this relation is raised to the status of a rule. In his Erdtikos (758-59), Plutarch cites the theory of the four aspects of mania, as it is set forth in Plato's Phaedrus. He then adds an observation that is of particular interest to us on "the furor termed martial or bellicose," about which he says: "everyone knows which god sent it and provoked its Bacchic transports."

Then, having pointed out that "the soldier, once he has laid down his arms, sheds his warlike madness" (polemike mania), he adds: "In the same way, for Bacchic and Corybantic leaping dances, it suffices to change the rhythm by abandoning the trochee, and the air by abandoning the Phrygian mode, for them to lose their violence and draw to an end." If in order for trance to cease all that is necessary is to abandon the trochee and the Phrygian mode, then no doubt intoning them is all that is required for inducing it.

We see that the relation between mania on the one hand and the Phrygian mode and trochaic rhythm on the other, is seen as resulting from a quasi-mechanical effect of music. Fifty years earlier—since it was written down by Dion Chrysostom'— there was an anecdote in circulation that one could see as a custom-built illustration of Plutarch's rule. I shall not give it in this version, to which I did not have access, but in another one, written down three centuries later, in the fourth century, by a Church Father, Saint Basil, archbishop of Cappadocia.

In recounting this anecdote, he wished to demonstrate the necessity for study and exercise in order to develop the body and mind. Having first compared athletic training to the study of music, and having poked fun (I'm not quite sure why) at Marsyas and Olympus, he praises Timothy, "a master in the art of manipulating sounds. So much so that he was able at will, simply by the power of his music, either to arouse or to suppress men's ardor."

He adds: "it is said that one day when he was playing his au-los in the Phrygian mode before Alexander, during a banquet, he caused him to rise and rush to his weapons; then caused him to return to his guests again, thanks to a relaxed harmony." The fact that Alexander was well known for his irascible temperament does not alter the facts: this anecdote quite plainly describes a trance, a martial "furor" such as Plutarch describes with reference to "enthusiasm." It is as if one were reading Michel Leiris's L'Afrique fantome, and seeing Malkam Ayyahu being suddenly possessed by a warlike zar upon hearing a gunshot. Indeed, Alexander's behavior has all the abruptness and all the conventional aspects of possession. The sudden alienation that invades him is devoid of all logical reason. It is not caused by anger. It has no motivating cause other than the music. The Renaissance and Opera 229

Such behavior is similar to that described by Plato in the Jon (536c), when he observes that those who are corybantizing “have a sharp ear for one tune only, the one which belongs to the god by whom they are possessed, and to that tune they respond freely with gesture and speech, while they ignore all others.” The Corybantes behave like automatons, and it is indeed like an automaton that Alexander behaves. The only difference is that in the case of the Corybantes there is overt possession, whereas such is not the case with Alexander. The music acts by means of its own power alone, without the aid of any ritual, simply by the effect of the Phrygian mode in the first place, then by a change of mode. We shall find that this anecdote resurfaces in the Renaissance, in almost identical form, but in a modern context. Before coming to this, however, let us turn to another story, different, but derived from the same model, and significant in another way. It is even more interesting since it appears in writings even earlier than those cited for the previous example, notably in Cicero. There are a number of variants;‘ I shall use the one by Boethius, which is the most complete. It appears in the introduction to book 5 of the De institutione musica (1867, 184-85), which deals with the moral effects of music. Boethius asks, “Is there anyone who does not know the story about the young man from Taormina who, drunk and excited by the sound of the hypophrygian mode, was calmed by Pythagoras who brought him back to his senses by changing the music to a spondee?” And he explains: “Whereas a prostitute had been locked up in the house of a rival and whereas he [the young Taorminian], in a frenzy, wanted to burn the place down, Pythagoras, who was watching the night sky as usual and observing the course of the stars, having realized that excited as he was by the Phrygian mode,’ he [the young man] would refuse, despite the many warnings of his friends, to change his mind, advised that the mode be changed, thus tempering the frenzy in the young man’s soul and [restoring him] to a peaceful state of mind.” Less gloriously but just as naively stated, this is really the story of Timothy and Alexander all over again. Cicero’s version tells us that this Phrygian music was played on the tibia, in other words on the aulos,’ which could not be more in keeping with a context of drunkenness and orgy. Alexander was seated at a banquet. The young Taorminian was drunk. Although there is no question of possession, both contexts are nevertheless Bacchic, in the vulgar sense of the term, if not ac- tually Dionysiac. But this time, and this is just as important, we are also in the context of Pythagoreanism, or, more probably, that of Neopythagoreanism (since nothing proves that Pythagoras was ever really the leading figure in so ludicrous an adventure), and this merits a closer look. Pythagoras thus advises that the music’s mode be changed, and that the Phrygian be replaced by a spondee; in other words, he orders the aulos player to switch to the Dorian mode.® We thus are dealing with a classic example of the ethos of modes. But the presence of Pythagoras lends it a quite different dimension.’ In the domain of music, Pythagoras represents, as we know, both the theory of consonance and that of the “harmony of the heavenly bodies,”!° the two being closely allied. And the Bo- ethius version tells us that at the time of the incident Pythagoras was observing the stars; so it really is the Pythagoras-of-the-harmony-of-the- heavenly-bodies who is involved. This version of the anecdote deals with Pythagorean theory and the ethos of modes. The harmony of the heavenly bodies, or the "scale" of the heavenly bodies, was the idea that the law of numbers governing the consonance of the principal intervals (octave, fifth, fourth) of the scale also governs the relations between the distances of the planets. It is the mystery of the tetraktys, which involves the four first numbers (1/2, 2/3, and 3/4) that create both the consonances of octave, fifth, and fourth, and the harmony of the universe. The idea that the seven strings of the lyre correspond to the seven planets, including the moon and sun, was germinating in Pythagoras' discovery of the relations of consonance. Plato was the one who formulated it, and he gave it its final, grandiose, and esoteric expression in the Timaeus, ensuring its fame. The theory was then taken over and modified by many writers, including Cicero and Boethius.

The story of the young Taorminian, drunk and excited, calmed down by the aulos, represents the relations between music and trance. Pythagoras and Plato are behind this story, as well as the idea of "the music of the spheres." Boethius was one of the Neopythagoreans who wrote on music, and he greatly influenced the ideas about its effects during the Renaissance.

During the Renaissance, there was a deep concern about the power of music. People referred to the story of Orpheus taming the wild beasts with his songs and Amphion displacing stones with the sound of his lyre to build the walls of Thebes. Kings believed that music was responsible for public morality. Charles IX, in his Lettres patentes, created the Académie de Poesie et de Musique in 1570 in Paris, stating that the morals of the citizens of a town were influenced by the music current in the country. He believed that when music was disordered, morals were also depraved, and when it was well ordered, men were well tutored. The Académie was intended to make its "Listeners . . . capable of higher knowledge, after they had been purged of whatever may remain in them of barbarity." This revival of ideas from Plato's Laws and The Republic, via Florence and the work of Ficino, adapted to French taste by Pontus de Tyard, shows the importance of music in the Renaissance. And in the "purged" we just read, we may also recognize Aristotle's catharsis from the Politics. With these Lettres patentes, which merely repeat the terms of the letter in which Baif requested the creation of the Académie by the king, the whole program of the Pléiade poets was given official recognition. Through them, Ronsard's very theory of the union of poetry and music was made state policy; hence their importance. Intimately associated with poetry, music was seen in the Renaissance as a decisive factor of civilization. It raises the soul and refines manners. By what means? Essentially by its capacity to arouse emotions. Among the ancients, Pontus de Tyard writes in his Solitaire second ou discours de la musique, "music served as an exercise to temper the soul into a perfect condition of goodness and virtue, arousing and calming, by its native power and its secret energy, the passions and affections, while its sounds were borne from the ears to the spiritual parts." Such is the model to be followed. Thanks to the intimate union of words and melody, of "measured verses" and music, also "measured," it is possible to obtain the three desired "effects," which are, Baif writes in his letter to Charles IX, to "tighten, untighten, and calm men's minds." The supreme aim of music is thus clearly defined: it should move us. And the result of these "effects" is described for us by Ronsard's in his hymn to the cardinal of Lorraine, a poem in which, in praising the cardinal's musician, called Ferabosco, the poet also praises what he sees as the ideal in the field of music:

Oh heavens, what sweetness, what ease and what pleasure
The soul receives when it feels itself seized
By the movement, the sound, and the voice combined
That your Ferabosco on three lyres conjoins
When the three Apollos, singing divinely
And gently wedding the lyre to the voice
Suddenly, with agile throat and hand
Make Dido die again through Virgil's verse
Almost dying themselves; or with louder trill
Rethunder the sieges of Calais or Guienne

Your brother's victories. Thus there is no soul
That does not leave its body and swoon away
At their sweet song, just as, up there in the skies
At the god Apollo's song, the gods all swoon
As he plays his lyre... . The ideal, as we see, is that music should make one swoon. And what is swooning if not falling into ecstasy or trance, in short to be beside oneself? "There is no soul that does not leave its body." Again we are reminded of that great coming and going of souls we encountered earlier'® in Haiti and Africa. Exaggeration, one may say. A mere figure of speech that should not be taken seriously. Not at all! The literature of the time is replete with refer- ences to fureur and furore, words that translate the Greek mania, and that alternate with "enthusiasm." In his Histoire et chronique de Provence (1614, 583E), Nostradamus (not the astrologer but his son) writes that the troubadours derived their poetic invention from "a certain inspiration and divine frenzy called enthusiasm by the Greeks." A century later, in his Le Parnasse ou l’Apothéose de Corelli, Francois Couperin was to express in music "the enthusiasm of Corelli caused by the waters of Hippocrene." How are we to explain this rather unexpected resurgence of "enthusias- asm?" Largely by the influence of two "humanists" somewhat forgotten to- day, but who in their time played a decisive role in this return to antiquity that so profoundly marked artistic life in the Renaissance: Ficino, the great translator of Plato, and then Pontus de Tyard,'’ the masterthinker, so to speak, of the Pléiade. Tyard's book Solitaire premier, ou Discours de Muses et de la fureur poétique was published in 1552 and reprinted in 1575, and its title evidently echoes that of Ficino's commentaries on the Ion, published earlier under the subtitle “vel furore poetico.” This “poetic furor” is nothing other than Plato's poetic mania, which was attributable, as we saw, to the Muses. Both Ficino and Tyard resuscitated the Platonic theory of the four aspects of mania, which, via Latin, became furore or fureur. In resuscitating it, however, they also transformed it somewhat.

Times had changed since Plato. Of the four aspects of mania, three had become rather difficult to celebrate: First, erotic mania, totally identified with pederasty by Socrates; second, prophetic mania, which had acquired a whiff of fire and brimstone; last, telestic mania, that of possession, which of course was no longer overtly practiced, under the penalty of being brought before the Inquisition. Of these three, however, the last was to survive the best, owing to a certain amount of clever juggling that enabled Bacchus, with the help of communion wine, to be become identified with Jesus, and Dionysianism with religious fervor. But the only one that had remained at all easily defensible was poetic mania, with the result that it eclipsed the other three, and “poetic furor” came to be the only state representative of “enthusiasm.” Let there be no mistake, however: this poetic “furor” was still very close to religious frenzy, and was regarded as an inspiration, in the religious sense of the term, as a visit from the spirit; in other words, as a trance state, if not as possession.

Let us now return to the “effects” of music. If in the Dorian mode, music will incite men to moderation and virtue, thus exerting the moral influence referred to in the Lettres patentes. If Phrygian, it will unleash the passions, enthusiasm, and ultimately violence. Here, in a much simplified form, we recognize the theory of the ethos of modes as set forth by Aristotle. The poets and musicians of the Pléiade took it very seriously indeed. “If it please God to be able by the Dorian mode to extinguish the furor that the Phrygian may have aroused,” Claude Le Jeune writes in the dedication of his Dodécacorde to Turenne. Forty years later, Marin Mersenne himself, having first expressed the opinion, in his Harmonie universelle, that “bad music [meaning Phrygian] should be banned from society,” wishes that “magistrates would institute prizes and rewards for those who practice none but Dorian music.” In that time of religious wars it was apparently the secret hope of Baif that the psalms in “measured verses” would disarm the rebellious Huguenots and that the pacifying effect of the Dorian mode would restore harmony between Catholics and Protestants. The least we can say is that Renaissance man took music seriously!

Nothing better illustrates how these “effects” of music were regarded in their relation to the ethos of modes, on the one hand, and to “furor” on the other, than two anecdotes that relate events of the time but are based on the model that had previously inspired the stories about Timothy and Alexander and about Pythagoras and the young Taorminian. Both these Renaissance anecdotes follow the same basic scenario: first, music that renders you beside yourself; second, music that restores you to yourself. It is quite evident that they are both, in fact, simply new avatars of the stories related by Saint Basil and by Boethius some thousand years earlier. Tyard's account of the first story involves a musician who, through his playing, caused a guest at a sumptuous feast to experience a profoundly ecstatic transport. The musician's performance was so captivating that it left the guest in a state of heightened sensitivity to hearing, as if the soul had withdrawn to the edge of the ears. The guest remained in this state until the musician changed his mind and gradually brought the guest's soul and feelings back to their original state, leaving everyone in a state of great astonishment.

In the second story, Thomas describes a event that took place during the marriage of the duc de Joyeuse. A musician named Claudin Le Jeune composed and performed an air that caused a gentleman in the audience to become so excited that he grabbed his weapons and swore he would go out to fight someone. However, when another air was played in the sub-Phrygian mode, the gentleman became tranquil again. This event was confirmed by several witnesses, illustrating the power of modulation, movement, and the conduct of the voice to affect people's minds. [Thomas 1611, 281] This same story was repeated a few years later by Titelouze, who wrote an account of it to Mersenne (who was very interested in the “effects” of The Renaissance and Opera 235 music) in these terms: “I remember having heard the late Claudin le Jeune, an excellent musician, when talking of the effects of ancient music, say that he believed it was with measured verses, and that he himself, with measured French verses such as Baif and others composed, once sent a captain into a furor by musical movements that he had joined to appropri- ately fashioned words.”?’ With this anecdote we are once again, as we can see, in the direct line of Plutarch’s rule: changing the musical mode is enough to trigger trance or cause it to cease. This is how a continually strengthening tradition arose; according to it music could induce trance as it does in possession rituals, but outside the framework of any ritual and without reference to posses- sion—in other words, without context and by its own power alone; or again, as Pontus de Tyard himself wrote, by the simple play of its “native power” and “secret energy.”

Moreover, based as it is on the Timothy and Alexander scenario, which derives from the same model as that of Pythagoras and the Taorminian, the story of the duc de Joyeuse’s gentleman should also be placed in the same Neopythagorean perspective as the latter. Ficino (who naturally also cites the Alexander story), Pontus de Tyard, and Mersenne had all read Boethius,”* and they were all deeply impregnated with Pythagoreanism and Neoplatonism (a Neoplatonism that sought, moreover, to reconcile Plato and Aristotle). It is this context that explains the success of our story, and it is in such a context that it should be read: the ethos of modes, of course, but also “furor,” or in other words trance, and “music of the spheres,” which is to say the mystique of numerology and astrology— these are the messages concealed within it, with that taste for secrecy so typical of the Renaissance, a time when knowledge and esoterism naturally went hand in hand. Ronsard’s Préface sur la musique,”® which he dedi- cated to Charles IX, provides a very significant example of this. Writing about the Phrygian and Dorian modes, the poet naturally cites, among other stories, the one about Timothy and Alexander. In the space of four pages there are four mentions of “the harmony of the universe” or of the heavens, and two of “furor”; he who is not “stolen out of himself” by “a sweet-sounding instrument or the sweetness of the natural voice, . . . has a twisted, vicious, and depraved soul,” and he who “does not honor Music as a small part of that which so harmoniously (as Plato says) moves all this great universe” is not “worthy of seeing the light of the sun.” Ronsard’s im- portance for the French Renaissance lends great interest to this musical declaration of faith. As we see, it closely associates trance or ecstasy with the harmony of spheres. This said, the principal role in producing the “effects” of music, as they were conceived in the Renaissance, was nevertheless assigned to the ethos of the modes. Whether in the case of Alexander or that of the duc de 236 CHAPTER SIX Joyeuse’s gentleman, furor and the return to normalcy are attributed to the successive effects of the Phrygian, then the Hypophrygian modes. In the story of Pythagoras and the Taorminian it is the Dorian, a more classi- cal view of things, that ensures the “furious” young man’s return to his senses. All our stories are centered around an antithesis between two modes with opposite effects: the Phrygian, which remains the mode of "enthusiasm," and the Dorian, which is the mode of moderation and wisdom. In the Renaissance, there was confusion over the identity of these modes, with various scholars attributing different effects to each mode.

Pontus de Tyard believed that enthusiasm was triggered by the mi mode, while Mersenne attributed it to the re mode, which Tyard believed had the power to calm enthusiasm. Claude Le Jeune was cautious about the effects of modes and was more interested in the ethos of rhythm. He believed that rhythmics, both in music and poetry, could bring about powerful effects, as shown in the stories of Orpheus and Amphion.

Le Jeune saw rhythmics as a way to bring back the lost art of Rhythmics, which had been neglected over time. His work, Dodécacorde, focused more on the ethos of rhythm than the ethos of modes. While he was skeptical about the Dorian versus Phrygian opposition, he believed in the power of rhythm to create powerful effects. "As we saw, this is also what Titelouze expresses when he reports the story about the duc de Joyeuse’s gentleman to Mersenne: “. . . and that he himself [Claude Le Jeune] with measured French verses . . . once sent a captain into a furor by musical movements that he had joined to appropriately fashioned words." We are once again back to our story. But this one (that of the gentleman suddenly seized by furor upon hearing a tune by Claude Le Jeune) differs in one respect from that of Alexander, who also becomes “furious” upon hearing Timothy play: the music played by Timothy was instrumental (he played the aulos) whereas that of Claude Le Jeune was vocal. As we discovered in the previous chapter, among the Greeks the music of mania was primarily instrumental and the musical instrument was almost always the aulos. In this respect the Timothy/Alexander story fits perfectly into the tradition. The story of Claude Le Jeune and the gentleman, on the contrary, does not. This is a significant fact, and we will examine it now.

The great idea of the poets and musicians of the Pléiade was that in antiquity music derived its expressive power from its intimate union with poetry. In other words, for them the only true music was sung music, music in which words played a principal role. It is therefore only natural that they should have shown such interest in Orpheus. Ficino, Pontus de Tyard, Dorat, Ronsard, Claude Le Jeune all refer to him as the very symbol of the power of sung poetry. Mersenne also gives him the place of honor in his Harmonie universelle by making him the subject of its frontispiece, on which he is depicted surrounded by savage beasts held by the spell of his song.

From Orpheus—going back for a moment to ancient Greece—sprang what was later called Orphism. Without going into the very controversial question of what exactly it was, I shall simply record what Boyancé (1936, 39) has said on the subject, namely that all “the activities of the Orphics may be subsumed under the idea of incantation.” Elsewhere (ibid., 33), he also writes that “the idea of incantation is that which establishes the deepest bond between the legend of Orpheus and the religious practices of the Orphics.” For them, Orpheus represented above all else the power of incantation, which is to say the magical efficacy of the chanted word.

We learn from Plato (Republic 2. 364b-c) that the various charlatans and soothsayers who claimed Orpheus as the source of their powers were nothing other than magicians, and that it was in their incantations, their “epodes,” that their principal power resided. These epodes, which they sang while performing the appropriate sacrifices at the request of a client, were what we now call Orphic hymns. These hymns in verse form were, to a large extent at least, what the Renaissance humanists were thinking about when, within the framework of a general return to Greek music, they advocated, in the name of musical efficacy, a return to the union of poetry and music.

A poem published in 1609 by an Italian friend of Ronsard, Bartolommeo Delbene, who helped organize Henri III’s Académie du Palais (an extension of the Académie de Poésie et de Musique), is very revealing in this respect. In it, he describes the “City of Truth,” an allegory placed under the sign of Aristotle, the ideal model of the Académie. The fourth and last temple of this city is that of intelligence. Upon entering it, one penetrates into the realm of “enthusiasm” and of “poetic furor,” symbolized by the “Union of Poetry and Music. Standing in this temple is a statue of Orpheus casting a spell over savage beasts with the charm of his music, and there is a space on the pedestal for the inscription of an Orphic hymn. For the poets and musicians of the Pléiade, then, the effects of music were governed by three factors: the ethos of modes, the harmony of the spheres, and the power of incantation. The power of music is thus seen as being at once moral, religious, and magic. It is within this general conception, therefore, that we must situate the effect that Claude Le Jeune's music had upon the "furor" of our gentleman. Those who use this anecdote as the perfect illustration of the power of "measured" music in the ancient style are consequently making simultaneous reference to Plato (the theory of enthusiasm), Aristotle (the theory of the ethos of modes), Pythagoras (the theory of the harmony of the spheres), and to Orpheus (the practice of incantation). Whether explicit or not, these references explain why they took this anecdote so seriously. For them, it illustrates their general representation of the relations between music and human behavior. For us, the story of our gentleman has a quite different meaning.

We have said that among the Greeks, possession music was principally played on the aulos, wordless most of the time, and intended to make people dance. Plato, when referring to such music, uses the words melody or rhythm, never the word epode, which he reserves for completely different contexts. For him, incantation and possession are two totally distinct domains. Incantation is used in the service of magic—or shamanism, if, like Boyancé (1936, 59) and Dodds (1951, 147), one wishes to see the Orphic priests, and even Orpheus himself, as shamans—but never in that of possession. In this respect, the situation in ancient Greece perfectly illustrates the rule formulated in an earlier chapter. So by attributing our gentleman's trance to a kind of music that is not only vocal but reputedly Orphic, and therefore in the incantatory tradition, our story flatly contradicts precisely what it claims to prove, namely its conformity with trance music as it existed in antiquity. It runs contrary to the manner in which the relations between music and possession are practiced, whether among the Greeks or elsewhere. In this respect, then, it could be said to be a "bad story." But this is not important.

What is important is that, by claiming to be in conformity with the Greek model, and at the same time by attributing the trance to the incantatory nature of the music, it leads one to believe that trance music among the Greeks was incantation. This is where the confusion lies, a confusion entirely symptomatic of the general confusion that the furious ferment of ideas in the Renaissance created in so many areas. A music capable of triggering trance by the power of its "secret energy," as Pontus de Tyard would have it, or by the effect of the "hidden relations" of the modes with the soul's "affections," as Saint Augustine wrote, or by the play of the law of numbers, or by its invisible links with the harmony of the universe, or by its incantatory powers; in short, a music that acts mysteriously—such, ultimately, is the theory that underlies our anecdote. It is for this reason that it is so significant, and that I have spent so much time examining it. The ideas it reflects are far from having lost all credit in our own day, and this is the point to which I will now turn. “Incantatory airs whose effect was irresistible on certain subjects, whatever the skill or the mediocrity of the musician”; “possessed thrown into trance by the demoniacal call of the incantatory melody”; a possessed person who “obeys the incantation of this music”—all these phrases demonstrate that for Jeanmaire it is the theory of the incantatory power of music that explains the fundamental role it plays in the possession process. Elsewhere, speaking of the musical theme specific to the possessing spirit, Jeanmaire (1949, 470-71) tells us that “this theme particular to each of the various demons by which each dancer believes himself haunted thus automatically triggers the onset of trance in the hitherto apathetic possessed person.” Automatic behavioral response, haunting, incantation—all this adds up to a whole that constitutes, for Jeanmaire, the climate, so to say, of possession among the Greeks. Yet, as we have seen, there is no mention whatsoever of incantation in either Plato or Aristotle! To attribute the effect of music on trance to its incantatory power is to interpret the evidence in a totally arbitrary way. It means introducing magic where it does not belong. Above all, it means being quite mistaken about the formal characteristics of the music concerned. The music that triggered “the bounding dances of the Bacchantes and Corybantes,” as Plutarch wrote, was evidently stimulating, extrovert, dynamogenic. Incantatory music is by definition introverted, slowly turning around upon itself, proceeding by fascination, and developing itself in immobility. To see the music that induces trance as incantatory music is therefore a major musical misconception. It is amazing that Jeanmaire, despite his perspicacity and his admirable scholarship in the field, should have made this error. The reasons for it are clearly the power of the Orpheus myth on the one hand, but also, and above all, that of the ready-made ideas generally held about music, and to which even the best minds are not always immune. Many others have made and are still making the same error of interpretation. Their excuse is that they are following a tradition dating as far back as the Renaissance, and that has been maintained by writers as eminent even as Combarieu, who in his great work La musique et la magie devotes several pages to incantation in his chapter on the ethos of modes (1909, 228, 233) and concludes that among the Greeks the latter was simply “a legacy from ritual magic.” Linforth, to cite only one more example, makes an error of the same order. In his very important article on Corybantic rites in Plato, he refers several times to the “intoxicating” nature of trance music, and to its “intoxicating spell.” Spells, incantations—we are still faced with the same general conception of things, that which consists in attributing trance to a more or less inexplicable power sui generis in music, which acts in some way physiologically, like a drug, like an intoxication, like a magic potion. Not once does Plato mention incantation (ep6dai) or intoxication in his texts on Corybantism. Linforth is yielding here to the same temptation as Jeanmaire, which attributes to music the magic power of triggering possession, something which neither the writings of the Greeks nor ethnographic data justify. It is this same Renaissance Neoplatonic tradition that has influenced— or perhaps given direct rise to—another interpretation of how music is related to trance. 

But here it is the mystique of numbers that is involved. The theory of the harmony of heavenly bodies rests, as we saw, upon the belief, a purely intuitive one, that the movement of the planets and the relations of consonance are governed by the same law of numbers and by the same mystery of the tetraktys (which one might translate as “fourth- ness”) that designate the ordering of the first four numbers in accordance with the ratios 1/2, 2/3, and 3/4 (which would now be called superpar- tials), which are those of consonance. In a word, it is mystical numero- logy. When Alain Daniélou (1975, 14) writes that all music used to induce trance, always and everywhere, utilizes rhythms based on the numbers 5, 7, or 11, he is making use, whether he says so or not, of a theory of num- The Renaissance and Opera 241 bers that is admittedly different from that of Pythagorism, but that is es- sentially the same in spirit. In discovering the laws of consonance, Pythagoras gave proof of a great scientific mind. In developing the theory of the “harmony of the spheres,” which is pure bunkum, the Pythagoreans and Neopythagoreans were merely dabbling in bogus science. They, nonetheless, were taken seriously for a long time. It seems that even Kepler believed in the music of the spheres.*! But then, was he not as much an astrologer as an astronomer?*? In appealing to Plato, and in invoking mania under the name of fureur poétique, the poets and musicians of the Pléiade renewed the ties with the Greek trance tradition, but their version of it—need I say?—was literary and watered-down. Parallel to this aristocratic current at the level of the court and the salon, however, was another one, popular this time, that continued to keep the practice of trance alive in Western Europe in much less civilized forms. Tarantism in Italy and Spain, epidemics of Saint Vitus’s dance elsewhere, demoniac possessions occurring sporadically in many places, and culminating later in those at Loudun—all these were very virulent manifestations of trance that have a greater connection with telestic traditions—those of Corybantes and Bacchantes—than with the poetic tradition of mania. After a long eclipse, the latter made a new appearance, not so many years ago, again accompanied by music—of course—but this time by an international publicity campaign as well: Beatlemania. The recipe is ap- parently a good one, since it has been revived even more recently by yet another rock group that labels its show “Starmania.” Of course, the word in this context means nothing more than “madness.” Yet its use is never- theless significant, and revealing of a certain desire—or a certain nostal- gia—for trance. Learned tradition? Popular tradition? Juncture of the two? That is what remains to be seen. LETTER ON A OPERA Opera, as we saw earlier, can be regarded in certain respects as the last avatar of possession ceremonies; or the opera singer (and this comes to the same thing) can be regarded as the most recent of the roles so far played by the possessee. This would mean, all things being equal, that opera is for the German, the Frenchman, or the Italian what the bori is for a Hausa and hau bong is for a Vietnamese. If the reader doubts that this is so, noth- ing could be more likely to convince him, I feel, than the letter about to be put before him. It was written‘? by a young ethnomusicologist from Benin, at present living in Paris, to a friend and colleague back in Africa. It fell providentially into my hands at the very moment.

What an adventure! I went to the Opéra yesterday. I thought I'd gone raving mad! No one had warned me, so I had no idea what I was in for: imagine my surprise when I found myself bang in the middle of a possession ceremony! You would have thought you were in Porto-Novo, in the Place Dégué, attending the annual feast for Sakpata, or at Alada attending the ceremonies of Ajahuto, or at Abomey for “The Grand Customs.” Of course it’s not the same thing at all, that's obvious. Of course the differences are immense. Never mind! I still think that a performance at the Opéra and a vodun ceremony in Benin are in many respects fundamentally quite comparable. That's what I want to explain to you now, since no one here seems even to suspect it, and everything else can wait.

Let's take psychology first. You will agree that the essential aspect of this, in possession, is identification with another, the invasion of the field of consciousness by a person other than the one one is normally, so that one is no longer oneself but this other, and so one behaves in every way like him. This is precisely what happens on the stage during an opera. Last night, in Elektra, which was the opera I attended, Birgit Nilsson was no longer Birgit Nilsson but Electra.

You will say, yes, but that doesn't happen only at the opera, it's just the same in the theater, or also in movies. That's true to some extent. But what makes the opera a particular case, and links it so closely with a vodun ceremony—I almost wrote performance—is its relation to music. In both cases it is in fact the music that organizes the performance, gives it the structure that governs its development, dictates the movements, regulates the alternation between tension and relaxation.

Just as a man or woman embodying a vodun takes his or her cue from the music to dance out his or her identification with the possessing divinity, so the opera singer takes his or her cue from the orchestra in order to express in song the character he or she is enacting. It is music that gives life to both of them. Neither one nor the other could incarnate his character without being constantly supported or even carried along by the orchestra. Their experience of their role is essentially a musical one, which is not the case in either the theater or the movies.

You know how crucial the function of the musicians is at home, in all possession ceremonies. One has the feeling that they are the ones who lead the play, that under their power the possessed are but puppets receiving their orders. All things being equal, I get the feeling that the conductor and orchestra have an exactly comparable function in opera.

The big difference, from the point of view of its relation to music, evidently, is that in a vodun ceremony the possessed dance and don't sing, whereas in the opera the performers—I nearly wrote possessed again—sing and don't dance. We could say that in vodun [or bori, or hax béng] possession is expressed through dancing and that in opera it is expressed through singing. Or again, that the actor playing the vodun embodies his character by dancing it and that the opera performer embodies his by singing it. For he does embody it.

Open the article on opera in Fasquelle's Encyclopédie de la musique and you will read: “It is not the reality of the characters on stage that is important in an opera, but the degree to which a singer-interpreter succeeds in evoking, by embodying [and those are the writer's italics, not mine] the inner character in the drama. "I am tempted to think that singing a part implies a greater investment of the self in the dramatic action than when one merely acts it. It is not for nothing that the French call opera “lyric theater.” To use Jakobson’s terms, I would say that lyricism means that the emphasis is placed on the “addresser” of the musical message, on the “I.” The opera house, the lyric theater, is thus the place where the first person expresses itself. It is the triumph of the profound expression of the self, at its most affective, most irreducibly personal level. To express that self, it is therefore important to be totally invaded by it, and this invasion of the self probably never occurs more fully than in this lyric-dramatic situation, in which it is permissible to live it out totally in public, precisely because one embodies a character that is not oneself. It is obviously the presence of the spectators that gives full meaning to this extraordinary adventure that the opera singer lives out when singing on stage.

Does this intensity constitute trance? To answer this question, one would need to ask the singers themselves. Would they, or could they, answer? Once themselves again, once the curtain is down and the performance over, do they remember what they have experienced, or are they subject to the same amnesia that our vodun adepts experience regarding everything that happened while they were possessed? Ultimately, the point is to know whether the opera performer lives his role and sings it in a state of dual personality, so that he is simultaneously himself and the person embodied, one governing and controlling the other, or whether, on the contrary, he is solely the other and no longer himself at all, in which case we are dealing not with dual personality properly speaking—or, as Freud puts it, “double consciousness”—but with a personality change due to substitution. It is a question that has been hotly debated ever since Diderot, I believe. However, we mustn't lose sight of the fact that opera performers are professionals, that changing personalities is part of their trade, and that this is not the case with the vodun adept, even though he too has sometimes undergone a very long training period.

Let us assume—first hypothesis—that while on stage embodying the hero he represents, the opera singer is in a trance, and let us call it, in this context, a lyric possession trance. This trance is quite clearly extremely controlled. It is not preceded by any crisis. Could this be the only type of trance displaying this particularity? And if so, would it be less of a trance for that reason? As you know, the trance in vodun cults is not necessarily preceded by a crisis. Indeed, this is one of the factors that helps in distinguishing between possession by a lineage vodun and possession by an “exogenic” vodun, to use Luc de Heusch’s term. In Senegal, in the ndép, only neophytes have crises; theoretically the women who officiate never do. So the fact that it is devoid of crisis would not be enough of a reason for seeing lyric possession trance as an isolated case within the general framework of possession. (Parenthetically, crises do in fact occur quite frequently in the opera house, or so I'm told. However, they take place in the wings; in short they are not part of the performance. In other words, they are non-ritualized crises, or just “tantrums,” but that's another problem.)


Lyric possession would then be a form of possession without trance, and we would have a type of possession that is completely different, psychologically speaking, from that at work in possession by a vo- dun. In this case, should we say that we can no longer speak of possession at all? I don’t think so. The crucial thing, ultimately, is that, from the spectator’s viewpoint, the entire event happens in such a way that the opera singer is seen to be truly embodying his character, or is, in other words, to- tally possessed by that character. Indeed, if the spectators believe in this incarnation, the singer is a great actor. We are therefore at the frontier of possession, but still within it. Or to put it more accurately (since we must not argue as though possession constitutes a fact in and of itself), let us say that lyric possession has enough points in common with religious possess- ion for both to be considered as belonging to one and the same very gen- eral state of consciousness.

So, if seen in relation to possession as a state of consciousness, an opera performance and a vodun ceremony are appreciably equivalent, how is it then that they are so different? Is it, ultimately, because one is aimed at the realization of an aesthetic need and the other at that of a religious one? But is this difference a real or an illusory one? What if the aesthetic function in one type of society were the same as the religious function in another? Has art not been, for a very long time, the main technique of religion? It is no wonder that, as the religious function atrophies, art becomes an end in it- self.

We have heard often enough that Greek drama originated in the cult of Dionysus, that modern Western theater had its origins, in part at least, in the Christian Mysteries, and that Japanese N6 is but a theatrilization of possession. I know nothing about the history of opera, but I will once again quote from Fasquelle’s Encyclopédie de la musique (my great source of information, as you can see!), in which the article on Comic Opera states that its origins lie in the medieval Féte des fous, or Feast of the Mad- men. Weren’t these “madmen” purely and simply possessed persons? Un- less I’m much mistaken, there are a great many reasons to think so. .. . But let us leave aside these historical problems about which I know noth- ing, and get back to the question at hand.

I tend to think that the differ- ence between a performance at the Opéra and a vodun ceremony is largely circumstantial and dependent on the context. I have already told you the ways in which the opera seems to be closely akin to a possession ceremony. I would also like to explain the ways in which the possession ceremonies that you and ] know now seem to be akin to opera. A moment ago I mentioned Alada** and the annual ceremonies for Ajahuto.*’ Now think back to the feast for Ajagbe that we attended to- gether a few years ago and let me tell you how I remember it. In the late afternoon, Akplogan,** sumptuously clothed in a blue and gold brocade robe, left his house in grand procession, preceded by spear carriers. Seats had been prepared for him and his entourage on one side of the public square where the dances were to take place, and in the center there stood an enormous kapok tree. As they arrived, the various families of Alada and the surrounding district, who had also come in procession, went to greet Akplogan before taking their places nearby. The various merchants set up their stalls slightly behind the audience. Little by little, the square—I almost wrote the auditorium—filled up. Drums, rattles, and iron bells were gathered at their appointed place, but no one seemed to pay any attention to them. When the time came, however, musicians appeared and began trying them out: hammer-blows on the drums to stretch their skins, test-drumming to judge the effects, bell-calls sketching out a rhythmic phrase. A certain vibration in the air that we both love so much had taken over.

As I sat in the Opéra, I experienced the same impression of music awakening when the musicians took their places in the pit and began to prelude, as it were, each performing in their own corner, one playing a few notes of a scale, the other a brief arpeggio. The music slowly took possession of the place, just the way it does back home. Unfortunately, I have no idea what exactly was going on backstage, since the audience isn't allowed there, as you can imagine.

But I was suddenly reminded of that wonderful evening in Alada, to which I shall now return. You had gone to say hello to your kinfolk, who had just arrived and settled themselves in a spot—I almost wrote a box—near Akplogan. You were making your social rounds, in short, just as I saw it done last night at the Opéra. Since I know very few people in Alada, I went for a stroll. I was intrigued by a half-open wattle door behind which there seemed to be a great deal of coming and going. I slipped through it. And I was backstage! There's no other way to put it.

You know that the Sakpatasi'*' have skirts worn tightly at the waist? Two of them were adjusting their skirts, busily knotting the little fastening strings, then swaying their hips to see whether they hung right. Further on, a woman who was also, visibly, a vodun devotee was making herself up, helped by a companion holding a mirror. Elsewhere, a Legba'** was arranging his necklaces, checking the fastenings of the vast panoply of objects they always wear, and adjusting the tilt of his straw hat. Elsewhere again, a group of women was swarming around a figure whose back was turned to me and whose loincloth was being arranged. All these people were gaily chattering, some standing, moving from one group to another, others seated on small stools.

Suddenly my presence was noticed, and with cries and exclamations from all present I was gently but firmly shown the door. I'd had a terrific time. I had really seen what it was like backstage and all that went on there in preparation for a performance. I had discovered that our great ceremonies in honor of the vodun are just like theatrical performances in that they require a quite a bit of preparation and involve a great hustle and bustle behind the scenes, during which the adepts, who prepare to go into trance and to be possessed by their gods, behave just like actors backstage in other countries.

The drums began to beat. The feast began. The ritual actions had taken place that morning: invocation of the ancestors, divination, offerings, libations, sacrifices, prayers. The evening would be devoted exclusively to dance. It became dusk. First came a very calm parade, accompanied by drumming that rose and fell. It was as though the entire troupe had to be presented to the audience. If I remember correctly, Khévioso,* recognizable by his récade'* in the form of a stylized brass ax, led the way, unless it was Légba with his enormous phallus of polished wood around his neck. There were about ten of them in all, all richly costumed, the men wearing short variegated skirts, rather like tutus, the women in long crossover skirts made of multicolored cloth, arms weighed down with silver bracelets, neck and ears bedecked with necklaces and pendants. As they moved past, the audience acclaimed them, shouting out mottoes at the top of their lungs, their voices mingling with those of the singers standing near the drums. After circling the dancing area two or three times, half walking, half dancing, the procession disappeared backstage again. There followed a fairly long pause, filled only by drumming and rather loose singing.

Night had fallen. In the dark, one could scarcely make out people's faces, since the only source of light in the square was the gas lamp placed besides Akplogan. Further back, the tiny lamps of the stall keepers pierced the darkness here and there with their small yellow flickers.

Suddenly, Khévioso burst into the square, eyes rolling, a white kerchief knotted around his head, brandishing his brass ax in threatening gestures, running and leaping in all directions, driving back any children who happened to cross his path. Sacred furor of the god of lightning! His brass ax, taut curve and tongue of fire, flashes in the night. Khévioso spins around on himself, hurtles first this way, then that. His eyes roll frenziedly in his head, white flashes shining through the darkness with a moist gleam. His feet make the dust fly. Drums, rattles, and iron bells had joined in frenetically, encouraging, with the greatest agitation, the dancer's wild dashes and turns.

Meanwhile, without anyone noticing, another dancer—excuse me, a female divinity, but which?—had also taken possession of the stage, moving forward with tiny steps, scarcely dancing at all, and very reticently, with little sways of the hips, arms curved out in front of her to part the panels of her pagne. Apparition full of charm and gentleness, making the most touching contrast with Khévioso and his violent demonstrations of virile energy.

Then it was time for Légba's entrance, as fantastical as ever, so that one never knows whether he's serious or joking. Straw hat and tutu both dyed purple and both of a somewhat unlikely shape. Légba pirouettes, stops suddenly, legs apart, holds his bizarre pose; then shoots off unexpectedly in a new direction. Everything about him is disconcerting. His expressions force you to laugh, but you're not quite sure why.

Other dancers—I mean other gods—come on stage one after the other. Now there is a pantheon of five or six divinities dancing together, each in the style befitting his or her character. Légba, who had vanished, makes a showy reentry, holding his huge wooden phallus in front of him with both hands, and taking over the center of the square, he performs an obscene dance with utmost vigor. General but not excessive hilarity ensues.

And so the performance continues, with entrances, exits, crowd scenes alternating with solo exhibitions. All executed with a very great freedom of movement and, certainly, with a great deal of improvization. Since I was enjoying the show as a dilettante, never having been initiated into any cult myself, the esoteric aspect of these dances naturally escaped me. And yet, with all those gods parading about, we certainly were being treated to a tremendous lesson in mythology.

Yet one still had to know how to read it. I recently described that evening to some friends—white people, of course—here in Paris. "But what about trance in all that?" they asked. Well, you know, I told them, come to think of it, there was no more—but no less—of it than at the Opéra. I doubt whether someone who was really a stranger to the country, and hadn't been told beforehand, would have even suspected that the people he saw dancing were in a state of possession. And yet, as you and I both know, they were. The dancers always are in such ceremonies. But entry into trance takes place backstage—whether it is with or without crisis is secondary—and from then on it is scarcely apparent most of the time, except by certain small signs recognizable only to those experienced in such matters. Perhaps there is a slight fixity to the gaze, or it is bizarrely elsewhere. That’s all, apparently at least. I couldn’t say what goes on in their heads. As I told you, so far I’ve seen only one opera. That’s not much of a basis on which to make valid comparisons with our vodun feasts. The differences from opera to opera are very great, it seems, because the repertoire [248] is vast. But that’s true of our ceremonies too!

Very often, I’m told, operas involve a certain magical element. The action can move outside everyday reality. Things happen that are scarcely believable. To limit myself to Mozart, I’m told this is true of two of his operas: The Magic Flute, which as its title indicates has a fairytale atmosphere, and Don Giovanni, which, toward the end, also brings into play a fabulous character, the Commendatore. And this supernatural, fabulous element is also at work in our ceremonies. I would even think that it is essential.

Remember the ceremony for the resurrection of a Sakpatasi, at Porto-Novo? What could be more fabulous, more unbelievable than a resurrection? But what theater! What staging! The open space at the center of the square black with people, the mats so carefully arranged on the ground, the high priest, all in white, sitting at one end with two pots full of magic water at his feet, the corpse swathed in its shroud, making its entry on the square borne rigid on outstretched arms, set down on the mats before the high priest, then the priest’s seven calls, summoning, in dramatic tones, the body to waken, the truly "deathly" silence of that great crowd awaiting the miracle, the explosion of joy, the delirium that sweeps through it at the first sign of returning life, the frenzy of the drums, suddenly liberated again, the whole thing preceded by a slow setting of the scene, by choruses, dances, processions, and ending in a general dance accompanying the resuscitated Sak-patasi's first steps, the songs, the joyous sound of all the instruments.

And even though the ceremony was very much part of a possession cult, since the corpse was that of a girl killed by the vodun who wanted her for his wife, there was in fact no question of trance. Yet possession certainly lay at the very heart of this drama. Dead to her former life, the girl was being reborn to another existence, that of the wife of a god, a wife whom this god would henceforth ritually possess at each of his feasts. A change of personality, through possession, was the very substance of the ceremony, and the whole thing was presented, I now realize impregnated as I am since yesterday with opera, as a musical drama. It is impossible to conceive of it without song, without dance, and without musical instruments.

Of all the vodun ceremonies I have seen back home, this is the one that provides the best example of dramatization and theatrilization. It is significant, it seems to me, that it had as its theme this resurrection, taking place within the framework of a possession cult and consisting, ultimately, in the birth of an actress. There is another good example of theatrilization among our ceremo-nies: the "Grand Customs" of Abomey, which also involve a very elaborate theatrical production. *' Imposing processions, tremendous choruses as they move from the square to the temple, and all very similar, if I can believe what I’m told, to what one sees in Boris Godunov. Long, unbroken succession of dances consisting of quite varied allegorical and symbolic figures whose deepest meaning is not really understood except by initiates. There are dramatic episodes recalling the great feats of the princes of the blood and warriors of former kings, redoubtable fighters who decapitated their enemies without pity, and who are still embodied today by entraced women in the course of these festivities. At a specified moment in the ceremony—which lasts almost an entire day and is repeated on several successive days for weeks on end—each dancer (although she is not the woman one sees; but the character by whom she is possessed and who “dances on her head”) in turn breaks away from her group and simulates such a combat in the center of the square. This takes the form of a saber dance in which the movements are precise, lightning swift, but very stylized, preceded by a dance circling the square and followed by a return of the dancer to her group supported on the shoulders of two of her companions, who move forward to help out the exhausted warrior. All action is accompanied, of course, by choruses and drums. Here, however, contrary to what we saw in Alada, there is no improvisation. The entire performance is as strictly regulated as an opera-ballet would have been, I am told, in the days of Louis XIV.

I expect you’re wondering by now what I’m hoping to prove with all these comparisons, which you may think very superficial. Don’t worry, I’m not going to start arguing that performances at the Paris Opéra have their origins in ceremonies for the vodun in Alada, or anywhere else. What strikes me is that possession ultimately seems to occupy fairly comparable positions in two states of civilization as far removed from one another as the one in Paris, on the one hand, and Porto-Novo on the other. But despite appearances, or rather ready-made ideas, this is in fact the case. Everyone willingly agrees that possession occupies a very important position in the traditional religion of our country; but you will find precious few people ready to accept the idea that possession also occupies an important position in the social life of contemporary France. The Opéra stands in the very heart of Paris; its budget is more than a hundred million new francs a year (a tenth of our entire national budget!) and this is where foreign heads of state are taken when they come on official visits. If my analysis is correct, therefore, this Théatre National de l’Opéra of theirs is nothing other than the French temple of lyric possession. Nonreligious, wholly profane possession, but possession all the same, and comparable to that observed among us, since once again opera consists in people embodying, or behaving so that others believe they are embodying, imaginary characters with whom they identify in public by means of behavior closely associated with music. You may tell me that none of this is really important at the Opéra, that what matters is to show off one’s dress or one’s wife, to see if the performers sing well and if the sets are beautiful. But all things being equal, the same is true at home! At home, possession takes place in the course of a performance very comparable to an opera. An opera performed here involves behavior very comparable to possession. The fact that possession among us is totally sincere (in theory at least), and that it may be totally insincere here (but can it ever be?), does not change anything at all. The fascination that possession exerts on the minds of men is what intrigues me. I had naively thought it was hardly ever found outside of, let us say, “archaic” societies, such as our own. My visit to the opera has shown me I was quite wrong. How is it that this cultural trait is apparently a universal in human societies, whatever the stage of their development? To what deep need does it correspond? What fundamental function does it perform? Could it be the katharsis Aristotle wrote about? This, I must say, is what I was tempted to think when I heard (to my great surprise! ) the prodigious outpouring of enthusiasm that exploded in the auditorium as soon as the last note had been sung. One would never find anything like that at home, I thought to myself. That unending applause, those yells of approval intrigued me a great deal. Were they a manifestation of collective frenzy? As you may have gathered, I still must clear up a lot of points. Ethnologists here in Europe are beginning to ask themselves (it is high time!) what the “indigénes” think of their interpretations. So I hope to find a few native Parisians who will tell me what they think of the ideas I’ve had and the questions that came into my head as I observed them at the opera. I'll write again and tell you what I find out; it should be interesting. But I shan’t necessarily take what they say at face value, you can count on that. Why should the mere fact that they are natives place them ipso facto in a better position than us to understand what is going on among them?

First came a very calm parade, accompanied by drumming that rose and fell (p. 246). The women in long crossover skirts made of multicolored cloth, arms weighed down with silver bracelets, neck and ears bedecked with necklaces and pendants (p. 246). I doubt whether someone who was really a stranger to the country, and hadn't been told beforehand, would have even suspected that the people he saw dancing were in a state of possession (p. 247). Légba pirouettes... Everything about him is disconcerting (p. 247). Suddenly, Khévioso burst into the uare... , a white kerchief knotted around his head, brandishing a brass ax in threatening gestures, running and leaping in all directions... Sacred furor of the god lightning! ... His eyes roll frenzily in his head, white flashes rough the darkness with a moist 'am. His feet make the dust fly. Rattles, and iron bells had sounded in frenetically, encouraging, the dancer's wild dashes and turns (p. 246-47).

Music and Trance among the Arabs

Of all the peoples in the world, the Arabs are undoubtedly those who have associated music and trance the most closely: first, in their religious life, with Sufism, in which trance (wajd), which for many adepts occupies a very large place in the search for God, is achieved very often through music; and second, in profane life, in which musical emotion (tarab) traditionally leads, very frequently, to trance behavior. These two aspects of the relations between music and trance among the Arabs are what we must now examine.

RELIGIOUS TRANCE
Kitab al-adab al-sama'y wa al-wajd, "Book of the Right Usages of Audition and Trance,"*—such is the title given by Ghazzali (al-Ghazzali, known as Algazel during the Middle Ages) to the eighth section of his renowned Ihya' ulum al-din, "Book of the Revivifying of the Sciences of the Faith," which dates from the early years of our twelfth century and constitutes one of the most important writings on Sufism. 

"Audition," let it be clear from the start, means audition of what we have here decided to call "music." To be sure, one could not have found a book more closely connected with the problem of the relations between music and trance. But before coming to it, let us first examine the words sama and wadj, which I have translated as "audition" and "trance," whereas Duncan B. MacDonald, to whom we owe the English translation of this work, most often renders them by the terms "listening" and "ecstasy."

The Word Sama
Given the context in which Ghazzali uses it, the word samd@ is in fact untranslatable,* for two reasons. The first is that it denotes a very particular thing, peculiar to Sufism, which is the ceremony made up of prayer, mu- sic, and dance that brings dervishes together for the purpose of adoring God and practicing trance. This ceremony is called the sama and, taken in this sense, it is similar to the word is/am in that it has no equivalent in French or English. The second reason is that Ghazzali’s book is above all 256 CHAPTER SEVEN an attempt to justify sama and his justification rests upon the ambiguity of the word, or rather upon the fact that the word has two meanings, a very particular one, which I have just given, and a general one, which is "listening" or "audition." If "audition" (sama*)—"of poetry and music" is understood—is lawful in the eyes of the faith because it can cite illustrious precedents in its support, then the sama (ceremony) is also lawful.' This, in extremely simplified forms, is his argument. Now we must look at the meaning, or rather the meanings, of sama even more closely.

* The relation between sama as ceremony and trance (wajd) is so close that the word sama‘, in this sense, also signifies the trance state. One can in fact say "to go into sama’ or "to be seized by sama‘," or again, "to be in that state."® Mole writes (1963; 148) that the term is practically equivalent to "ecstatic dance," At the beginning of the first chapter of his book (Mac- Donald 1901; 200), Ghazzali says, "know that the sama . . . bears as fruit a state in the heart that is called trance [wajd].” Taken to its limits, sama‘ can also mean "music," or something very like it, since one can say'® "hear sama°”’—which is surprising since it runs counter to the very logic of the word, for such a usage amounts to the same thing as saying "hearing the audition." But, once again, sama‘, which derives from the root s.m.¢. (hear, listen) denotes, in its first and general sense, the act of hearing or lis- tening, without reference to any particular acoustic phenomenon, or, let us say, "audition." Granting this, in the Sufi texts that interest us here, the verb "hear" (s.m.°) in its various forms always includes an implicit object, which is either poetry, the Koran, or music, though a particular kind of music only. But which one? In order to answer this, I must first digress on the word "music." The Arabic word miisiqi—which comes directly from the Greek, need I say?—does not appear even once in Ghazzali’s book." This is clearly not because he does not know the word; at the time he was writing his book, the translation of Greek authors into Arabic had already been going on for a hundred and fifty years. It is because he is avoiding it. For several rea- sons. First, because in his time the word miisiqi denoted the rules or the art of music but not music itself as a product of that art, or, if one may say so, as a______ And so, of course, he had many other words at his disposal, such as "entertainment" (/ahw), in the sense of "entertain- ment music," "melody" (/ahn), or "sound" (sawt), for example, without mentioning the names of the various musical instruments. But he does not have a word that covers a very general concept comparable to that we con- vey by the use of our word "music." (Although, as we all know, this word can have different, and even opposing meanings on occasions, according to who is using it.) If Ghazzali does not use the word miisiqi, it is also because this word, referring as it does to the rules for composing music, relates much more to the music maker than to the listener. And it is precisely the listener he is in- terested in, not the musician—for a very good reason, indeed, since in the eyes of the faith the musician is always a suspect, if not blameworthy per- son.

His third and last reason for not using miisiqi is that it does not con- note any moral value. The rules of music apply to all kinds of music; not only to that played for spiritual purposes but also to that played at "gath- erings where wine is drunk" (Mole 1963; 174) in which the songs are mere "amusement and futility." From Ghazzali's point of view, which is essen- tially that of finding a moral justification for sam‘, it is indispensible to make a distinction between what we might term "light" music and "seri- ous" music. Only the latter is lawful. To confuse the two by using the same term to cover both would thus be aberrant.

That which is lawful consisted of; first, the cantilation (taghbir)'? of the Koran, of course; second, sung poetry, on the condition that its sentiments and thoughts were sufficiently elevated; and third, accompanied song, provided that the musical instru- ments utilized were permitted, which is to say instruments that were never associated with blameworthy musical practices. But this is not all. Another restriction must be added to these. It is permissible to hear only that which one hears when one is oneself in a certain state of inner purity. It is not only what is sung or played that counts; it is also the disposition of the listener. Heard with a pure heart, music can be lawful even though it would not be if one listened to it in a lascivious state of mind.

This delimi- tation of the repertoire (Koran, poetry, accompanied song), made all the stricter by a proviso applying to the listener's own intention, is precisely what is conveyed by the word sama‘. This conceptual patterning of reality to which it corresponds is comparable to no other, and certainly not to that of the word "music." Thus, in a Sufi text, the range of things possible for "audition" (sam) is restricted to poetry, the Koran, and, let us say, serious music, and these three things combine, for this very reason, to constitute a particular cate- gory of sound. This category, which is covered by no particular Arabic word (unless it is sama‘), may thus be defined, in the context of Sufism, as the category of the objects of audition (sama).

This category of sounds, as we have seen, is not only constituted by the different intrinsic qualities of its three components; the fact that it is heard also plays a role. It exists only insofar as it is perceived by the ear and insofar as it affects the hearing. Twice, on the first page of his book, Ghazzali stresses the importance of the ear: "There is no way of extracting their hidden things save by the flint 258 The category is, therefore, not constituted at the level of the message itself, nor at that of its sender, but at the level of its receiver, or, if one prefers, at the level of perception. Why is this? Apparently because the three components of this category of sound are all capable, from the listener’s standpoint, of the same effects. This is what emerges from a reading of the “Book of the Right Usages of Music and Trance,” which clearly shows that the Koran, poetry, and serious music are all three equally capable of inducing wajd, which is to say trance, and of doing so in any context, not only during sama (the ceremony) but also outside it. However, let us observe that the manifestations of this trance will be very different depending on whether the “audition” takes place during sama or outside it. This is a point of great importance for our purposes, and we shall return to it.

The Word Wajd
This word, which is more often translated as extase or ecstasy, but which I shall render as “trance” for reasons I shall explain later, is only used in the Sufi vocabulary and is derived from the root wj.d., “to find, to meet with.”'* Speaking about the “reality of trance” (wajd) for Sufis and the relation of “audition” to the soul, Ghazzali writes: “Wajd is an expression of what is found [yi#jadu] through audition [sama] (ibid., 719). This discovery, this encounter, involves something that is in close connection with the deepest part of one’s being, or that is in intimate harmony with the situation being experienced. It manifests itself suddenly, like an illumination (I imagine that Saint Paul on his way to Damascus was experiencing wajd). It is revelation or inspiration. Its relation to “audition,” Ghazzali says, derives from the fact that it “produces purity of heart and the purity is a cause of revealing” (ibid., 723). Trance (wajd) consists of “Revelation proceeding from the Truth,” he says elsewhere (ibid., 720),'5 and the man who experiences trance achieves it “because he has found [wajada] what was lacking with him.”

How does this trance manifest itself? Let us begin with the case in which it is induced by audition of the Koran. “The stories indicating that trance [wajd] has shown itself in the possessors of heart at hearing the Koran are many,” Ghazzali tells us (ibid., 733), and then cites several of them, beginning with three anecdotes concerning the Prophet himself. The latter is depicted as follows: “his eyes were flowing with tears. . . ; then he fell, fainting,” and weeping, while listening to three different passages from the Koran. “And much is transmitted from the Companions and the Follower concerning ecstasy through the Qur’dan. Of them were some who fell swooning, and some who wept, and some who fainted, and some who died in their fainting.” He then recounts: “And ‘Umar heard a man reciting, Verily the punishment of thy Lord surely descends; there is none to keep it back! [Qur., 52: 8]. Then he cried with a great cry and fell fainting, and was carried into his house and ceased not to be sick in his house for a month. And Salih al-Marri recited to Abii Jarir, and he sobbed and died. And ash-Shafi‘i heard one reciting, This shall be a day when they shall not speak and shall not be permitted to excuse themselves [Qur., 77: 35]; then he fainted. And ‘Ali b. al-Fudayl] heard one reciting, A day when mankind shall rise up for the Lord of the worlds! [Qur., 83:6] and he fell fainting." Ghazzali adds, "And similar stories are transmitted from a number of them." In one case, a man named ash-Shibli was in his mosque, praying behind an Imam of his. The Imam recited, "And, verily, if We willed We would bring to thee him whom We inspired [Qur., 17:88]." Ash-Shibli shrieked a great shriek, and people thought his soul had fled. His face grew red, and his shoulder muscles quivered, keeping saying, "With such words He addresses the beloved," repeating it over and over.

In another story, a slave girl who was a tar'® player passed close to a Koran reader who was chanting the verse, "Truly hell surrounds the impious." She threw away her tar, uttered a cry, and fainted. When she came to, she broke her instrument into pieces and embraced a religious life.

Ghazzali recounts another story of how the famous Abi-l-Husayn an-Niri, hearing a line from a poem on the subject of religious love, "arose and constrained himself to an ecstasy, and ran wildly on, and happened upon a cane-brake which had been cut, but the stems in which remained like swords." He kept running in it and repeating the verse until the morning, and the blood flowed from his legs so that his feet and shanks swelled. He lived for a few days and then died.

In another example, a man was listening to a slave girl singing on a verandah beside the Tigris. He asked her to repeat a line she had just sung, " 'Every day thou 260 CHAPTER SEVEN changest!' Then she repeated it, and the youth kept saying 'This, by Allah, is my changing in my state with Truth!'" He sobbed a sob and died.

Lastly, a woman whose husband was taking her away against her wishes to the country where he lived heard a singer reciting some lines by Abu-Katifah. She sighed convulsively and dropped dead. The lines were, "I spend the night in grief and moan. . . thinking of my fellow countrymen, who live so far away from me."

All the examples mentioned above are of unexpected trances linked with situations in which the Koran, poetry, or a song was heard accidentally. The audition (sama) was fortuitous and did not occur during a sama in the sense of a "ceremony." When trance does occur during such a ceremony, it may still manifest itself by cries, tears, and fainting (and eventually even by death), but Ghazzali tells us that according to the "right usages" (@d@b) one should not abandon oneself to trance unless it is really too strong; one should always try to dominate it. "Then think not that he who throws himself on the ground in agitation is more perfect as to trance than he who is still and does not agitate himself; yet, often he who is still is more perfect as to trance than he who is in agitation," he writes (ibid., 1902; 6). The second part of his book is devoted, first, to the "effects" (athar) of sama*, then to the "right usages" that should govern it. The latter are five in number (ibid., 159) and relate to (1) the time, place, and participants in the sama‘; (2) the precautions to be taken regarding the presence of neophytes (murid) to whom the sama could be injurious; (3) attention and inner concentration; self-control, consisting in not yielding to the trance unless it is impossible not to (absence of external manifestations may be a sign of the trance's weakness, but it may also be a sign of the subject's strength of will); (4) control of tears and dancing, neither of which should be indulged in unless it is impossible to restrain them; similarly with the tearing of garments, which should not be practiced except within certain limits; (5) courtesy toward other participants and the behavior one should observe while dancing.

Let us look for a moment at that curious manifestation of trance called tamziq, which consists in tearing one's clothes. The same behavior, which the evidence suggests is a stereotype, can also be observed outside the sama‘ ceremony. One famous example is that of a certain Umayyad caliph (living in our eighth century) who, so the story goes, was so affected by the music of a great singer of the day that he tore his clothing. The singer was given a thousand pieces of gold as a reward, Farmer tells us (1929; 85), but at the same time the caliph warned him: "When you return to Al-Medina you may be inclined to say, 'I have sung before the Commander of the Faithful and so entranced him that he tore his garments,' but, by Allah, if a word escapes your lips of what you have seen, you will lose your head for it." We see how much this form of trance behavior, however conventional and stereotyped it may be, is regarded as irresistible. It is also interesting to note that it is both highly valued and, at the same time, somehow shameful—it must not be disclosed.

During a sama, one can tear one's garments only if the need is irrepressible, and only on the condition that the remaining pieces of clothing are still usable afterwards (MacDonald 1902; 10). We have seen that outside the sam‘, trance manifests itself quite often not only by fainting but also by sudden death. Ghazzali (ibid., 4) also reports on a case of death during a sama‘ caused by struggling too hard to overcome trance. "It is related," he tells us, "that a youth used to accompany al-Junayd," and whenever he heard aught of the mention (dhikr) of God, he would cry out. Then al-Junayd said to him, 'If you do that another time, you shall not accompany me.' And thereafter he kept putting pressure upon himself until from every hair of him there would drip a drop of water, and he did not cry out. And it is related that he choked one day through the force of the pressure upon him and sobbed a single sob, and his heart broke and he died."

Whether trance takes place during or outside of the sama, we see it can produce the same manifestations: sudden death, fainting, cries, tears, tearing of garments. The only difference is that "right usages" of the sama‘ consist in not succumbing to trance but precisely in controlling these agitations and manifestations: "Think not that he who throws himself upon the ground in agitation is more perfect as to trance than he who is still and does not agitate himself; yet, often he who is still is more perfect as to trance than he who is in agitation." "But after having stated in the first lines of his first chapter (ibid., 1901; 200), Ghazzali adds: “and trance bears as fruit a moving of the extremities of the body, either with a motion that is not measured and is called agitation or with a measured motion which is called clapping of the hands and swaying of the members.” In other words, he establishes an opposition between “agitation” (idtirab)—or “non-measured” motion—and “measured” motions—or dance—to which trance leads when it is controlled. “Agitation,” with its ensuing cries, tears, fainting, and madness, is observed above all, as we have seen, when trance occurs outside the sama or, in other words, when there is no ritual. Let us say that, from our perspective, this is a non-ritualized crisis or trance. Dancing, on the contrary, is observed only during the sama‘, which is to say during a ritual. Let us say that this is a ritual trance.

So once again we find the opposition between ritual and non-ritual trance, which is familiar by now and which we have encountered so often in matters of possession. Non-ritualized trance is frequently lethal (as Zempleéni tells us), even within the sam ritual, when it is so violent that it cannot conform to the ritual (as with the young follower of Al-Junayd). Ritual trance, on the contrary, consists in a state of plenitude and exaltation. The kind of trance, Ghazzali tells us, that is “found with Hearing (sama‘)” (ibid., 719), and which is a “Revelation proceeding from the truth” (ibid., 720), is at the same time “Witnessing of the Watcher” (i.e., knowledge of God), presence of understanding, beholding of the unseen (ibid., 723), communion with the secret, and relation to what is lacking. It is pleasure (ibid., 230; the word appears thirteen times on this very page) and purity of heart—love, or rather passion, for God. It is not, of course, a possession trance, and Ghazzali (ibid., 178) who clearly has Halladj in mind, denounces the heresy of the man who claims to be “inhabited” (hull) by God and to become “one” with him.

It is a trance, however, in the sense in which we defined our terms at the beginning of this book, and not an ecstasy, since it manifests itself by movement (“it bears an excitation of the bodily extremities like a fruit”), is produced by sensorial stimuli (sounds), and is achieved not in solitude but in the company of other participants (the sama has three essential ingredients according to Al-Junayd [ibid., 1902; 1]: time, place, and company). Perhaps, in order to distinguish it from possession trance, we may call it a trance of communion or a “communial” trance. It is not conceived as the effect of God occupying a person—which would be totally impious—but as the result of a more or less immediate relation to God, one that can have the shattering nature of a revelation, the calm nature of contemplation, or even, at the very limit, the nature of a union. The word “communial” seems to me capable of covering all three. Although it is a trance, then, and not an ecstasy, one might say that when wajd is completely controlled, mastered, sublimated, it is nevertheless at the very frontier of ecstasy. This frontier is crossed when wajd becomes fana‘, which lies somewhere beyond and is a state of annihilation (Molé 1963; 269), or “disappearance” of human qualities in God. This state of ecstasy is frequently the result of another practice known as dhikr, which is often closely associated with sama." The word Dhikr in a very general way may be defined as an exercise of piety consisting in repeating the divine name in order to recollect God and to make him recall one's existence, in the hopes of attracting his blessing. The word Dhikr derives from Dhakara, "to recollect, remember." The practice of Dhikr, like that of Sama, has been the subject of many works by Arab authors, particularly by the Sufis. To be sure, our interest in this practice is limited to its use as a means of attaining the trance state.

Dhikr has two principal aspects: solitary Dhikr and collective Dhikr. The first is also called the Dhikr of the privileged, and the second the Dhikr of the commoners. The first, the solitary, displays three different degrees of ascetic discipline and ultimately leads to what we have agreed to call ecstasy. The second, the collective, is an attempt to reach the trance state and contains only one degree of ascetic discipline.

Solitary Dhikr, which uses a very elaborate technique of breath control, leads to a state of annihilation, Fana, which consists in a total absorption of the self into God. This ecstasy, or as some say, following Mircea Eliade, this "en-stasy," is accompanied by hallucinations that are mainly auditory when the Dhikr is of the second degree, and visual when it reaches the third, the one called "inner" or "secret" Dhikr. Clearly this form of Dhikr is of no interest to us here, since it is practiced in silence.

The "collective" Dhikr or Dhikr "of the commoners" is of utmost interest to us since it is closely associated with music and dance. This is the Dhikr (or Zikr) often also called "public," since it is practiced by a number of dervish brotherhoods from India to Morocco. Its very spectacular aspects, with its violent trances during which the dervishes pierce their flesh, walk on burning coals, grasp red-hot pieces of iron without burning themselves, and swallow broken glass, have been described innumerable times. These practices were introduced into Dhikr at a relatively late date, sometime around our twelfth century, it seems.

The style and repertoire of the singing, the use of musical instruments, the dance techniques, and the demonstrations of fakirism vary from brotherhood to brotherhood, each having developed its own particular form of Dhikr over time. But among those that practice collective Dhikr aloud, the manner of intoning the divine name by shouting, if not howling, it out remains more or less the same everywhere. Hence the name of "howling dervishes" that has sometimes been applied (very improperly, I might add) to the members of these brotherhoods. Nothing could be more different from the Sama described by Ghazzali very early in the twelfth century, or from the Sama of the Mawlawiyya' 264 CHAPTER SEVEN (the "whirling dervishes") as it was instituted some hundred and fifty years later by Jalal al-Din Rumi, then the Zikr of the Rifa'iyya or the Hadra of the 'Isawiyya, as they can be observed in our day. We will now turn to the relations between music and the diverse manifestations of trance that characterize these two broad types of ritual, sama and dhikr. But before we do so, we must first explain in greater depth the opposition we posit between sama and dhikr. According to Massignon, in the course of time the practice of dhikr gradually replaced the sama among the Sufis. “The masters of mysti- cism,” he writes (1934; Tarika), “gradually abandoned free musical sé- ances [sama‘] . . . for fixed recitations of litanies based on the Koran [dhikr].” We shall return to this point before long, but let us specify first of all that sama and dhikr are as different from one another as the words used to designate them, and second, that they have coexisted in the past and still coexist today. As Molé states (1963; 150), dhikr and sama “must be carefully distinguished, even though a certain correlation does exist be- tween them, and despite the fact that anti-Sufi polemicists frequently con- found sama and public dhikr.” Ghazzali, in his treatise on sama‘, refers on several occasions to dhikr. His brother Ahmad also mentions dbikr in his short description of a sama‘ séance (Robson 1938; 105). In both of these cases dhikr seems to be an episode within the general framework of the sama‘. This was some nine centuries ago. More recently, Brunel (1926; 116) found that in Morocco the dhikr, accompanied by very violent trances, was practiced by the ‘Isdwiyya, whereas the sama‘, with very calm trances, was practiced by the Tijaniyya. In our day, in Iraq, the word dhikr is the one used to denote the trance rituals practiced by the Qadir- iyya and the Rifa‘iyya, while sama is used for those of the Yezidi>? (Has- san 1975; 221ff. and 250-51), about which we admittedly have little in- formation, but enough to presume that they are very different from the first. It is clearly by the extension of its original meaning that the word dhikr has come to denote not merely the “mention of the divine name,” as Gar- det puts it, but also the entire ritual during which this recitation occurs, when it is collective and performed aloud. In the West, and also in some Muslim regions of the East and of Africa, dhikr has become known as a ritual that is more or less open to the public and that gives rise to spectacu- lar manifestations, and it is in this sense, consequently, that the word is most often understood outside the narrow circle of Sufism. This being so, there nevertheless has been, and still is, a great deal of uncertainty in the use of the two words. For example, dhikr is often used nowadays when referring to the sama of the Mevlevi. Judging from the extracts quoted by Molé (1963; 232ff.), the ancient writers spoke only of samat, so that the house where the dervishes met was called sama°khana and the principal dancer sama‘zan (he who makes the sama). Inversely, in the fourteenth century, Ibn Batutah, in the story of his encounter with the Rifa‘iyya in India, gives the name sama to the displays of fakirism cus- tomary among this sect, whereas today we would speak of dhikr, or, bet- ter yet, hadra. This last word, which means “presence” (not that of God, as one might think, but that of the Prophet), and which in many brother- hoods designates the weekly dhikr séance, has, according to Trimingham, “taken the place of the term sama of older usage” (1971; 204). It is not only with respect to terminology, however, that things have changed over the centuries. As Massignon says, there have been even greater changes in the ritual practices themselves. The practice of sama‘, as described by Ahmad (brother of the great Ghazzali), which took the form of a “spiritual concert” that gave rise to highly controlled mystical emotions closer to ecstasy than to trance, progressively lost ground to collective dhikr, which became an extremely violent affair that generated rather frenzied trances. This change, which began in the twelfth century, consisted, Trimingham says, in “the mechanization (if one can put it that way) of mystical experience” (1971; 199), which from then on became accessible to “the ordinary man in a relatively short space of time, by rhythmic exercises involving postures, control of breath, coordinated movements, and oral repetitions.” It is worth observing, in passing, that this evolution paralleled a similar trend in the domain of possession, in which, it has often been said, violent trances are signs of a relatively late stage in the cult's development.

Sama Music according to Ghazzali

In writing his “Book of the Right Usages of Audition [sama] and Trance [wajd],” Ghazzali had in mind readers who already knew perfectly well in what a sama consisted, so that he did not bother to provide a full description of such a ceremony. However, the allusions he makes to the way in which it was conducted are numerous enough to give us some idea of it. His younger brother, Ahmad, on the other hand, who also wrote an apology for the sama‘, has provided us with a very succinct scheme (Robson 1938; 105-13). Information can also be gleaned from other texts*? that deal with the sama’, either to defend it or, on the contrary, to condemn it. We thus have enough data to be able to say that at the end of the eleventh century a sama was a kind of “spiritual concert,” as Mokri (1961; 1014) terms it, in which the music was mainly sung, sometimes by a soloist, sometimes by a chorus, but which also included an instrumental element of varying importance. The concert took place under the direction of a master (shaikh) who led the ceremony and was at the same time the spiritual director of the faithful who attended. The solo singing was provided by a cantor, the gawwal, chosen for his musical talent and beautiful voice. The concert consisted of several successive phases, some vocal, some instrumental, some a combination of the two. The faithful listened to the music seated, in a state of great inner contemplation, and allowed themselves to be gradually overcome by trance (wajd), which they did their best to control. When the trance became too intense, they rose (MacDonald 1902; 9) and began to dance. Return to calm and normality was brought about by the sound of music suitable for that purpose (Robson 1938, 112), after which everyone went home filled with a memory of “the revelation of what appeared to them in the state of their absorption in trance” (ibid., 113).

Besides the singing, what musical instruments were used? Ghazzali and his brother Ahmad are more or less in agreement on this point. Ahmad (Majd al-Din) says that all instruments (malahi) are “forbidden by common consent” with the exception of the tambourine (duff), whose “permissibility” is based upon two solid references to tradition (hadith) (ibid., 111, 175), and the transverse flute (gasab), which he calls the “Persian flute” (ibid., 96). “As for the reed-pipe (mizmar); it is forbidden to listen to it on account of what has come down in the tradition, that He (Allah bless him, etc. Ghazzali's views on musical instruments in the sama' and their relation to wajd in the framework of the sama' are quite interesting. He believes that the music for a sama' should be essentially vocal and can be accompanied only by a drum and, possibly, a flute. This limitation of instruments was done to protect the sama' from accusations leveled against it by certain hardline Muslims.

However, other instruments were used in the sama', as mentioned by al-Mas'udi, a great historian of Arab music. He stated that the best music was the four-stringed [lute] when it accompanied a good song rendered by a perfect voice. This shows that the canons of beauty regarding sama' varied over the years and depended on the place and circumstance.

Ghazzali's perspective on the relation of music to wajd in the framework of the sama' can be understood from his statement that the "measured melodies are helped and strengthened by the rhythms" of the drum. He believed that a weak trance is not aroused except by a powerful cause, and it only becomes strong by a combination of these causes. This shows that Ghazzali believed that music played a significant role in the arousal of trance. Ghazzali's perspective on music is deeply rooted in the pleasure it brings and its ability to create various effects. Music's physiological impact is a secret that belongs to God, and it can affect people in diverse ways. Music can bring joy, grief, sleep, laughter, and excitement. Moreover, it can create movements in different body parts. Even a baby or a camel can be soothed by music, showing its universal effect.

Ghazzali emphasizes the importance of understanding the meaning of the music, which can be attained through different degrees of intelligence. Only the highest degree of intelligence can lead to total trance or annihilation. Love of God is another crucial element that can enhance the music's impact.

Pleasure, divine love, and beauty are three essential words that recur in Ghazzali's account of how "audition" produces trance. He also mentions how music can arouse profound love, joy, grief, courage, warlike feelings, and even summon pilgrimage in various contexts. The cause of these states that invade the heart when hearing music is a secret of God Most High, and it consists in a relationship of measured tones to souls.

In conclusion, Ghazzali's perspective on music highlights its profound effects on people, including various emotions and movements. The understanding of music's meaning and the love of God are vital aspects that contribute to the powerful impact of music. Such people are amazed that it is possible to feel pleasure and go into trance as a result of listening to music, and their amazement is like that of the impotent man who marvels at "the pleasure of sexual intercourse, and the youth [who] marvels at the pleasure of governing." Because "in the case of him whose power of perception is imperfect, that he should have pleasure through it cannot be imagined" (ibid.). We clearly see just how sensual Ghazzali's theory on the relations between music and trance is. Elsewhere, when he explains what the onset of trance owes to understanding of the words as opposed to the pure sound of the melody, Ghazzali still talks about pleasure (ibid., 707): one faints "from the force of joy, pleasure, and gladness," he says. But this joy, this pleasure, this gladness, are associated with love of, or rather passion for, God. Pleasure, understanding, love of God—these, then, are the three components of trance (wajd), which is a revelation of God when it is the result of the "audition" of music, poetry, or the Koran.

If singing (ghina‘), writes Ghazzali, has greater power than the Koran to cause trance, this is due to seven reasons (ibid., 738-48): (1) because the verses of the Koran do not always match the state of the person hearing them, so that he may not understand them; (2) because the Koran is so well known that there is no surprise effect when one hears it; (3) because the sound (sawt; i.e., of the voice) is more pleasurable when it is measured (has a regular meter) than when it is not measured, and such "measure" is what distinguishes poetry from the Koran; (4) because the variety of "measured poetry" has great expressive power, even if the melody is purely instrumental and consequently has no meaning; (5) because "measured melodies are helped and strengthened by the rhythms" of the drum, whereas the Koran never is; (6) because song can be used more freely than the Koran; (7) because "the Koran is the word of God" and because "it is uncreated" ; because its composition does not lie in the realm of language since it is a miracle, whereas poetry, which is composed by men, is in harmony with their natural qualities.

If both the Koran and sung poetry can induce trance (wajd), this is because both are capable, through the medium of a pleasant voice (ibid., 742), of making us meet (wajd), of revealing to us, that which is in profound harmony with ourselves; but if sung poetry is more capable of doing this than the Koran, this is especially because poetry is measured and has rhythm. With respect to the arousal of trance, rhythm and measure are thus regarded as an important dimension of music. But it is not more important than the quality of the sound, the beauty of the voice, and the meaning of the words. It is the combination (ibid., 743) of several causes that gives birth to trance, as we have just seen. The drum, whose rhythm helps the melody and strengthens the measure, is merely one among many others, an interesting point we need to remember. Although for Ghazzali the drum is the only instrument, except for the small flute, that could be played in the sama, it nevertheless only occupies a somewhat secondary place in his list of the effects of music and, ultimately, in his theory of the relations between music and trance. This is a further example of the inanity of the theory, already mentioned several times in this book, that the drum is always and everywhere the principal, if not the only, cause of the arousal of trance. Whereas in the sama’, as conceived by Ghazzali, music is primarily vocal, in the samd as conceived by Jalal al-Din Rimi, the music is at least as much instrumental, if not more so. In the sama‘ of the Mevlevi, the famous whirling dervishes of Konya in Turkey, the music is provided by an instrumental ensemble, including transverse flutes (ney), a bowed string instrument (rabab), a plucked string instrument (tanbir), two pairs of small kettledrums (kudum), and cymbals (zim). It is the flute that plays the principal role, characterizing the music to the highest degree. Rumi states, "Listen to the flute... It complains of the separation." About the rabab, he says, "It is only dry string, dry wood, and dry skin, but from it speaks the voice of the Beloved." The second part of the Mevlevi's sama‘, accompanied by instrumental music and a chorus of singers, features drums that play an important rhythmic role but are played moderato, conforming to the ceremony's general esthetics. The sama of the Mevlevi is remarkable for its restrained character, and although the spinning of the dancers is sometimes spellbinding, the dance's overall spectacle is impregnated with great calm. Everything is controlled, restrained, and ordered, symbolizing the spinning motion of planets. The dancers may be in a trance, but the trance is interiorized, leading to ecstasy. The word sam@‘ signifies the act of hearing or listening, and the sama ritual consists of hearing or listening to music to attain divine contact, termed wajd or trance. The person participating in a sama listens to music but does not make it as a musician or musicant, except when clapping hands. Musicians provide the music and do not participate in the sama, as they do not seek wajd. The roles are strictly divided: on one hand, dervishes listen to music and expect to enter trance; on the other, musicians make music and expect nothing from it. This situation is identical to possession ceremonies and is diametrically opposed to shamanism. The Practice of Dhikr

Although the practice of collective dhikr varies among brotherhoods, it retains certain constant features in its organization and manner of reciting the dhikr. According to Trimingham, the hadra (the dhikr ceremony as a whole) consists of two parts: a) the reading of the office (hizb, wa zifa, etc.) of the order and other prayers, perhaps interspersed with music and songs (amdashid); and b) the dhikr proper, accompanied throughout by music and songs and generally introduced with a special prayer called ‘The Opener’.

The dhikr takes place under the direction of the brotherhood's spiritual leader, the shaikh, assisted by one or several singers who take over in the sung parts of the ritual. The first part (hizb or wird) of the ceremony constitutes a preparation for the second. A state of contemplation and musical fervor is created by means of prayers (which are, in fact, chanted) and chants taken up in chorus by the participants seated in a circle on the floor around the shaikh.

The second part involves an almost uninterrupted crescendo marked out by moments of paroxysm of ever-increasing intensity. The rhythmic recitation of the dhikr alternates with sung sections, sometimes solo, sometimes choral. At a sign from the shaikh, the men rise, still keeping their circular formation, and join in unison in a rhythmic intonation of the first part of the profession of faith (shahada), La ilaha illa Allah, or the name of Allah, or such other words as huwa (Him) or hayy (Living). The words are half-chanted, half-shouted to a very pronounced rhythm, which the men obtain by strongly exaggerating their respiratory movements as they breathe in and then out.

In certain cases, this general and raucous panting is similar to the sound of a saw moving back and forth. This effect is produced by means of a specific practice said to date back to the twelfth century and to have been promoted by Ah-mad al-Yasavi, the founder of the Yasaviyya order. To produce this "rasping saw dhikr" (al-dhikr al-min-shari), the ba@ is expired very deeply, then aspired as low as possible. However, there are many different ways of vocalizing the syllables that serve as the basis for the recitation, and they vary during the course of the "spiritual concert." 

"** Trimingham (ibid., 210) describes the rasp during the final phase of the dhikr as being like the noise of a "rasping saw" or "pectoral barking." But perhaps it would be more correct to speak of "roaring." Whatever the case may be, the essential fact is that this great hubbub has an air of savagery and animality about it. As they roar, the participants sway back and forth or from left to right, with their necks disarticulated and their heads violently hurled about by the movement. It is the shaikh who controls the alternation of song and rhythmic recitation, which follow one another without break and are accompanied by various dance figures (spinning, facing one another, splitting up into small tight groups, or forming a circle, sometimes stamping on the spot, sometimes not), and it is he who also regulates the rhythm and general acceleration of the movements.

"Under his drive," Ferchiou (1972; 55) writes in her description of a Saduliyya ceremony in Tunisia, "the exercise of the dhikr reaches its paroxysm: faces streaming with sweat, eyes almost closed, the faithful are drawn into a rhythmic frenzy, and then comes the silence of their ecstasy." In other sects, on the contrary, this is the moment when the fakir begin to display the most frenzied manifestations of trance. These manifestations do not, in fact, have very much in common with the communion trance that is, as we have seen, the aim of the dhikr, and these practices are the ones we must now examine.

As we shall see, these fakirist practices, already alluded to earlier, constitute a very particular aspect of Sufism. Although they have nothing in common with the dhikr in the strict sense of the term (repetition of the divine name), they do nevertheless form an integral part of the ritual commonly designated by this term, or by the term hadra, which in this case is practically synonymous with dhikr.

As we have seen, in the dhikr in the strict sense it is characteristic for the adepts to be the musicants of their own trance. As we shall see, this ceases to be true, however, of the fakirist section, if I may so put it, of the ritual. Our problem, therefore, is to find out why this should be so. And the answer is that in the case of the fakir we are no longer dealing with communion trance but with possession trance, which means that, logically, the relation of the trance subject to music should no longer be the same. In order to prove this, however, we need to examine the evidence in greater detail.

Fakirist Practices and Possession

All brotherhoods do not indulge in fakirist practices to the same extent. In Tunisia, for example, as we know, the Saduliyya brotherhood abstains from them totally. Among those who do go in for such practices, the Rifatiyya, founded in the twelfth century in Iraq, and the 'Isawiyya, founded two centuries later in Morocco, are both famous for the spectacular and amazing nature of their exercises. It is with the first of these that we will begin our examination of the relation of music to this particular form of trance that one might term fakirist.

The account given by Christian Poche (1974; discography) of a zikr ceremony recorded among the Rifa'iyya in Aleppo is very significant in this respect. The ceremony (hadra) in question included the skewer ordeal, which is a rite of transition, or initiation, that novices (mirid) are obliged to undergo. It is this trial that interests us here. The trial consists of the shaykh piercing the neophyte’s flank with a skewer, so that the point goes right through the flesh and out the other side, without leaving a wound or drawing a drop of blood. This deed takes place in an ambiance of noisy effervescence, with participants exalted by continual singing, cries, invocations, and a ceaseless beating of drums. The novice is put into a trance, allowing him to identify himself with Ahmad Rifai, the founder of the brotherhood. This identification with the founder of the brotherhood conforms to the definition of possession.

The Sufi adept in this case, although unexpected or misplaced within the Muslim context, is truly possessed and in a possession trance. The fact that Sufi religious discourse remains silent on this aspect does not change the facts. The music used in this possession episode is different from that in the rest of the hadra. Drums play a principal role, with the mizhar (frame drums) being called "he who makes appear." The rhythm in double time drives the novice irresistibly toward the center of the circle. No mention of dhikr or recitation is made.

The skewer ordeal was observed in Iraq in the fourteenth century among the Rifa‘iyya, by the well-known Arab traveler and geographer Ibn Batutah. He also recorded that, among the dervishes in trance, some took a great serpent and bit at its head with their teeth until they had severed it. P. de Felice (1947) described a ceremony he witnessed among the ‘Isawiyya of Algeria, where madmen were first presented with knives and daggers, with which they pierced their arms and cheeks without a single drop of blood flowing from their wounds. They were then offered great scorpions and grey vipers on dishes covered with sieves, and they threw themselves upon those creatures and devoured them. One of them, before consuming his share, ran to and fro with a snake hanging on to his tongue; a second did the same with a scorpion. Brunel (1926) wrote that Ben ‘Aisa (or Ibn ‘Isa), founder of the brotherhood of the ‘Aissaoiia (or ‘Isawiyya), had the gift of captivating ferocious beasts and rendering venomous snakes harmless. We are once again faced with a case of "fakirism" that relates to identifica-tory possession: it is by identifying himself with the founder of his sect that the ‘Aissaowia dervish acquires the power of facing the trial and of enduring the snake bites. There is every reason to believe that this also holds true for the Rifa‘iyya. But the Rifa‘iyya have not only the peculiar ability—I was going to say the specialty—of undergoing sword and snake bites unharmed: they can undergo fire in the same manner. In Trimingham's words (1971; 86), their ecstatic practices render them "immune to sword and fire." In his description of the above-mentioned seance he witnessed among the Rifa‘iyya, Ibn Batutah writes: "Loads of wood had been set ready and were lit; they [the dervishes] danced into the fire. Some of them rolled in it; others placed it in their mouth until the fire was extinguished." And he adds: "Such is their rule, and this is how the congregation of the ‘Ahmadiyya®’ is distinguished." But this is all he says on the subject. So how is this "immunity" conceived?

This time, we have no information that would provide an answer to the question. By analogy with the two preceding ordeals—that of the skewer and that of the serpent—which both have their origin in a particular power of the patron saint of the dervishes, one could presume the same holds true for the fire ordeal. The saint may have shown, in one or another circumstance, his resistance to fire. Following the same logic as in the two previous cases, his entranced devotees, by identifying themselves with him, would give proof of the same power. This, however, is pure hypothesis and must still be verified.

Thad to linger somewhat on this last case because among all the deeds of "fakirism," the fire ordeal is probably the most frequent and most spectacular. It would indeed be particularly interesting to know how this resistance to fire is conceived, on what sort of "collective representation" it is based. The question can also be raised for the Anastenarides,*? adepts of a Christian sect well known for its practice of the glowing embers*? ordeal. During the course of their great annual spring feast, the Anastenarides customarily practice a ritual that consists in walking barefooted over a bed of burning coals without burning themselves. The adepts prepare for this ordeal by entering into trance, aided by musical accompaniment in which drumming plays an essential role. Apparently, at least, this trance is a possession trance, since the adept is "seized by the saint" (Kakouri 1965; 22), whose icon he carries at arm's length above his head, as though better to identify himself with him.

Would the imaginary representations that inspire the Anastenarides who walk on the coals without being burnt be those of their identification, conscious or not, with the saint possessing them? (Their insensibility to fire, as a physiological fact, is another matter, and one that does not concern us here.) The hypothesis is once more tempting. Would the biography of the saint—Constantin, most often, but not always—include an episode relating to immunity from fire? This here again is pure hypothesis, but it might well deserve an inquiry. According to a study of the Anastenarides recently carried out by a team from the University of Salonica, the people concerned say that they are moved by a "divine power" (S. Baud-Bovy 1981, personal communication). In this case, the Anastenarides should be seen not as possessed but as inspired. With respect to the dervishes involved in the practice of dhikr, we have seen there was room for hesitation between possession and inspiration trance. Let it be repeated once more, concerning the subjects treated here, that the distinctions, however necessary and useful they may be, are always somewhat blurred. The Anastenarides are but one more example of it. Let us now return to the Rifatiyya and move on to the music of the hadra.

Ibn Battutah does not say anything about the music that accompanied the séance he describes. He only notes that at the beginning the dervishes [276] recited the dhikr. After that, they "started the samad" (I said earlier what we should think of the use, somewhat unexpected here, of the word samad). During this, they rolled about in glowing embers. We are thus dealing with a hadra divided into two parts, the first devoted to the recitation of the dhikr proper, and the second to fakirist music and practices. Dermenghem and Barbes, in turn, make the same distinction when they describe the hadra of the 'Aissdotia in Algeria, a hadra whose second part is devoted, precisely, to the "games" of fire and timber.

As regards the music (which is treated at length in their description), it is the chorus that plays the principal role during the first part [1951; 291-92], and "it is mainly in the second part of the ceremony that the instruments (drums and flutes) will play a part." We have just seen that drums play the principal role among the Aleppo Rifa'iyya during the skewer ordeal. This predominance of the instruments during the part of the hadra devoted to fakirist practices is something we shall also find among the 'Isaiyya of Morocco, to whom we shall now turn.

Before we do move on to Morocco, however, where the evidence of possession is even greater than in the cases we have considered so far, let me make it quite clear that I have no intention of reducing all manifestations of Sufi fakirist practices to possession. Nothing is ever as simple as that. I simply wish to show that in certain cases at least these manifestations can be interpreted in such a way, and that, at the same time, the relations of the adept to the music follow the logic of possession trance (as outlined in the first part of this book), and not that of communion trance. It is this correlation that it is important for us to isolate.

Among the 'Isawiyya, the public dhikr is practiced either in the course of the weekly Friday meetings (fadra) or during feasts (lemmat: "gathering") "offered by private persons very often on the occasion of family ceremonies," or, lastly, during the great feast (miisem) held every year to commemorate the brotherhood's founder. In all these cases, the dhikr, which in its broad lines conforms to the description already given and is therefore completely Muslim, merely precedes other ritual actions that, on the contrary, have nothing to do with Islam. Brunel's work, in fact, shows that a large part of the 'Isawiyyas' religious practice is based upon belief in possession by various spirits, usually those of such animals as the lion, lioness, jackal, boar, camel, and so on. As a neophyte, each adept is given the name of one of these, and from then on he must "imitate the behavior and manners of that animal exactly" during the brotherhood's weekly ceremonies (Brunel 1926; 170). The origin of these beliefs should probably be sought in black Africa. The Hadhra, a weekly ceremony, is divided into two distinct parts: the dhikr and an ecstatic dance. Brunel tells us that the dhikr enables adepts to enter trance, and the transition to possession trance occurs fairly abruptly but without causing a break in continuity. The process is characterized by the progressive intervention of musical instruments, such as drums and oboes. These signals mark the start of the rbbani dance, which is slow and resembles the dhikr. This dance serves as a "preparatory exercise" for the next dance, which is figurative and directly related to possession.

The figures of this new dance change with the Ta'ifat, or "groups," to which the dancers are attached. The dance can involve two performers facing one another, spinning leaps, and repelling one another like two opposed forces. Sometimes the dance features "extraordinary leaps" accompanied by the gesture of "dis-embowelling and tearing out." Other dance figures correspond to the behavior of various animals capable of possessing the adepts, such as boars, jackals, and others.

The specialty of those who embody the camel is to chew cactus leaves with spines, barley, or wild artichokes. They also sometimes quarrel among themselves and hurl themselves head-down at gates. There is no point to going further, as the second part of the hadra, which Brunel describes as devoted to "ecstatic dancing," has no connection with the first, which was devoted to the "dhikr proper." The relations between trance and music totally change from one part to the other. In the dhikr, the musicians are the adepts themselves, governing the exercise that causes them to enter trance. In the "ecstatic dancing," it is the musicians who provide the music by playing drums and oboes.

Before leaving religious trance among the Arabs, and passing on to profane trance, perhaps it would be useful to review the relations between possession and Islam as they emerge from the examples we have examined thus far. In the case of the ‘Isawiyya, we are clearly dealing with a phenomenon of religious syncretism. We can say that such things are not unique and occur within Christian and Islamic contexts. In Bahia, those who participate in the candomblé have no difficulty in practicing possession and simultaneously declaring themselves Roman Catholics. However, many Christians and Muslims express indignation over these practices. The two cases are symmetrical in this respect.

In the 'Isawiyya, we have clear examples of syncretism, combining possession and adoration of God. In other cases, the situation is not always clear. During a hadra, one section is devoted to the practice of dhikr, which is a recitation of the divine name and communion with God, while another section is devoted to the ordeal of being pierced with a skewer, which is an initiation rite and identification with the founder of the brotherhood.

In the first case, we are indisputably dealing with a Muslim act of faith, whereas in the second, something else is involved. The question is, what exactly? The trance during the ordeal episode can be viewed as a case of possession. Those involved would be surprised and indignant at this suggestion. They experience this privileged relation with the brotherhood's founder—with the saint—as a particular aspect of an overall situation, which is adoration of Allah. The saint is no more than a mediator in this adoration, and this is why there is nothing shocking about identifying oneself with him.

However, this identification, which involves going into trance and temporarily taking on the personality of someone who is the object of the group's devotion for the purpose of obtaining his blessing, conforms exactly to the definition of possession proposed at the beginning of this book. The ambiguity of this case somewhat shades the presence of possession, but the latter exists nonetheless.

A hadra in which dhikr proper and fakirist practices succeed one another, in whatever order, should be seen as in some way juxtaposing communion and possession trance. This is what causes the singularity of these ceremonies. Such a juxtaposition is likely to be a source of ambiguity, so that it is not always clear whether it is the first or the second type of trance that is at work. But the existence of transitional or ambiguous stages does not alter the fact that two types of trance are clearly involved, or, if one prefers, two types of religious bonds with the deity. The interesting point for us is that the relations between the trance subject and the music vary according to whether the first or the second type is involved. During the dhikr proper, which is to say during communion trance, the adepts are the ones who are the artisans of their own entry into trance, which they induce by their own singing and dancing; during the fakirist practices, they no longer do so themselves but others have the task of providing the music, and of inducing their trance. In short, the first case involves the adept as a musician, while in the second, he is musi-cated. The Jinn and "Poetic Furor"

Alongside the possession trance associated with Islam through popular forms of Sufism, there is another kind, parallel with Islam, but also sometimes associated with it. This is the possession trance brought about by beings known in Arabic as jinn.1 A pre-Islamic survival, belief in the jinn has become confused, or combined, with a number of other more or less similar beliefs that are, or have been, current in the various countries in which Islam prevails.

The jinn are held responsible for certain illnesses, which they cause by taking possession of people. Individuals possessed in this way tend to organize themselves into schools or colleges. This is true, among other examples, of the female college of the Tidjan-iyya2 in Tunisia, described by Sophie Ferchiou (1972; 57 ff.). The "spirits" responsible for the possession and called 'ennés el obra ("the other people") answer for the most part to the definition of jinn.

Seen in this way (for there are other aspects, some associated with magic), the jinn, or rather the cults of which they are the object, scarcely constitute anything more than variations on the general theme of possession. And these variations would probably tell us no more about the relation between music and possession than what we have already learned in the first part of this book. I shall therefore not linger over them.

Moreover, Farmer (1929; 7) tells us that "the jinn were evidently conjured by means of music," which takes us back once more to the exorcism problem, which we also discussed in part one—the more reason for moving on. Let it simply be understood at this point that in the subsequent general table of trance (cf p. 290), trance relating to jinn cults should of course be placed in the category of possession.

Belief in the jinn presents two other aspects that are completely different and particularly interesting from our point of view: first, that of the shaair majniin, or "poet-soothsayer possessed of the jinn" (ibid., 21) who performs the function of prophet or augur3 (in his early days, Muhammad had the reputation of being one); and second, that of the musician, or more correctly, the composer or poet, who receives his inspirations from a jinn.

Like his master, the celebrated Ishaq al-Mawsili, the most famous of the Andalusian ninth-century musicians, Ziryab, "believed that the jinn taught him his songs in the middle of the night. When thus inspired he would call his two favorite singing-girls, Ghazzalan and Hinda, and bid them commit to memory music which had come to him by these means" (ibid., 130). A good example of what the Renaissance was later to call, following the Greeks and Romans, furor poeticus.

Possession by the jinn as expressed in popular religious practices, the clairvoyance of the augur, and the inspiration of the poet, can be seen as equivalent to three of the four kinds of mania described by Plato: the telesctic, mantic, and poetic. But what has happened to the fourth, the one Plato himself placed above all the others, the erotic,4 which, to be sure, is associated with love, but with love as a contemplation of beauty and through this of goodness and truth? This obviously parallels communion trance, the wajd—the paroxysmic expression of the love of God. The four types of trances observed among the Arabs correspond to the four sorts of mania practiced among the Greeks. The first three categories of trance, those due to the jinn, owe nothing to the Greeks. The fourth, due to God, paradoxically owes something to them. Sufism's birth is related to Neoplatonism. Contemplation of a beautiful youth as a means of attaining trance, especially advocated by Ghazzali's brother Ahmad, might be a direct heritage from Plato.

After discussing the "poetic furor" of musicians, caused by genii, we move on to profane trance. Music and Trance among the Arabs 281 PROFANE TRANCE

Trances we've examined in the sama‘, the dhikr, or the hadra are religious. They're designated by the word wajd or hal. However, trance can be produced by music outside of any religious context, referred to as tarab.

The Word Tarab

An anecdote from the Kitab al-aghani ("The Book of Songs") explains tarab. Jamila, a famous singer, entertained poets and musicians in her home. During a concert, she sang erotic verses by 'Umar. Those present were seized by tarab, clapping their hands, beating time on the floor, and swaying their heads, shouting in praise. 'Umar shouted in a state of total unconsciousness, tearing his robe. He apologized later, saying he lost his mind because of her beautiful voice. Other guests fainted but didn't tear their clothing.

Wajd and tarab sometimes resemble each other, and tarab may also signify mystic trance. This is the case in certain areas of Iraq. A distinction is then made between tarab kaif and tarab rahi, “entertainment trance” and “spiritual trance” (Hassan 1975; 305). Just as wajd, as we have seen, may display different degrees of intensity, so that its manifestations vary from the most abandoned and spectacular form of frenzy, including even sudden death, to the most controlled and interiorized expression, so tarab can likewise lead to the worst extremes of madness, even death, or, on the contrary, be reduced to a pure and simple musical emotion of which no sign, or almost none, is externally visible.

Nowadays, however, especially in urban settings, trance as an expression of musical emotion, of tarab, is less customary than it was in the past. It still occurs, nevertheless, mainly in country districts. In certain areas around the Euphrates, for example, we are told by Schéhérazade Q. Hassan (1975; 125), people gather every evening in the villages to sing, and it is usual for the men to go so far as to “weep with ecstasy.” In Iraq, too (ibid., 32), in the small folk orchestras, the professional drummers often break their drums on their own heads “at the moment of ecstasy”; a form of destructive behavior that naturally makes one think of tamziq, the rending of one’s clothing, which we have encountered before, and which in Sufi territory we found as a manifestation of mystic trance (wajd), during the spiritual concert (sama).

Tarab and music are so closely associated that the word tarab has in fact come to signify music. Thus in our day, in Iraq (ibid., 123), musical instruments are as often referred to as Gilat il-tarab, “instruments of trance,” as they are lat il-miisiqa. This usage is by no means recent, as is attested, among other examples, by the treatise of Ibn Abi al-Dunya, the great ninth-century music censor, who already called musical instruments alat al tarab (Robson 1938; 12). And even as early as the time of the first caliphs, in the seventh century, Farmer tells us (1929; 51), music was also called tarab. The great historian Mas‘udi, in the tenth century, wrote, when wishing to express a certain caliph’s passion for music, that he was deeply in love with tarab (ibid., 60). And there is another more recent example: a book about music published in Baghdad in 1963 and entitled Al-tarab ‘ind il-“Arab (“Tarab among the Arabs”), is not at all about trance, contrary to what one might expect, but about singing.

It is high time I pointed out that the word tarab derives from the verb tariba, which means “to be moved, agitated” (Kazimirski’s dictionary). Of someone “moved by the memory of his homeland and longing to return there” (ibid.), one would say he is tarib, and of “camels hurrying to reach camp again”—excited no doubt by the riders’ songs mentioned by Ghaz-zali—one would say they are tarib. Tariba also signifies “to excite, to want to move,” and hence (Kazimirski) “to sing, to make music.” Mutrib and mutriba, literally “he” and “she who moves people,” are the words for musicians, male and female. The famous Egyptian singer Omm Kalsim, whose records sold by the millions, was a mutriba, and it was quite usual for those listening to her to be seized by tarab. For mutrib and mutriba, are, in fact, applied to makers of popular music only, not to makers of learned music, and of course more to singers than to instrumentalists.

On the other hand, mutrib can also sometimes mean “music.” There is a tenth-century Arab treatise in which we read that the Greek word miisiqi denotes what in Arabic is called mutrib. In Iran, the word motrebi is applied to light or popular music (During 1975; 141-42). The fact that it is possible, when speaking about music, to use the word tarab (which in fact denotes the emotion or trance to which it gives rise), and when referring to musicians, to use mutrib (which means literally "he who arouses tarab"), demonstrates the close ties that unite music and trance among the Arabs. For them, both words can be synonymous.

We saw earlier, in the case of the sama‘, that music was the great mover of mystic trance; and now we find that it fulfills the same function for profane trance. In both cases, we should note, it is the expressivity of the singing that is the operative factor, working through the combined action of the beauty of the voice and the emotional power of the words. The instruments have little, or even nothing, to do with it. Indeed, contrary to what one might expect from the expression 4/4t al-tarab, "the instruments of trance," which in fact means musical instruments, as we have just seen, trance, as a manifestation of musical emotion, is so closely associated with singing that the musical instrument is sometimes regarded as unfavorable to the inducement of tarab.

In classical singing, that of the maqamat, "only the great singers can attain joy and ecstasy [tarab] in the presence of instruments," Schéhérazade Q. Hassan tells us (1975; 125). She also tells us that in the villages near the Euphrates mentioned just now, "where love of singing constitutes a genuine mystique," the musical instrument is "a thing of shame": in their singing sessions, rhythmic accompaniment is provided "solely by a string of beads." In other words, tarab, profane trance, is no more linked with frenzied drumming than is wajd, mystic trance.

Just as Ghazzali says that the triggering of wajd during the course of the sama is linked with the spell of the voice and the power of the words, so is the triggering of tarab in the course of a concert of popular music. This is so true that the Iraqi proverb bait il tarab ma kharab, "the house of the tarab does not know misfortune," means in plain language, "the house where one sings does not know misfortune" (ibid., 124).

THE ENGENDERING OF TRANCE

The relation of trance to music and dance among the Arabs, as it has emerged in this chapter, would seem to be somewhat complicated. This complication is more apparent than real, however, and the data as a whole can be seen to fit into a fairly simple pattern if we simply rearrange them in accordance with, on the one hand, the different conditions under which trance occurs, and, on the other, certain modalities of music and dance. From our viewpoint here, it is possible to reduce both of these sets of data to a small number of oppositions. This is what I now intend to do.

The conditions under which trance occurs may be either profane or religious, and when they are religious they can be either "communial" (meaning that they consist in a relation of communion with Allah) or fakirist (meaning that they relate to the fakirist practices I have described and which fall into the category of possession). If they are communial, they can be either ritualized or non-ritualized. If they are ritualized, they can occur within one of three frameworks: "classical" sama‘, the sama of the Mevlevi, or the dhikr in the strict sense of the term. As for the music that accompanies the trance, it can be made either by the person who is in trance or preparing to enter it, or, on the contrary, by other persons specifically charged with this task. Placing ourselves in the position of the trance subject, who is either the "addresser" or the "addressee" of the music, we shall say that in the first case, the subject is a "musi- cant," and in the second, the subject is "musicated." Dance, which interests us here, may precede entry into trance, preparing it, or follow it, serving to manifest it. We shall say it can be either the cause of the trance or its effect. It can eventually be both, one after the other, but in this case, it changes in character, so that it is no longer the same dance involved.

Profane trance, outside any religious context, is triggered by hearing music (non-religious music) or, more precisely, singing. The circumstances are of little importance, and the trance occurs sometimes completely unexpectedly, sometimes in answer to a high degree of expectation. Its most characteristic manifestations are weeping, fainting, and the rending of garments. It can also happen that the trance subject, who is beside himself, will begin to clap his hands and strike the ground rhythmically with his feet in a dance. This trance is called "emotional trance."

As described, emotional trance is passive, both from the standpoint of music and that of dance, since it is only while listening to music that one enters the trance state. Most of the time, the state solely involves fainting, weeping, or rending one's garments, and the movement, if any, is only a manifestation, not a cause of the trance. The person in trance is regarded as essentially "musicated" and only very accessorily as a "musicant." However, this rule is not absolute.

Emotional trance is sometimes observed in musicians while they are playing. Scheherazade Q. Hassan describes Iraqi drummers breaking their earthenware drums on their heads "at the moment of ecstasy (tarab)." This would seem to be a case of emotional trance in a musicant rather than in a musicated person. Is it an aberrant case? To answer this, we would first have to know whether these particular musicians are entranced by their own drumming or whether, on the contrary, the trance is due to the words of the singers they are accompanying. Both are equally possible. In the second case, despite appearances, we would be dealing with emotional trance induced in a musicated person, which falls perfectly well within the category just described. The musician would, in this instance, experience the odd situation of being what one might call—no pun intended—a musicated musicant.

Now let us move on to religious trance, beginning with communion trance. As we have seen, it can occur outside any ritual context, and I cited a number of examples of people being unexpectedly seized by wajd simply upon hearing someone singing a verse from the Koran or some verse of religious poetry. The manifestations of this trance are much more violent than those of the ritualized wajd, since they can include sudden death, fainting, and fits of madness. The difference between the two is the same as that which distinguishes non-ritualized trance from ritualized trance in the possession cults we examined in the first part of this book. The non-ritualized/ritualized opposition can therefore be used once again, within the framework of Sufism this time, in order to distinguish the kind of trance that occurs outside the sama', and which can be lethal, from that which occurs within the framework of the sama and which, apart from very rare exceptions, is not fatal. In fact, this non-ritualized communal trance displays much more the characteristics of a crisis (and I am thinking here of what we called the "prepossession crisis" in the first part of this book) than of a trance. It never leads to dancing. The relation of the subject in a trance—or in a crisis—to the music is a passive one. The subject is a musi-cated person, not a musicant.

Ritualized communion trance occurs inside the framework of three distinct rituals: what I have called the "classical" sama' , which conforms with descriptions dating from the time of the two Ghazzali brothers; the sama of the Mevlevi, which is a later form; and the dhikr. In the classical sama', the adept is entranced (wajd) by the "audition" (sama) of music. His relation to the music is thus once again passive. But here, unlike the non-ritualized communion trance, the trance is necessarily, or almost, transformed into dance, so that ultimately dance can be seen as the outstanding sign of its ritualization.

Let us once again recall what Ghazzali writes at the very beginning of his "Book of the Right Usages of Audition and Trance": The trance [wajd] "bears as fruit a moving of the extremities of the body, either with a motion that is not measured and is called agitation, or with a measured motion which is called clapping of the hands and swaying of the members." The opposition he establishes here between disordered movement, which is mere agitation, and the ordered (“measured”) movement that constitutes dance could not be more clear. One might almost think that in this passage Ghazzali had the non-ritualized and ritualized distinction in mind. In the last part of his book, in which the "right usages" are actually prescribed, he deals exclusively with dance. He does not say a word about agitation. Thus dance ultimately constitutes, for Ghazzali himself, the very blossoming of trance. Seen in its relation to music and dance, the trance that occurs during the sama' appears as both the effect of music and the cause of dance. I shall come back to this later, but let me say here and now that this is usually the case in possession as well.

The situation is not the same for the sama of the Mevlevi, however, and we shall not turn to it. Contrary to the "classical" sama' , as it is possible to reconstruct it from the writings of Ghazzali and his brother Ahmad, the sama of the Mevlevi (the "whirling dervishes") is characterized by the fact that dance is not the result of trance but in fact its cause. In the classical sama' , trance incites the participants to dance, in the sama of the Mevlevi the opposite is true. Just like the classical sama' , the sama of the Mevlevi begins with a section devoted to prayers and invocations, then to music, which the dervishes listen to seated and motionless. At a given moment, they rise and walk once around the room, still to the sound of music, after which, having removed their robes, they begin to spin. The important thing to stress is that they do not wait until they are entranced before they begin to spin, in other words, to dance. Quite the contrary, it is the whirling motion of the dance itself that leads them to ecstasy, or, as I would prefer to say, to trance. This trance is therefore the result of the adept's own action. In relation to his entry into trance, the adept is thus active. He is the actor, through his dance, of his own entry into trance. The subject's will is involved in a way that is not found in the classical sama‘, in which the adept simply undergoes the effects of the music by going into trance in the first place, then by translating it through the movements of his dance. Seen from the perspective of the onset of trance, the difference is considerable.

Induced Trance vs. Conducted Trance
To express this important difference, I propose we use the two opposed terms "induced trance" and "conducted trance." Induced trance will signify a trance into which the subject is led through an action external to himself; conducted trance will be that into which the subject leads himself through his own action; in other words, the trance is self-induced.

Clearly the trances we have listed up to now—(1) profane (or emotional) trance; and (2) communal trance, both (a) non-ritualized and (b) ritualized in the classical sama‘—were all induced trances. The communal ritualized trance in the Mevlevi sama‘, on the contrary, is a conducted trance. But, one may say, in the Mevlevi sama there is also audition (sama, in fact), not just dancing. The Mevlevi are "dancers," it is true, but they are "musicated" and not "musicants." My reply would be that the important aspect to remember is the factor that engenders trance, which in this case is dance and not music, which is not the case, I repeat, in classical sama‘. This being so, I acknowledge that this case is not totally devoid of ambiguity.

This ambiguity becomes even more evident when we move on to another case that is completely unambiguous and that constitutes, one might say, an example of purely conducted trance. This is the dhikr of the Sadu-liyya of Tunisia, as described by Sophie Ferchiou. In this case there are no musicants other than the adepts themselves. They are the ones who sing the prayers, the incantations, and the songs that form the first part of the ritual that serves as a preparatory stage for the dhikr proper. As for the exercise of the dhikr itself, which, as we have seen, is an indissociable mixture of dance, rhythmic recitation, and song, again the adepts are the only ones who take part in it, without the support of a single musician, either with his voice or an instrument.

Unlike the practitioners of the Mevlevi sama‘, who go into trance as a result of their own dancing but who need musicians to provide the music for the dance, the practitioners of the Sadu-liyya dhikr are the musicants of their dance, and thereby are the sole artisans of their entry into trance. The Saduliyya dhikr, then, is a perfect example of conducted trance. There certainly are others, and it would seem that the Algerian Rahmaniya is one of them. But in certain brotherhoods it is usual to engage other musicians. This is true of the Halveti, who secure a flutist and a drummer for the introductory section of dhikr in particular. It is also true of the Rifatiyya—those of Aleppo at least—among whom the hymn singer (munshid) is a lay person, not a member of the brotherhood. "Drums—this time played by members of the brotherhood—may also be beaten to strengthen the rhythm of recitations or songs. The drummers then station themselves a little outside the circle of those who are taking part in the exercise of the dhikr, and they do not generally go into trance. In this case, should we say that since the practitioners of the dhikr are not the only musicians of their dance (since they are partially “musicated”), they can no longer be seen as the sole artisans of their entry into trance? And would it then follow that we cannot consider the dhikr as belonging to the category of conducted trance? Would the rule cease to be general? I think not. In all these cases, the essentials remain: in order to enter into trance the subject must recite the dhikr, sing, and dance in the manner described. This is what remains invariable, whatever the brotherhood concerned. It is this that defines the dhikr. The rest—singers engaged from outside, the use of the drum—should be seen as accessory and consequently as not invalidating the rule.

Last, there is the case of trance linked with the manifestations of fakir-ism practiced by certain brotherhoods after the exercise of the dhikr and which, through a misuse of language, is sometimes included under the same term. I have already stated how we should view this trance: it is distinct from communion trance, even though it may follow it closely, sometimes without a break, and in practice mingling with it to some extent. We have seen that in every case this trance is associated with music that is not provided by the subject himself (the subject is not the musicant of his own trance) and that the dance is the expression of trance but not its cause. Unlike the communion trance produced by the dhikr, which is a conducted trance, the “fakirist” trance is an induced trance, as, by the same token, are communion trance (produced by the classical sama‘) and profane trance. This being so, the system of the relation of trance to music and dance among the Arabs may be expressed schematically by figure 7.1: “induced trance” signifies that the subject is “musicated,” in other words entranced by the music provided by those other than himself, and that his dance is moreover the effect, not the cause of his trance; “conducted trance” means that the subject engenders his own trance, either through dance or through the effect of both his dance and his own action as a musicant.

Communion Trance: Between Possession and Shamanism
The induced trance/conducted trance opposition, as it has just been isolated, takes us back to a similar distinction made in the first part of this book with respect to possession and shamanism. Viewed in their respective relations to music, it will be remembered that the possessed person was defined as “musicated” and the shaman as a “musicant.” Communion trance, shamanic trance, and possession trance can thus all three be characterized by reference to this one opposition, “induced/conducted,” but with one proviso: whereas this opposition allows us to distinguish between shamanism and possession, in the case of communion trance, this opposition operates from within, since it distinguishes between the two aspects that this category of trance may have, depending on whether it occurs within the context of the dhikr or, on the contrary, within that of the classical sama‘. Communion trance thus seems to lie between possession and shamanism." In the first part of this book, we found that possession and shamanism are differentiated first by a doubly marked inverse relation between the trance subject and the world of spirits or divinities; second, by the fact that possession trance is involuntary while shamanic trance is voluntary. Shamanism, as we saw, is a journey made by man into the invisible world of spirits; possession is a visit by the spirits or gods to the visible world of men. The relation is opposite in direction, but it operates on a footing of equality, since in both cases a religion of immanence is concerned. Men, spirits, and gods are all of the same essence, of which they represent different avatars, some visible and some invisible. This is why the relation of man to the spirits can be either one of submission or of domination.

In a religion of transcendence, like Islam, which excludes the possibility of identifying with God, and even more so that of dominating him, it cannot be the direction of the relationship that leads, by reversing itself, to two ways of engendering trance, one induced, the other conducted. How, then, are we to explain that, even here, two processes are at work in opposite directions? It appears that it is of no great importance whether the relation between the two worlds, the visible and the invisible, is one of immanence or one of transcendence. Both cases lead to one and the same alternative: either the relation is experienced as something undergone, or it is experienced as something willed. In the first case the trance technique is passive, in the second it is active.

Let us say, for brevity's sake, that among the Arabs the dhikr represents the shamanic path to communion trance, and that the classical sama represents the possessional path to it.

An Aside on Christianism

To complement the outline just given on the relation of trance to music and dance in Islam, we should now examine, in a similarly systematic manner, what happens in those other two religions of transcendence, Judaism and Christianism. The subject is vast, and much of it lies outside our present purpose. Let me simply say, limiting myself to Christianism and staying close to the categories we have just examined, that the trance of the Shakers in the United States and the Shlustes in Russia, as practiced in the nineteenth century, would clearly have to be placed alongside the dhikr, on the shamanic side, in the category of conducted trances. Both Shakers and Shlustes were at once the musicants and dancers of their own entry into trance.

On the other hand, the trances observed among black (and sometimes white) Americans—Baptists, Pentecostalists, and others—would be placed more on the side of induced trance, and therefore of possession, due to the important role played by musicians (singers, organists, etc.), and the preacher in the ceremonies. However, things appear to be extremely fluid, as the profoundly syncretic nature of these cults complicates the situation further.

At the beginning of the twentieth century, there was the Welsh Revivalist movement, a Christian movement in which mystic trance played a considerable role. Trance was triggered both by the singing of the participants themselves and by the action—often described as decisive—of the preacher. We are dealing with a kind of trance that was both conducted—since the participants were musicants of their own entry into trance—and induced, but this time by means of words, not song.

Unlike the ceremonies of the Shakers or the Shlustes, those of the Welsh Revivalists did not include dance. In the famous epidemic of Saint Vitus’ Dance (or Saint John’s Dance or Saint Guy’s Dance) that swept Europe and Germany, dance was the primary sign of trance. However, the dancers were musicated, meaning that their trance was induced. This is evident in a drawing by Bruegel the Elder, titled "The Epidemic Dance in Moelenbeek," which depicts a woman falling into a trance as a result of the music being played for her by a bagpiper.

I know of nothing in Europe that is as close to a black African possession scene. Except for the costumes and the particular instruments being used, one would think it depicted an ndép ceremony in Senegal. However, a question does arise: where we are undoubtedly in Christendom, we are not necessarily within Christianism and transcendence. I shall go no further. These few examples should have sufficiently shown that the diagram used to situate the relation of trance to music and dance in Islam can also be applied effectively to Christianism. Music as Emotion or as Excitation

Let us return to the Arabs. As we have seen, trance practices among them are exceptionally numerous. From this great diversity, however, two broad patterns emerge: that of the sama and of the dhikr. The sama consists in listening to music—which is essentially singing—for purposes of triggering trance and then expressing this state in dance. Also in view of attaining the state of communion trance, the dhikr consists in reciting the name of Allah while singing and dancing. These two operations are quite different. Nevertheless, they achieve the same result. There is a paradox here, and it is this paradox that we must now examine. How, in these two cases, are we to explain the action of the music, or, more correctly, of the singing since the music is often reduced to singing and since in any case, singing always plays the essential role? The problem does not pose itself in the same way with respect to dance: in the sama it is the result of trance; in the dhikr it is its cause. We shall return to this point later.

Before anything else, however, we ought to ask what the Arabs themselves thought on this subject; and not just the Sufis, moreover, since profane and religious trance, from the viewpoint of their relation to music, ultimately have a certain number of points in common. The problem therefore does not only interest philosophers of religion like Ghazzali; it also concerns music theorists in general. And as we know, the Arabs have had some very illustrious ones. What were their ideas on the relation between music and trance?

Music and Trance among the Arabs

The first of the Arab philosophers, al-Kindi (who died in A.D. 873), thought its effects were of three sorts: those that "dilated" the movements of the soul, those that "contracted" them, and those that "calmed" them. It was in exactly these terms, borrowed from the Neoplatonists, that seven centuries later, Baif, as we saw, presented the program of his Académie de Poésie et de Musique to Charles IX. In addition to theories on the ethos" of modes, the harmony of the spheres, and the efficacity of numbers, al-Kindi also proposed a theory on the relation between sounds and the four elements, the four seasons, and the four humors. The power of music could thus be explained, according to him, through a vast set of psychological, physiological, and cosmological causes.

Al-Farabi (born in A.D. 872), certainly the greatest of the Arab musicologists, also thought that music was capable of arousing every passion, but for very different reasons. Deeply influenced by Aristotle, he refuted "the Pythagoreans' opinion that the revolutions of the planets and stars give rise to sounds that combine harmoniously" (Erlanger 1930; 28) and in his huge book on music he did not make the slightest mention of the correspondences between sounds and the elements or humors. His theory of the effects of music is purely psychological and rationalist: "Man and animal, guided by their instinct, emit sounds that vary with their emotions, as when they are joyful or fearful. Man's voice is guided by other moods. It can express sadness, tenderness, anger. Inversely, these sounds, these notes, will give rise to the same passions, the same moods in the auditor, and will have the power to exalt, erase, or calm them" (ibid., 14). Significantly, his chapter on the "effects of melody" and "their relation to passions" forms part of the discourse he devotes to "vocal melodies This amazingly modern discourse intended "to show how to adapt the phonemes of a logos to a given melody and, inversely, how to adapt the notes of a melody to the phonemes of a given logos" (Erlanger 1935; 55). Nothing is more important to Al-Farabi than a perfect relationship between melody and words. "One seeks the musical effect," he writes, "in order to better reach the goal of poetry" (ibid., 65). We find here, though via a different path from that of Neoplatonism, a fundamental aspect of what seven centuries later would be the musical theory of the Pléiade: the union of music and poetry.

The anecdotes about the effects of music that we found circulating in Paris or Milan in the sixteenth century were already circulating six centuries earlier in Baghdad. In one variant, Al-Farabi himself is the hero of the story. It so closely resembles the story of the Milanese lute player recounted by the count of Vintimiglia (was it perhaps the model?) that it is worth quoting here:

One day the famous philosopher, who was not only a musicologist but also an excellent musician, presented himself in disguise at the home of the famous vizier Ibn 'Abbad. There he sat himself upon the ground amidst the shoes of the people present. It was a gathering of friends, and they took him for a jester. He grabbed the instrument away from one of the singers, and, having tuned it while he was being mocked, began to play tunes that made those listening laugh so heartily that their souls almost flew away with joy. He then played melodies so melancholic that they shed tears and their hearts were about to break with sadness; then he finished with a tune that put them all to sleep on the spot, and left them as though dead. On the neck of the instrument he wrote these words: "Abi-n-Nasr of Farab visited your house and then left." When they awoke, worried and stupefied by the amazing things they had witnessed, they read what he had written; then they sent people to seek him out everywhere, but in vain, which only furthered their stupefaction.

A literary stereotype, of course, that should only be taken for what it is, but which is nonetheless significant: in the Baghdad of that time, as in Milan later, what mattered was that music should be expressive, that it should move the soul. But what connection does all this have with trance, one may ask? Very little, even nothing at all up to now. We might perhaps say that in the story of the musician plunging his listeners into the deepest of sleeps, we brush up against trance, in its hypnotic form, just as we brushed up against it, we will recall, under the form of "divine furor" in the story of the Milanese lutenist. Even so, we have to admit that in both cases we do so from afar.

We are even farther away from it in the writings of Al-Kindi or Al-Farabi. True, both speak of the effects of music on the "passions" of the soul, but this certainly does not mean they are referring to trance, by which I mean that total upheaval of one's inner equilibrium that occurs in wajd or tarab. We know that Al-Farabi, who was very favorably disposed toward Sufism, wrote a book on the sama', but it has unfortunately been lost. This means that we shall never know what he thought about the relations between music and trance, which is a great pity. As for Avicenna, to move on to the last of this great trinity of Arab musicologists working in the ninth and tenth centuries, he breaks with his predecessors by not making the slightest mention in his work of any theory of the effects of music in relation to the cosmos or to numbers.

Other authors after him, as we know, returned to these ideas, notably Safi al-Din (thirteenth century), to name only the most famous. But with the exception of the Brothers of Purity, to whom we shall return in a moment, none of them was to deal with trance. Music and Trance among the Arabs 295

Yet one might have expected that at least one of them, al-Hasan al-Ka-tib (a writer of second rank, to be honest, who wrote in the early eleventh century), would have treated the subject, since his work begins with a chapter on farab. But he does nothing of the kind. The tarab with which he is concerned is only “musical emotion” in its most intellectualized and anodyne form, and has very little to do with the dramatic and sometimes lethal crisis with which we are concerned. He also touches on trance, however, like the writers mentioned earlier, with two stories’ that we also encounter several centuries later in the writings of Pontus de Tyard or of Ronsard. One of them closely resembles the Timothy and Alexander anecdote we examined in the chapter on Renaissance theories; the other is a verbatim version of the story of Pythagoras and the young Taorminian, quoted in the same chapter. Both were borrowed from Nicomachus. The striking thing about al-Katib’s use of these two stories to illustrate the omnipotence of music, however, is that their original purpose, as we saw, was to demonstrate the opposed effects of the Phrygian and Dorian modes. And these two modes are quite foreign to Arab music. Neither Pontus de Tyard nor Ronsard was very convincing with his rehashed version of these old Neopythagorean tales. We have already explained why. We see that for similar reasons al-Katib is no more convincing than they.

To my knowledge, the only piece of Arab writing dealing not with Sufism but with general musical theory that takes into account the relations between music and trance is the famous letter of the Brothers of Purity (Ikhrawan al-safa), “a group of philosophers, scientists, mathematicians, and littérateurs who flourished at Al-Basra during the second half of the tenth century” (Farmer 1929; 214). This Epistle on Music’ (one of a long series of other epistles) revives, developing and amplifying them in the process, all the ideas then current on the influence of music, its effects on illnesses, on the harmony of the spheres, and on the relation of the four strings of the lute (“wd) to the seasons, elements, and humors. It is a veritable treatise on musical astrology. The writers of this epistle' defined their own work as follows: “In this epistle we discuss music; we show also how notes and melodies, by means of harmonious and rhythmic association, influence the listener’s soul in the same way as medicines, potions, and theriacs act upon the bodies of animals. We also explain how the rotational movement of the celestial spheres and their friction against one another engenders melodies as pleasing as those of lute strings and flutes. The purpose of these melodies is to arouse in the pure and rational, human and royal souls an ardent desire to rise up to these sites where they will be separated from their bodies, through that separation known as death.” Clearly, then, trance is not the principal preoccupation of this epistle. It does nonetheless have a place in it, and a significant one at that. The last part of the epistle is an isolated chapter that has no connection with anything preceding it and that is entitled “The Diverse Effects of Music. "It deals exclusively with the Sufis and wajd. Several anecdotes are quoted, all very similar to those told by Ghazzali, in which Sufis are seized by trance and commit their souls, or faint upon hearing one or another passage of the Koran or of sung poetry. Although the title of the chapter attributes these effects to melodic modes, these modes are never specified. The sung or recited words, on the other hand, are quoted meticulously. The soul rejoices and is exalted, we read, 'when it listens to descriptions that correspond with the object of its desires and to melodies that are in harmony with the object of its delectation.' Given the necessary union of melody and words, it is the meaning of the words, above all else, that is really important. This being so, no explanation is provided for trance as a particular effect of music. It is presented as a fact, and that is all. 'May God aid you, oh brother, to understand . . . his hidden secrets.' This is how the letter ends.

Our excursion among the Arab theoreticians, however interesting it may have been, has not really solved our problem. We will thus return to it. Sama and Emotional Trance

As we have seen, two broad models emerge from the diversity of trance forms among the Arabs, the sama and the dhikr: two practices that could not be more different from one another (what could there be in common between listening to singing, seated and impassive, and singing oneself, even howling, while flinging oneself about like a madman?) but that both paradoxically result in the same thing, namely 'communial' trance. Let us examine them again more closely, one after the other. We shall begin with sama.

'Audition' (samd*) of a song or of a chanted recitation with religious content triggers trance (wajd), which can be either expected—in which case it is sama ritual, which results in dance— or, on the contrary, unexpected—in which case it is crisis or fit, which leads to death or madness. By means of what power does this singing trigger trance or crisis? Ghazzali tells us clearly, and all the anecdotes we have read confirm his statements: it is through its beauty—the quality of the voice in particular—on the one hand, and on the other through its meaning, which has no moving qualities in and of itself but owes them to the subjectivity of the auditor. It moves him because it is in perfect accord with his inner state at that moment, which is that of desiring and seeking God. He experiences the situation as an abrupt meeting—the very meaning of the word wajd—a revelation, an illumination. Hence the emotional aspect of the process, an aspect all the more marked because this meeting takes place in a context itself imbued with passion, since love of God, which inspires this desire and this search, is always more or less impregnated with eroticism—whether it is sublimated or not changes nothing. In profane life tarab corresponds to wajd—religious trance associated with the 'spiritual concert' that sama represents. The story quoted earlier about the poet seized by tarab while listening to the singing of the celebrated Jamila shows that in this case it was also the beauty of the voice and the erotic context—profane this time—that were at work. Whether tarab or wajd, the trance manifests itself in the same ways: by dancing; by that odd form of behavior (tamziq) that consists in tearing one's garments; by a dead faint, or possibly by all three in succession." Like wajd, tarab can be fatal if it is triggered by an unexpected encounter with a sung text: witness the story of the wife taken away from her homeland by her husband and who, upon hearing some lines relating to her situation, was seized by tarab and died. Here again, it is the meaning of the words and their dramatic content, related to the listener's subjectivity, that are responsible for the trance. Let me sum up. Both the spiritual and profane concert can give rise to a trance that will in both cases manifest itself in the same way. Unexpected audition of a religious song or unexpected audition of a profane song—both can trigger a fatal trance. Wajd and tarab, religious trance and profane trance, thus seem to be totally homologous, except for their content. We can thus say, that from our perspective, we are dealing with nothing more than two forms, one religious, one not, of one and the same trance. We can say that tarab is wajd minus references to God; or, reciprocally, that wajd is tarab plus references to God. Seen now with respect to their relation to music and dance, wajd and ftarab are also homologous. Both are "induced" trances in which the subject is "musicated," song is the operative factor, and dance is the expression (not the cause) of trance. In both cases it is esthetic and passionate emotion that triggers trance. In short, in both cases we are dealing with "emotional trance," and it is this emotional trance that we will examine in the remainder of this chapter.

One observation may perhaps be useful here. Believers will doubtlessly consider that to merge wajd and tarab under one heading in this way is equivalent to removing God from religious trance, and that to do so is aberrant, since it is precisely an encounter with God that produces it. This is not the case. Whether one is a believer or not, the fact is that wajd and tarab are triggered and manifest themselves in the same way, and their relation to music and dance is the same. The revelation can thus be that of God, of beauty, or of truth; what counts, ultimately, is the emotion it arouses and the trance that ensues. This being said, believers are free to think that when it is religious, emotional trance is radically different from when it is profane, and others may think the contrary. The two positions are equally compatible with my interpretation of the facts.

This practice of emotional trance among Arabs brings us to a situation we have not yet encountered in this book. We must now therefore talk about musical emotion and examine its particular faculty of causing the Arabs to become entranced. In his preface to Erlanger's great work (1930; ix), Carra de Vaux, after first having stressed the essentially melodic nature of traditional Arab music, observes: "With such restricted means, music produced an enormous impression upon Middle-Easterners. A simple distich accompanied by the lute, a few introductory notes sung by a beautiful voice, possibly a voice with the slightly raucous and guttural timbre as they love it in the Middle East, was enough to throw the listener into a state similar to that of ecstasy; he quivered, wept, fainted, he thought he was going to die. Arab literature is full of anecdotes bearing witness to this hyperesthesia of the musical sense." It is indeed hyperesthesia that is involved, it seems, at least relative to what we late-twentieth-century Europeans see as the norm. But to what should we attribute it? I trust everyone will agree we cannot see it as some natural and innate quality of the Arab temperament. We are clearly dealing with a sociocultural phenomenon, even though one could interpret our relative indifference to music as resulting from a veritable form of anesthesia of our musical sensibility; in which case, this would be a culturally specific characteristic. This hyperesthesia, as we have said since the beginning of this chapter, is largely regressing in our day in the cities. It is proof that it stems from a certain kind of upbringing, tied to a certain type of society.

Although musical hyperesthesia is more widespread among the Arabs, there are other examples in the world. In our day, the behavior of fans electrified by their idols, like Janis Joplin or Elvis Presley, can be seen as a cultural (or countercultural) equivalent of the tears, fainting, and garment rending of the Arabs. An even better comparison is to be found in Rousseau's description of the effect of the "Ranz des vaches" upon Swiss soldiers.

When Rousseau talks of an "air so dear to the hearts of the Swiss that playing it in their Troops was forbidden on pain of death, because it made those who heard it weep, desert, or die, so ardent a desire did it arouse in them to see their country again," he is describing a completely typical case of tarab. The word tarib, meaning subject to farab, is applied to the person "moved by the memory of his homeland" and "longing" to see it again.

We may be sure that Isfahani, who recounts the story of a woman who dies upon hearing someone sing verses about homesickness, would find nothing astonishing in a Swiss soldier who passes from life to death upon hearing the "Ranz des vaches." He would perceive no "hyperesthesia of the musical sense" in the event. For him, the fact that an emotion of a certain type could be so strong as to bring about instant death was part of the natural order of things.

It is characteristic of all cultures to repress or encourage the expression of emotions and decide which among them should or should not be valued. The person who could explain why Arabs have so strongly developed their musical emotivity would cast light on a fundamental aspect of their civilization. The fact that for them, song (ghina‘) and trance (tarab) are so closely associated that the two words can be used synonymously is certainly indicative of a very deeply embedded feature of this civilization.

In the absence of further information, let us simply recall that Arab singing is aimed particularly, and above all, at moving, or rather at overwhelming the listener, and that the latter is in turn encouraged by his upbringing to cultivate this emotion, sharpen it, exacerbate it, and express it in the most spectacular way. Such conditioning evidently predisposes someone to trance. It does not, however, explain it. In order to do this, I will venture a hypothesis. It is clear that for Arabs, music possesses the emotional power with which we are concerned here only insofar as it is associated with words, which is to say with meaning. At the same time, however, it is because they are cast into a musical form that the words have this impact, which they would lack on their own. Two complementary factors are therefore at work: on the one hand meaning, on the other the sensitive form of the meaning. One is nothing without the other. Only melodies that have a meaning, melodies to which "something exterior to them corresponds," al-Farabi says, are perfect (Erlanger 1935; 95). This was also Plato's opinion, for whom purely instrumental music was merely an aberration, as we know. But although the meaning can sometimes be culturally specific (when it relates to the inaccessibility of God, for example), sometimes universal and thus natural (when it expresses homesickness), its sensitive form (in other words the musical form it is given) is always cultural. It is therefore only insofar as it refers to culture that the musical form affects, and even overwhelms, the listener. Such a cultural reference suddenly confronts the individual with what formed him, what fashioned his sensibility, with everything that is consequently anterior to him, all he has always known, and all that transcends him. This experience confronts his fleeting, imperfect, unfinished individuality with permanence, with completeness and with ontological plenitude. It makes him aware in the most sensitive way—because it is done through his senses—of the existence of two opposing realities, his own and another, one that is both and at the same time close yet in opposition to his. The dichotomy between what he is and what he is not—to which he obscurely aspires—is then felt with heart-rending acuteness. Trance, or rather crisis, is undoubtedly due to this acute and intense impression of being inwardly torn apart; it constitutes a response to an inner state that has become untenable, and for which it is an outlet. Two paths are thus possible. Either this contradiction between the two present realities cannot be resolved and the crisis, which cannot blossom into trance, leads to madness and death, or the other reality does not merely erupt into the realm of consciousness but totally invades or occupies it. In this case it is illumination, which can be so brief as to merge with the crisis—collapse, swoon—or, on the contrary, can be of a certain duration and manifest itself either by the rending of garments—a highly stereotyped behavior pattern—or by dance. Possession trance, for its part, is associated with a division of consciousness in relation to a general conception of the structuring of the person in which the latter is thought to possess several "souls." Emotional trance is not linked with this ideology, but in its religious form it is clearly related to the idea of God, which is also that of transcendence. This transcendence could well be but one specific aspect of a more general representation of the world, which conceives the latter as irreducibly dualistic. Plurality of soul or duality of the world, the trance that results from them is in both cases the sign of a certain experience of being torn, and this possibly constitutes the common denominator of these two forms of trance that in other respects are so very different. This being so, and regardless of whether my hypothesis is acceptable or not, one thing must nonetheless be remembered: for an Arab music has the power of inducing trance only because it is a vehicle for words, and because these words are charged with meaning. 

As Rousseau would say, "he must understand the language spoken to him before what he is being told sets him in motion," which proves that it is not "the physical power of sounds" that is at work here. Thus, we find that in this respect, what we said about the relations between music and possession in the first part of this book also applies to emotional trance.

Dhikr and Excitational Trance

Whereas the ritual of sama‘ can be said to pave the way for trance through purely psychological means, the ritual of dhikr appears to do so mainly through physiological means. True, the repetition of the name of Allah, or substitutes for it (dhikr), is an exercise that occupies the mind, but in the collective dhikr intoned aloud, which is the one that interests us, it is the involvement of the entire body in very violent practices that manifestly constitutes the most important part of the exercise. These practices essentially have two aspects: half-spoken, half-sung recitation, and dance, the two being coordinated by rhythm, which is very heavily stressed. All this has already been described, so we need not go over it again.

Let me just recall the central characteristics. Contrary to what usually happens in both speech and song, in which vocal emission occurs only while breathing out, here the vocal cords vibrate as much during exhalation, with only the briefest interruption at the moment when the movement is reversed. The voice is guttural. The raucous and racking panting resulting from it recalls the sound of the back-and-forth movement of a saw. In fact, this chanting appears to be some sort of vocal exercise in which the constantly forced modulation of the breath plays a very important role. It seems likely that breathing in such a way—sometimes for as much as several hours on end—is likely to produce certain physiological effects. To my knowledge, they have not been studied scientifically. It seems justified, however, to assume that the ensuing pulmonary hyperventilation is likely to produce disturbances that might be of the order of a "dizzy spell," let us say.

The hyperactivity of the vocal cords, moreover, in conjunction with overstimulation of the hearing system, which necessarily results from vibrations in the throat that are internally transmitted, also undoubtedly contribute to modifying the vascular and neurological balance of the encephalon. As for the dancing, which consists of a sequence of fairly elementary figures, it too is characterized by an alternating movement consisting of swaying the entire body from right to left and left to right while the head oscillates from one side to the other. Here again, it seems likely that such movements can in the long run cause disturbances of equilibrium and result in the "spatial disorientation" to which Zempléni refers with respect to the ndép.

The dhikr ceremony can thus be seen as a corporeal technique aimed at bringing about changes in the individual's physiological equilibrium that will lead to certain perturbations. The convulsive aspect, so often described as being typical of this kind of trance, naturally makes one think of something like orgasm. Experienced in a state of consciousness entirely occupied with the idea of God, whose name is repeated throughout, any resulting dizziness, any convulsion, naturally could be interpreted, given the mystic exaltation involved, as an abrupt encounter with God. This being so, and whether the psychophysiological process that occurs is evident or not, this trance is nonetheless attained largely by means of the hyperexcation of a set of neurovegetative functions. "I propose that we call it 'excitational' trance to distinguish it from the 'emotional' trance attained through the classical sama. The collective dhikr is a specific singing and dancing technique aimed at triggering one's own trance. The Arabs themselves have never advanced a theory on this subject, but there could be Sufi texts and oral evidence from dhikr practitioners that may enable us to formulate a theory. According to B. Mauguin, the theory could be formulated as follows: 'In a zikr, the function of the music, both vocal and instrumental, is to activate the various centers in the human body. It is not perfection of form that is being sought; the only thing that matters is the circulation of acoustic energy, the perception of a basic rhythm, and awareness of vibratory phenomena which, when intensified, are alone able to eliminate the superficial level of the self.'

The importance given to the 'nerve endings in the throat' tends to indicate that chanting—with its rather particular technique—would tend to be the prime factor in the process. However, we are presented with a neurophysiological theory on the effects of music in the dhikr. Depont and Coppolani, in their description of this ritual, associate rotation of the head (which is swung from side to side then lowered onto the chest) with the 'raucous sounds' of the voice, compressed by 'cerebro-spinal congestion'; 'the blood beats harder and harder in their temples, the participants collapse heavily, roll on the ground,' they write, and this is 'ecstasy.' Gardet (1955; 203), to whom we owe the most thorough published study on the dhikr to date, thinks that the dhikr should be regarded as 'a set of verbo-motor and respiratory means' acting 'on the cerebro-spinal nervous system' in order to in some way bring the 'conscious . . . into harmony . . . with the subconscious,' thus imposing the 'desired monoideism' on the one as on the other. In a note referring to certain psychiatric research, he emphasizes, as support for his theory, the interdependence of the vegetative and the cerebrospinal nervous systems." So although Gardet's personal position is far from being that of an unbeliever, his theory of the dhikr as a trance technique, as we can see, clearly allocates the largest place to physiology. What are we to make of these various theories? First, there is no avoiding the fact that none of them—and my own is no exception—is scientifically well founded, and that they all presume, with an admixture of intuition and common sense, that if the dhikr—a practice expressly intended to induce trance and in most cases succeeding in doing so—brings into action such a specific corporeal technique, this is because the physiological upheavals it produces have the power to provoke that trance. How so? That is what we need to know, for this is precisely the point on which we are ignorant. This does not, however, invalidate the hypothesis. Let us therefore accept it and move on to investigate its implications.

In the dhikr, we may have, at last, acquired proof that a certain musical and dance practice—a very ritualized one to be sure, but this does not matter—has the power of producing trance unaided. If music is indeed capable of such effects in this context, the first thing we must then ask ourselves is if it might not be capable of doing so in other circumstances, and if we ought to consequently revise all we have said thus far in this book about its relation to possession. Let me answer right away that this is not the case. According to my hypothesis, the condition sine qua non for music to act as it does in the dhikr is that it be a practice on the part of the trance candidate, something it never is (with one exception that does not invalidate the rule, as we saw in the case of possession. Music in the dhikr operates as a corporeal technique, not as an organization of sounds, hence its characteristic of being strictly indissociable from dance. The dhikr cannot, then, in any case, be seen as an example that would demonstrate that sounds in and of themselves have the power of producing trance.

Taking account of the fact that it is the practice of music and not the music itself—not the message but the act of emitting the message—that is responsible for trance, we must now go on to investigate whether this practice, which certainly is a necessary condition for the ritual to induce trance, is also a sufficient condition; in other words, if, in order to go into trance, it is enough to practice dhikr in the correct manner. Or again, to pose the problem in another way, whether the practice of dhikr induces trance automatically, as has been claimed. For this is how it is generally conceived, and it is precisely this mechanization (if one may so put it) of trance for which the dhikr is criticized.

In this case, we are once again faced with a situation entirely comparable to the one we encountered earlier in the case of possession, where the "right tune" (the musical motto) is often thought to have the power of automatically triggering trance. In fact, as we saw, this is not at all the case. And the same is true, as we shall see, of the dhikr. Let us begin with the most astonishing case, which is mentioned by Trimingham (1971; 211) at the end of his description of the dhikr among the Mirghaniyya in the Sudan. This brotherhood practices a collective dhikr that conforms in all points to the general picture given in this book, including the vocal emission, since in the final stages, Trimingham tells us, the words are reduced to a barking noise from the chest, or to the rasping sound of a saw. And then he very unexpectedly adds that this brotherhood is in no way seeking to produce "ecstatic phenomena." Up to now, all aspects of the execution of dhikr were seen as answering to a very precise objective, that of inducing trance. Suddenly we are faced with an example of dhikr that does not have this aim at all. This is in itself surprising, but it provides the answer to our question: if dhikr, practiced here and there in the same manner, sometimes leads to trance and sometimes does not, this means that it does not induce trance automatically; in other words, something else has to be added to it. But what?

Before we tackle this question, let us take another look at the evidence. That dhikr should be routinely practiced without any intention of triggering trance certainly is a paradox—and one that raises an interesting problem. At the same time, the facts show that the sheer practice of dhikr is not enough to induce trance automatically, or at any rate that it does so only given certain conditions. This is corroborated by another piece of evidence that is probably an everyday occurrence but that I myself witnessed only once,'' namely that those taking part in "classical" dhikr—that is, one intended to induce trance—do not all necessarily become entranced. Some do, others may not. Yet all, apparently, are performing the same exercises in the same way.

Moreover, it is well known that the effects of dhikr do not manifest themselves in the same way in every brotherhood. Among some, the trance to which it normally leads is unbridled, convulsive, and paroxysmic; among others, it is relatively calm and consists in little more than a gentle and ephemeral daze. This is the case, notably, among the Derqawa d'al-Jadida in Morocco,'" whose exercises—swaying of the body, roaring, etc.—are just as violent as those of the 'Isawiyya, for example, yet never lead to comparable violence in the trance state.

Finally, one other aspect of the matter: we saw that in possession the neophyte is the one who responds almost without fail to the summons of the "right tune," whereas the officiant remains impervious to it, or only submits to it with difficulty; the same is true in dhikr, in which the ordinary adepts go into trance whereas the shaikh does so only rarely.'"

These few observations should have sufficiently demonstrated that the dhikr, which usually leads to trance, can also not lead to it, and that, moreover, the manifestations of the trance are variable. As a hypothesis, I suggested earlier that the musical practice of dhikr is responsible for the triggering of trance; now I find myself forced to say that the same practice is not always followed by the same effect, which means either that my hypothesis is false or that it is inadequate. If the same cause does not always produce the same effects, it necessarily follows that either the relation is illusory or that it has been disturbed by some other element, or again that the cause in question is not the only one at work.

It is difficult to accept that the hypothesis is illusory, because this would mean the general hyperstimulation provoked by this "excitational" practice is unrelated to the triggering of trance. Why then is it systematically sought after? Let us consequently remain faithful to our hypothesis but try to improve on it. To begin, however, I would like to reject one possible objection that might be raised, namely that in the field of human behavior no law can be verified other than with a fairly wide margin of uncertainty, and that in this case, it would be futile to continue our quest: since the context inevitably varies from one brotherhood, session, or man to another, it follows that the effects of this practice would also vary. 

My answer is that we are not dealing with such a case. If the practice of dhikr among the Rifa‘iyya is expressly intended to produce trance, and they consider that the cause- and-effect relation between the two is self-evident, and if among the Mirghaniyya, on the contrary, the same dhikr is practiced without any attempt to induce (and, to be sure, attain) the trance state, we are faced with a problem, whether we like it or not. This practice, as I said, is above all a corporeal technique. As such, in and of itself it should have the same physiological impact, broadly speaking, on everyone. The problem, therefore, is the following: either it produces trance, as in the first example, in which case why does it not have the same effect in the second? Or else it does not produce trance, as in the second example, in which case why do the participants in the first practice it, since trance is their sole aim? This contradiction is resolved if we accept that this excitational practice is—in the context of the dhikr, naturally—a necessary condition for triggering trance but is not sufficient in and of itself. In other words, there is another cause involved, not physiological this time—since the physical practices of dhikr remain the same in all cases—but psychological.

Let us accept, then—and this is my first hypothesis, which of course demands verification—that the practice of dhikr gives rise to physiological disturbances, but let us add that the latter constitute no more than preparations for trance. Our second hypothesis will be that these preparations only bear fruit if they are conceived as a prelude to trance or, and this amounts to the same thing, only if trance is seen as the normal end result. Trance would then only occur when two conditions are met: first, that one practices (to be sure) dhikr; second that one perceives dhikr as something that results in trance. In other words, if the model demands that the dhikr engender trance, then it does (Rifa‘iyya); if the model does not require trance in its program, then trance is not engendered (Mirghaniyya).

What a useless truism, one might say. By no means. This interpretation of dhikr as functioning to generate trance in fact proposes that the practitioner attains the trance state only because he conforms to a model suggested to him, in other words, because he identifies his behavior with the model. In order for the disturbances brought on by the physical practice of dhikr to lead to trance, it is necessary that the intention to transform them to trance should exist somewhere in the practitioner’s conscious or unconscious mind. Transition into the trance state would thus be a deliberate act on his part—which does not necessarily mean that it is a conscious act. The overall process could thus be described as taking place in two stages, even though they may not be distinct from one another in reality. The effervescence caused by the practice of the dhikr would lead the individual to such a state of instability or inner confusion that it would take very little to topple him into that particular state called trance. It would lead him to the threshold of this state, but, without any intention on his part, it would be insufficient in and of itself to effectuate the passage. An intention to enter into trance is indispensable to this conversion of the quantitative into the qualitative, this phenomenon of crystallization that characterizes dhikr. The musical practice of dhikr—song and dance—could thus be seen as comparable to the operation required for bringing a liquid to its saturation point in order to cause a change in its state; in both cases a further and quite distinct operation is necessary for the change to take place. In the case of trance, it is the will—be it conscious or unconscious—to take the step. Thus, entry into trance in dhikr would be a deliberate act, but one necessitating long preparation.

The hypothesis enables us to solve economically the problem raised by the existence of dhikr practiced without a quest for trance. The reasoning behind this is as follows: when practiced without any intention of going into trance (Mirghaniyya), dhikr does not in fact induce it; when it does trigger trance (Rifa‘iyya), it is because an intention to go into trance was already present. This hypothesis also resolves the problem raised by the fact that the practice of dhikr does not have the same effect—among the same people and during the same ceremony—on the shaikh as on the adepts. As a general rule, as I said, the latter (or the majority of them) go into trance; the shaikh does not. This is because the adepts had an intention to do so, whereas the shaikh did not. (This does not, of course, preclude the possibility that the adepts may have the intention of going into trance and yet fail to do so, or that the shaikh may go into trance without having intended to do so at the outset. We cannot always do as we wish.) Logic, clearly, is on our side.

But the explanation may very well seem somewhat simplistic to the unconditional supporters of the spontaneous trance theory. And it does undoubtedly pose the problem—hackneyed but inevitable—of the sincerity of trance. I have mentioned this aspect before. We must return to it now.

Ghazzali, in the second part of chapter 2 of his “Book of the Right Usages of Audition and Trance,” poses this problem in very clear terms. For him, not only can trance be sought deliberately—indeed, this is the very definition of sama*—but the actual entry into trance may be feigned. This does not mean that the trance is insincere; everything depends on the purpose for which it is feigned. Since trance, for Ghazzali, is a form of behavior that is learned—and practiced in accordance with “right usages”—it is only natural that in order to learn it, one begins by simulating it.

There are two sorts of wajd, he tells us (McDonald 1901, 730), one that is spontaneous and one that is forced, the latter being in turn divided into two categories: one that is blameworthy (because it is hypocritical) and one that is praiseworthy. “And this is why, the Apostle of God commanded him who did not weep at the reading of the Koran that he should force weeping and mourning; for the beginning of these States is sometimes forced while their ends thereafter are true.” Nothing is earned “except by effort and practice,” he adds, “thereafter it becomes nature through custom” (ibid., 731). At the end of his book, in the part that expressly sets out the “right usages,” he returns to this point and states, first, that one “should not rise [in order to dance], or raise his voice in weeping while he is able to restrain himself” (McD 1902:8) and second, that “if he dance and force weeping, that is allowable whenever he does not intend hypocrisy by it; for forcing weeping induces grief and dancing is a cause of joy and liveliness. ”Ghazzali is not speaking of dhikr—or at least not collective dhikr—but of sama. Let us say that, in our terminology, he is talking about emotional and not excitational trance. In emotional trance, the relation between trance and that which triggers it—the emotion—is evidently less close than in excitational trance, in which the excitation that triggers the trance appears to be at one and the same time its cause and its symptom. For Ghazzali, emotional trance was a learned form of behavior, which one acquired by first beginning to simulate it. He could have had even greater reason to think the same in the case of excitational trance, in which not only does one mime the excitation of trance before it happens, but one also chants the name of God in such a way that it is difficult to know [page 308] whether he is being invoked to manifest himself or whether he is being addressed because he is already there. In both cases, however, one must still understand how, by what process, the transition from simulated to real trance takes place.

Life provides many examples of emotions that begin as feigned or imaginary but then become real, often against one’s will. One can frighten oneself in play, then end up being genuinely terrified. The same is true of anger, grief, and even joy, although this is rarer and more difficult. At a certain point, one no longer knows quite what the truth is, but by the end one’s consciousness is undoubtedly totally overwhelmed by the emotion. On the basis of what? Of nothing! It is more difficult, however, to understand how the same mechanism could work for trance. Perhaps because one is in the habit of thinking of it in all-or-nothing terms, unlike emotions, which we customarily conceive as having varying degrees of intensity; perhaps also because we have had no personal experience of trance. I, anyhow, have not. But if trance is a state of great emotion, accompanied by certain mental representations and certain physiological disturbances, then it is conceivable that disturbances of the same order, artificially provoked by exercising dhikr, and accompanied by the same representations, would greatly aid the transition into the trance state.

In trance, be it communion or possession trance, the individual’s behavior is so radically different from his normal behavior it seems as though some other person were involved: he was standing—he falls; he felt pain—he is impervious to it; he was clothed—he tears off his garments. It is fairly easy to accept this substitution if one thinks of it as involuntary: if the individual who is its theater undergoes it, if it takes place against his will, because it is stronger than he, because he is borne along by an emotional torment that has deprived him of all control over himself. It is rather difficult to accept that he may be an accomplice in this change or, even more than he is actually the instigator. One thus tends to read into his behavior an insincerity, a duplicity that is incompatible with the reality of the substitution. In short, one thinks that the person is an imposter. This is apparently an error. Trance can be willed. Everyone will agree that dhikr involves a deliberate attempt to attain the trance state. By the same token, we should not be astonished to learn that it is also, partially and for good reasons, a simulation of trance. This is an apparent contradiction that we have to take into account: trance can be voluntary, but this does not mean it is necessarily insincere.” 

Let me add that if collective dhikr is a deliberate attempt to provoke trance, “solitary” dhikr appears to be a no less deliberate attempt to achieve ecstasy. On this point, however, the Sufis themselves, already divided as to the relative value of the two forms of dhikr—collective or solitary—are even more divided on the question of whether dhikr involves a deliberate quest for or a spontaneous realization of trance. Al-Hallaj, as we know, insisted that trance must never be actively sought, but that it should always be a gift from God—a conviction shared, later on, by Saint Teresa of Avila (though without the same results, fortunately for her).

Let us return to music. The keystone of collective dhikr, if one may so express it, is a particular musical practice. If the Sufis see this form of dhikr as inferior, this is because it is, we might say, easier than solitary dhikr, which is not only practiced alone but also in silence and immobility. The fact that music—or more precisely the practice of music—occupies a central position in the first and is totally absent from the second, is not fortuitous. If collective dhikr is easier than the solitary, this is because the practitioner of collective dhikr is supported—literally at times—by his companions, whom he supports in turn. This great enterprise of autosuggestion, namely dhikr, is based on the synergic effect of music. It is within music and through it; it is by means of the coordinating power that music alone possesses that the fusion of all these wills and all these desires is realized, a fusion that prefigures for each one the communion with God.

I have made it plain enough by now: the singing and dancing practices in dhikr should be seen as acting in a very real way on the physiology of trance. Their efficacy in the field of its socialization, in other words of its normal and regular realization, is certainly no less decisive. There is absolutely no need, in order to explain their role, to lend them some undefined, mysterious power.

Fakirism and Identificatory Music

In the last few pages, we have concentrated on the orthodox form of dhikr, if that is the correct way of putting it. But, as we have seen, there are others, and it can happen that dhikr will include episodes much more akin to possession than to Islam. This is true, as we saw, of the skewer ordeal described by Poche in the Aleppo Rifa‘iyya, during which the neophytes, whose flanks are pierced, identify themselves with Ahmad Rifa‘%i, the order’s founder. During this episode, it is not the chanted recitation of the dhikr that is heard, but a mixture of songs and drumming, in which the principal drum instrument is the mizhar, whose name means “he who makes appear.” According to Poche, this drum plays an essential role in the neophytes’ entry into trance.

“The vigorous beating of the mizhar,” he writes, “gradually overcomes all physical resistance and . . . produces a sort of anesthesia that facilitates submission of the body to the discipline of the ceremony, particularly during the sword ordeal. The loudness of sound produced by the instrument, which can be heard from quite far away, causes the accompanying song to be more deeply impressed upon the mind and body of the faithful identifying themselves with him.” Finally, "the entry of a rhythm in double time irresistibly urges the murid to move to the centre of the halga [circle]" where the ordeal it-self is to take place. With respect to the relation between the music and the entranced person, the situation is thus quite different here from that which characterizes the dhikr proper: it is not the musical practice of the dhikr by the adept himself that leads him into trance, it is music that is played for him. The practitioner is completely musicated; he is absolutely not a mu- sicant. Moreover, the situation is also different from that of sama (where again the adept is a musicated person, not a musicant), since it is not the emotion—both aesthetic and mystic—experienced while hearing a reli- gious song that triggers trance. This is done by songs urging him to be cou- rageous, or exalting the saint, or else by codified drum calls, in short, mu- sic that has the same characteristics as that found in the possession rituals described in the first part of this book. The fact that the ordeal in question takes place during a ritual identified by the word dhikr does not alter the situation: we are not dealing at all with a communion rite, but with a possession rite, and within the logic of the system, it is possession music that must be at work.

Now let us move on to the ‘Isawiyya, whose dhikr, or rather hadra (cer- emony) includes aspects that are even less orthodox than those of the Rifa- cyya. The second part of this hadra consists of figurative dances and dem- onstrations of fakirism (ordeals of hot coals, daggers, and so on) that must all be viewed, as I have said, as manifestations of possession. The music is no longer provided (even in part) by the adepts but only by musicians espe- cially appointed to the task. One does not hear recitation of the dhikr, con- trary to what happened during the first part of the hadra, but instrumental music performed by drums and wind instruments—the oboe (ghaita) among the ‘Isaiyya of Morocco,''$ the transverse flute (guecba)''* among those of Algeria. There is every reason to believe that the figurative dances and the demonstrations of fakirism (which are their equivalent) are per- formed to specific musical themes.

Brunel (1926; 98) makes a very signifi- cant observation on this point. Talking of a particular region where the -hadra of the Gnawiyya'"’ is practiced, he notes that “upon hearing the tune appropriate to this hadra, the adepts are seized by hal.''* They are then offered daggers, which they seize . . . [in order to perform] their fa- vorite exercise, which consists of striking their calves with the points of these weapons until the blood flows.” Nothing is said about the musical characteristics of this tune, undoubtedly because none is especially re- markable and because it does not significantly differ from other tunes in the repertoire, except for the fact that it is “appropriate.” We are justified in thinking, then, that this “appropriate tune” is nothing other than the Music and Trance among the Arabs 311 “right tune” to which we have referred on several occasions in other chap- ters, in other words, it is the “agreed-upon” air, which has the value of a signal and is recognized as such, but which is not endowed with any par- ticular expressive property peculiar to it. If the adepts go into trance when they hear it, it is not because the tune has emotive powers specific to it, but because it is the tune of the Gnawa, and because at its cue one adopts the conventional form of behavior—that is, one grabs the daggers. This "appropriate tune" should therefore be placed in the category of musical motifs, and we have already examined the mechanism by which they act to trigger possession trance. This mechanism is namely that of a code, in which the signal triggers a response as a result of the meaning that has been arbitrarily assigned to it, and not by some intrinsic power acting upon the auditor's emotivity. Let us now specify this interpretation of the role that music plays in the part of the ‘Isawiyya hadra in which possession is at work; it is one that I deduce from Brunel's description and is by no means his interpretation of the facts. Quite the contrary. A "furious tempest of drums and oboes" that puts the dancers in such a state that "they can scarcely retain their balance"; "din"; "dizzying music" that, together with the "demoniacal dance" of the tabhayor (generic term for trance dances among the ‘Isawiyya), plunges everyone "into an acute neuropathic state"; spectators who dance "in the grip of the terrifying staccato music of the ghaita and the thobol (oboe and kettledrum) and are seized by "this contagious madness" and "this ecstatic frenzy" which "none can resist"; "hysterical crisis" that abates "suddenly with the ghaitas' last notes" — such are the terms that Brunel uses to describe how the music functions in this ritual. Moreover, on several occasions he also mentioned the acceleration of tempo, so that the dances always begin fairly slowly and then gradually speed up. Clearly, he provides us with a general picture of the relations between music and trance that is extremely similar to the one that emerged from so many other ethnographical descriptions cited in the first part of this book. And in this picture, as in all the others, it is imperative to distinguish between facts and interpretations of facts. The facts are not to be doubted: the music is extremely violent, it is markedly rhythmic in character, accelerates, accompanies dances that have the same formal characteristics, and the dancers are finally entranced. Thus far one can argue with nothing: these are the facts and they have been recorded. On the other hand, as soon as one makes this music and dance responsible — and entirely responsible — for trance, one is interpreting the facts, and it is this interpretation I in fact dispute. Music and dance on the one hand, trance on the other, go together. There is a relation of contemporaneity that is undeniable. But by making this relation into one of causality, Brunel commits an error, since in the same culture area, namely Morocco, music and dances that are just as violent and make just as much use of accelerando are performed every day without necessarily leading to trance, possession, or demonstrations of fakirism. As for the manner in which he arrived at this error, it involves a process that has two phases. First, he attributes certain characteristics to the music that it does not have, but that it seems to have because they are characteristics of the accompanying trance. Second, having made this confusion, he then considers trance to be an effect of the music precisely because it has these similarities. In short, the procedure is as follows: this man is mad; he dances and listens to music; therefore there is something mad about this music; this being so, it is this music that makes the man mad. Needless to say, this very system of interpretation that is projected onto the facts remains implicit. It is because one is watching trances that can indeed be terrifying that one labels the music as "terrifying" too. It is because entranced people stagger about that one refers to trance as "dizzying" and that one speaks of the "furious tempest unleashed by the drums." It is because the spirits possessing the adepts are regarded as demons that the dance is labeled "demoniacal." In other contexts, the same music and the same dance would be described as "violent" certainly, but they would not be considered as either "terrifying" or "demoniacal."

As we know, the ahwach is the customary dance of a large number of the Berber "tribes" in the Moroccan High Atlas mountains. It is danced on the spot. Standing closely packed one against the other, the dancers bend their knees in time with one another, accompanying each beat with a sort of pounding of the ground and a back-and-forth swaying of the body very similar to the one Brunel describes in the rbbani trance dance. It makes use of music that has an extremely marked accelerando, also comparable to that used in the "ecstatic" dances of the ‘Isawiyya described by Brunel. Beaten for all they are worth, the drums (bendir) also make a "din" one could well term deafening, if not actually dizzying.

From the formal point of view, then, the ahwach displays all the features to which Brunel attributes the triggering of trance. Moreover, he also describes the trance dance of the ‘Isawiyya as a "dance of jubilation" (1926; 122, 225). And an intense impression of jubilation is also what emerges from a successful ahwach. Yet the fact remains that the ahwach is not a trance dance at all.

Another argument, this time concerning the musical instruments, further strengthens my skepticism with regard to Brunel's theory about the effects of the music. He attributes these effects largely to the oboe (ghaita); yet it so happens that the flute is sometimes used in its place. In his description of the ‘Isawiyya's annual feast in Morocco, Brunel (1926; 122) closely associates the "hysterical crisis" with the ghaita. The crisis, he writes, abates "suddenly with the final notes." He also emphasizes the ghaita's "nasal sound" (ibid., 98) and denounces its "hatched and frightening" music, which, accompanied by the drums, leads to "frenzied tempests."

As we know, the ghaita, the oboe of the Maghreb, is an instrument with a piercing, very intense sound. Clearly, it is its piercing quality and its timbre sui generis that Brunel interprets as being responsible for triggering trance.

Among the Algerian ‘Isawiyya, it is not the ghaita that is used for the hadra and trance dances but the transverse flute, an instrument whose sound is always rather weak. In their description of trance dances among the Algerian ‘Isawiyya, Dermenghem and Barbés (1951; 309) talk about the "irresistible beating" of the bendair, and thus attribute the same effects to the drums as Brunel does. As for the flute (guecba), it accompanies the drums "discreetly," they tell us, and its song is "so gentle that it can pass unperceived." They also add, however, that this song is "so pure that the nostalgic appeal of its melody colors the imperious rhythm of the percussion instruments with great efficacity." What sort of efficacity would this be? In Morocco, it was the violence of the oboe that combined with the drums to trigger trance; in Algeria it is the gentleness of the flute. Some explanation seems to be called for. The truth is that both these interpretations are equally subjective. We are once again confronted with the findings in the first part of the book on the nonspecificity of the musical instruments associated with possession. In practice, as we saw, they all can serve this purpose. This example further confirms this. I should add that in Morocco, among the Gnawa, another brotherhood that has numerous “points of resemblance” (Brunel 1926; 234) with that of the ‘Isawiyya, it is not even a wind instrument, but a stringed one, the gembri, a small lute, that is used as the melodic instrument in the band accompanying trance dancers. Here again, however, the gembri, which is “the fundamental instrument” (Lapassade 1975; 30 n. 3) of the orchestra, and which produces only rather weak sounds, is “generally” covered (ibid., n. 5) by the “deafening” music of metal castanets and drums.

How do we explain the fact that an instrument can play a “fundamental” role in a possession ritual and yet be scarcely heard? Clearly because the function of the gembri (like that of the oboe and flute earlier) is to announce the musical mottoes of the genii responsible for the possessions, and because all that is needed in order to produce the desired effect is for the adept consecrated to a particular genius to recognize that spirit’s tune (which is easily conceivable, however great the surrounding din). This is the only hypothesis through which this paradox can be solved.

Even though the musical motto, or in other words the melodic aspect of Gnawa music, plays the essential role in triggering trance, it is nevertheless only its rhythmic aspect—which is much more spectacular—that caught the attention of the Living Theatre. It seems that it was also this aspect that attracted a young Moroccan, Pacca Abderhoman, founder of a pop group whose aim is also to induce trance through music, but in a profane context. And this is further proof that such erroneous ideas concerning the preeminence of rhythm in the relation between music and trance reign everywhere. To repeat once again: these ideas are the reflection of a much too simplistic view of things.

In conclusion, it is because these relations are so extremely varied and often contradict one another from one case to another, that it is extremely difficult to formulate any rule about them without a counter-example immediately contradicting it. At the same time, things had to be shown in all their complexity so as not to fall prey to interpretations of the most reductive and erroneous sort. Although these relations are complex, it does not mean that they defy all logic. Elucidating this logic is the task that now remains. The only way to do this is to seriate the questions, which we shall do by successively examining all the principal types of trance as they have been defined in the previous pages, starting with their ideology, and by relating these trances to the manner in which they are engendered (induced/conducted trance), the dynamics of their manifestations, the kind of music associated with them, and the role played by dance. Among all these types of trance, possession trance is the one that seems to have the most paradoxical relations to music. I shall therefore examine it last, and at greater length. Music in its Relations to Emotional, Communal, and Shamanic Trances

Among the various types of trance, emotional trance—profaned or religious—is the one that has the most direct and evident relation to music. The subject, overwhelmed by emotion, goes into trance upon hearing music with a strong emotional power. The emotion is not only affective, but also aesthetic, calling upon the subject's sense of the beautiful or the divine, or both simultaneously. In this case, music is a pure message and produces trance due to its sui generis power. However, the power must be emphasized as indissociable from the words, as they were said in the Renaissance. The relations between music and trance are simple in this instance.

The only problem is understanding why musical emotion commonly leads to such conduct among the Arabs and less frequently elsewhere. The answer is that this behavior is a cultural phenomenon, with learned and stereotyped emotions. Although less usual elsewhere, examples include the "Ranz des vaches" and its effect on the Swiss, as well as musical emotion giving rise to certain forms of trance in Melanesia and the Solomon Islands. The emotional impact of military bugle calls and the behavior of pop music fans can also be categorized as musical emotion that has become an accepted and valued stereotyped form of behavior.

Music has the greatest capacity to move people, and the emotions it arouses can reach overwhelming proportions. Since trance is an emotional form of behavior, it is not surprising that musical emotions should become institutionalized under the pressure of cultural factors. This relation between music and trance is based on a natural, universal property of music.

In emotional trance, music alone produces the trance. This trance, frequently nearer to nervous crisis than true trance, is of short duration since it does not result in dance. Contrary to other sorts of trance, music does not function to maintain it.

Communal trance, induced and conducted, occurs in two forms. When induced, it is always emotional and can be ritualized or not. When ritualized and blossoming into dance, it is the classical Arab sama‘. Music brings about the trance due to the emotional power of the sung poetry and prolongs it during the dancing by means of its rhythm. 

It therefore has two effects: first, triggering the trance; second, maintaining it—the two resulting from two very distinct actions, first that of the words, then that of the rhythm. When communial trance is conducted, in other words when the subject is a musicant, we have the Muslim dhikr or, among Christians, the trance practices of the Shlustes, the Shakers, and various other sects. Here, the role of the music in producing trance is of a quite different kind. Being inseparable from dance—for it can only be made while dancing—it is above all a corporeal technique. The dancer and the musician, or more precisely the dancer and singer, are merged in one and the same person. It is both the subject’s own singing and dancing that lead him to trance. The dhikr is a certain way of singing. But this singing, which calls for a particular technique of breath control, is at the same time a recitation of the name of God (among Christians it refers to the Holy Ghost or Christ). The words also play a role (and many would say that it is the essential one) and are, here again, bearers of emotion—religious emotion, naturally, but at the service of a religion of love and fervor conducive to many ambiguities. In content and in form this music is above all invocatory. If one dissociates it from the meaning of the words, this music—singing and dancing combined—seems to have the function of creating excitation. What we are dealing with then is a very particular form of autoexcitation, since it makes use of breathing, a certain overstimulation of the vocal cords, a very accentuated rotary movement of the neck and head, and a whole variety of physical movements that must certainly consume (or liberate?) a great deal of energy. There are two musical characteristics specific to dhikr: a particular sort of vocal delivery (the “saw” dhikr)—which raises the question of whether or not it has neurophysiological repercussions—and a systematic use of accelerando and crescendo, the object of which is to increase the emotional tension. Although it is not as monotonous as people tend to claim—even if only because the increasing agitation just mentioned contributes to a renewal of the musical interest—repetition (and above all the repetition of words) also plays a role. Let us say, to sum up, that music, words, and dance create at the same time a great physical effervescence and a state of “monoideism” that, in combination, create psychophysiological conditions apparently very favorable to the occurrence of trance. In this case trance is quite deliberately sought for, and if it occurs—which is not always the case, for the “mechanism” is not automatic, even though it is certainly very efficacious—it is only very rarely that it does so in an unexpected manner, unlike emotional trance, which very often does occur unexpectedly. In the case of both induced communial trance (sama) and conducted communial trance (dhikr and other comparable rituals) the onset of trance requires a certain amount of theatricality. But the theater involved is as it were an intimate—or innermost—one. For although there may be an audience (varying in size depending on the case, and sometimes completely absent), the presence of spectators is not indispensable. Here the theater is constituted by the small group of adepts taking part together in the practice of either “audition” or sung recitation and dancing. The kind of dhikr practiced aloud—in other words the one that interests us here, since it is 318 CHAPTER EIGHT the one that leads to trance, whereas the other leads to ecstasy—is termed “collective. "Sama is likewise a group practice, not only because there are always several people taking part in it together (I know of no account of sama organized around a single individual), but also because the gathering is necessarily divided into at least two sections, “auditioners” on the one hand, musicians on the other. The Mevlevi sama‘, as I have said, is a particular case in that it is akin both to classical sama and at the same time to dhikr, since the dancers are not the musicians (or the musicants) of their own entry into trance, where- as their dancing is the principal means of triggering it. Contrary to what happens in classical sama‘, dance is not the result and expression of trance; rather, trance is the result of dance. The music here certainly is emotional since both words and instruments are impregnated with love of God. But it is the dance, ultimately, that is the triggering factor.

The role of the music thus is twofold. First, it creates a general state of mystic emotion—the emotion at once religious and carnal that is so characteristic of Sufism—and second, it provides the dance with the acoustic stimulus without which it could not even take place. Let us say, to sum up, that here the role of music in the triggering and maintenance of trance is indirect rather than direct, contrary to what happens in both classical sama‘ and dhikr.

Now let us move on to shamanism, in which the trance, as in dhikr, is conducted, since the shaman is the musicant of his own entry into trance (the fact that he is aided in his role by an assistant who takes over when the moment arises, notably when he loses consciousness, does not invalidate this rule). The relations between music and trance are organized, here again, in accordance with a particular system, but matters are more com- plicated than they have been up to now.

The shaman’s musical instrument is endowed with symbolic meanings related to his journey, or, more pre- cisely, to the world or worlds he visits during his trance. If the drum—sup- posing the instrument is a drum, for even in central Asia, remember, it can be some other instrument—plays a role in triggering trance, this is not, de- spite what may have been said to the contrary, the result of some mysteri- ous neurophysiological action specific to that instrument, as I have shown only too often, nor of some kind of “obsessive” monotony that also exists only in the imagination of certain authors.

Musically, the shamanic drum—or any other instrument used in its place—essentially functions to support his singing, to provide the rhythm that is the primary support of his dancing, and to dramatize or punctuate the action. In short, its role is precisely the same as the one it plays in theater music of any kind, with the single exception that here it is charged with symbolic meaning, and that this symbolic meaning is in turn charged with a certain emotional power. But even in this case we are still in the realm of psychology and cultural conditioning.

Conclusion 319

As for the shaman’s singing, it has several different aspects; sometimes it is invocatory, when he has to summon his auxiliary spirits, sometimes de- scriptive or narrative, when he is relating his journey, but its specific char- acteristic is that it is incantatory. The shaman is a magician, and his sing- ing brings to life the imaginary world of the invisible. Without song, the shamanic imaginary system would be inconceivable. (The imaginary sys- tem of possession, on the contrary, can dispense with it and make do with purely instrumental music, which operates by means of coded signals whose verbal equivalence is secondary." Moreover, for the shaman, singing is his principal means of communion with his audience, which supports him with its choral responses. The alternation of his calls and their replies creates a reciprocal warm-up and emotional excitation that is indispensable to the onset of the trance. For the shaman, to sing and play the drum or rattle is to stimulate himself to dance. The dance, often exhausting due to the weight of the costume, is a corporeal technique and spiritual exercise.

The shaman, among all practitioners of trance, is the one who makes the most complete use of music. However, the power of music alone cannot be held responsible for the shaman's entry into trance. This trance must still be willed. The accelerando and crescendo of the music intended to intensify the general emotion do not lead to trance unless the shaman has decided that they will at the outset.

Neither music nor dance produces trance mechanically or automatically, and this explains why the shaman, like the Sufi, often resorts to the use of a drug to obtain "lift-off." Music and dance on their own are instruments of a more authentic, meritorious trance, but they are also much more chancy.

With the shaman, we are dealing with someone whose trance is not necessarily linked to music. Every shaman, before becoming a shaman, has undergone sudden and unexpected crises that occurred outside of any ritual context, and that were the very sign of his vocation. The crises that he will regularly experience after being officially established as a shaman will be no more, in part at least, than reenactments of previous crises.

The crisis, or trance, does not require music to trigger it. The psychic upheaval that it manifests obeys a purely internal logic of the state of consciousness. The role of the music is much less to produce the trance than to create conditions favorable to its onset, to regularize its form, and to ensure that instead of being a merely individual, unpredictable, and uncontrollable behavioral phenomenon, it becomes, on the contrary, predictable, controlled, and at the service of the group.

As observed among the Bushmen, trance has yet another set of relations to music. As in shamanism, to which it is kindred in at least one aspect of its ideology (journey of the soul and ascent into the upper world), we are dealing with a conducted trance in which the subject is the musicant of both his own dance and his own trance. As in communial trance (as manifested in dhikr, for example), it is a collective practice; but the singing, which is the main support for the dance and has no instrumental accompaniment other than the dancers' own leg-rattles, is divided between the men who dance and will go into trance and the women who do not dance, are seated, provide the greater part of the choral singing, and do not go into trance. The singing, which is symbolically associated with one or another healing ritual, is wordless. It is vocalized on syllables devoid of meaning and does not constitute a particular musical category. The same type of singing that is usually intoned in everyday life is used for the healing dance, which gives rise to trance. This singing is neither invocatory nor incantatory, and it is not its emotional power that is at work, but the ardor of its collective execution, because of which the curative power of the singing "boils" and thus attains its full efficacy. The psychological fervescence, the emotion necessary for the onset of trance, is derived from the collective fervor of the singing.

As for the dancing, which like that of the shaman or that of the dhikr, though for different reasons, is an exhausting exercise, it also contributes to the physiological preparation of trance. Here again, music and dance, taken together, constitute a corporeal technique aimed at attaining trance. "Underlying all our mystic states," Mauss writes (1936), "there are 'corporeal techniques,' 'biological methods of entering into communication with God." If we substitute the words "religious trance" for "mystic states" and "communication with God" to make our generalization clearer, it is evident that for the Bushmen of southern Africa, as for the shamans of central Asia, the Russian Shlustes, the Sufis of the Near East, or the Shakers in the United States, trance is very largely a matter of corporeal technique, in which singing and dancing, in combination, are the two principal elements.

But it would be a fundamental error to reduce these various forms of trance to no more than various forms of corporeal technique using various combinations of song and dance. The technique operates only because it is at the service of a belief, and because trance constitutes a cultural model integrated into a certain general representation of the world. Here we have an essential intellectual datum, which underlies both the psychology and physiology of trance. This is why entry into trance always seems to depend upon a kind of restrictive clause: however well prepared one may be, physically and psychologically, one must still be prepared intellectually, and have made the decision (more or less unconsciously) to succumb to the trance state.

The great difference between emotional trance on the one hand and communal (conducted) and shamanic trance on the other, is that in the former the sole responsibility for the onset of trance rests upon listening to music—or, more precisely, to sung poetry—while in the case of the other two it is not listening to music but its practice that is involved; furthermore, it is not the practice of music alone that is the operative factor, but this practice in combination with dance. In the first case the music is in no way a corporeal technique; in the other two it is fundamentally and precisely that. Moreover, in the first case the music is essentially emotional; in the other two, whether invocatory (communial trance) or incantatory (shamanic trance), it is much less emotional, or only indirectly so. In the case of the Bushmen it seems it is not emotional at all, which raises a problem I shall leave open. Things look quite different, however, in the case of possession.

MUSIC IN ITS RELATIONS TO POSSESSION TRANCE

The reader will remember that in the first part of this book, we found that the relations between music and possession can assume an extraordinary number of different forms. At the moment of the actual triggering of trance, which is often but not always marked by a crisis, it took on the most contradictory aspects. The crisis sometimes appears to be the direct result of the music’s frenzy, sometimes quite unconnected with it; music sometimes appears to be the means by which the crisis and fall (in the ndop) are provoked, some times, on the contrary, as the means by which the crisis is brought to an end (as in tarantism); sometimes it appears to be an almost mechanical means by which trance is provoked (in public can- domblé ceremonies), sometimes it seems to play no part in it at all (the morning trance during the candomblé reclusion period); the adepts sometimes appear to be incapable of resisting the summons of the music (when they are neophytes), sometimes, on the contrary, it is a point of honor not to succumb to it (when they are officiants); in one ceremony an adept goes into trance at the sound of his motto, while another, apparently subject to the same objective conditions, does not; in one cult (candomblé) each god responds only to the musical theme (motto) specific to him, yet there also is a theme that can mobilize all the gods indiscriminately: one dance (in the zar cult) is reputedly a classic means of inducing trance, yet is also performed to provoke the coming out of trance; in the rab cult, the drummers appear to be playing a determining role in the onset of possession when great public ceremonies are involved (tuuru and ndép), yet play none whatsoever when the ritual is on a smaller scale (samp) since they are strictly excluded; sometimes the instruments are held responsible for the onset of trance, sometimes the singing; here it is one type of instrument that is characteristic of possession music, there it is another. In other words, although music indisputably plays a role—more or less decisive depending on the case—in the onset of trance, it seems impossible to establish any constant relation of cause and effect between the two. The only rule that appears to be truly general is that the music must be made for the possessed and not by them, or, in other words, that trance is induced and not conducted.

If we now go on to examine trance, not at its moment of onset, but when it is at its height, things become clearer. We could sum them up by saying that no matter which cult is concerned—if we set aside the initiation period which has its own particular logic—possession music is dance music whose melody is associated with the divinity held responsible for the trance. The relations between music and trance constitute themselves in two different ways depending on whether trance is at its moment of onset or, on the contrary, when it is in full bloom. They are also of two different kinds depending on whether the possessed person is at the initiation stage or not. In order to understand the reason for this state of things we must now look at the relations between music and possession with respect to the logic that governs the system since, indeed, a system seems to be at work. In order to do this, however, it is indispensable to be able to refer to a general theory of possession trance. To my knowledge, no such theory exists. However presumptuous it may seem, I will therefore run the risk of offering one here, less for its own sake (even though I believe it does account fairly well for a number of facts) than because one is needed anyhow. Good or bad, it will have the merit of occupying, until something better comes along, a position that another theory of this kind is bound to hold in this system. Provisional, then, let us view trance, as it is observed in possession cults, as a socialized form of behavior resulting from the conjunction of several constituents: (1) at the level of the individual: a given innate to the structure of consciousness making it susceptible of being invaded by an emotional event that submerges its normal state and leads to hysteriform behavior; (2) at the level of collective representations: (a) interpretation of this event as a sign of the will or presence of a spirit or divinity; (b) exploitation or, to use Roger Bastide's term (1972, 94), domestication of the event, with the intention of establishing it as a mode of communication with the divine; (c) identification of the entranced subject with the divinity held responsible for the trance; and (d) theatricalization of this identifying behavior.

The way in which these constituents are brought into play varies greatly from cult to cult, depending on the cult's history, the circumstances in which it was gradually constituted, the context in which it developed, the individuals who affected its evolution, its possible contacts with neighboring or foreign cults, and still a great many other things. For many adepts, the original emotion that gave rise to the mental upheaval around which the cult structured itself may well not or no longer be a spontaneous form of behavior but, on the contrary, a form of learned behavior, a stereotype. This does not alter the fact that in the genesis of all possession cults, and therefore all possessional trance, there must, in the beginning, have been an emotional state experienced by an individual and capable of being experienced in turn by others, whether spontaneously or as the result of a learning process.

The relation of music to this emotional state is extremely variable since it is integrated into the cult in varying ways. Initiation, according to whether it is very important (in the vodun cult, for example) or, on the contrary, nonexistent (as in tarantism) governs the emotional behavior and its relation to music sometimes in one way, sometimes in another. Although emotion is something experienced by individuals, in this instance it manifests itself only within the logic of the cult into which it has been integrated. This is what explains the disconcerting variability of the relation between music and the onset of trance.

The trance itself, in other words the period during which the subject settles himself, so to say, into his other persona and totally coincides with it, has, on the contrary, a quite stable relation to music. In its fullest form, by which I mean the form it displays during public possession ceremonies, trance most often consists in dancing to the sound of music that belongs to the possessing divinity or, if there are several persons, to the sound of music that corresponds collectively to all the divinities present. Here the function of the music is obvious. It is due to the music, and because he is supported by the music, that the possessed person publicly lives out, by means of dance, his identification with the divinity he embodies. The music at this point is thus neither emotional, nor invocatory, nor incantatory: it is essentially identificatory. By playing his "motto," the musicians notify this identity to the entranced dancer, those around him, the priests, and the spectators. The language the music speaks is understood by all, and each person decodes it at his or her own level. It is through this music, and through the dance to which it gives rise, that recognition of the divinity's presence is conveyed to the entire group, a recognition that is indispensable because it authenticates the trance and confers upon it a character of normality. Music thus appears as the principal means of socializing trance. The onset of trance very frequently obeys this logic as well, of course. It is upon hearing his tune, his motto (or rather that of his god) that the possessed person most often enters into trance. But the exceptions to the rule 324 CHAPTER EIGHT are so numerous that it is impossible to ignore them. Except in the case of "old hands," going into trance constitutes, for the individual concerned, such an event—I would even say such a psychophysiological adventure—that in order to make the transition successfully, a large number of favorable conditions must be present. The individual equation—to be or not to be disposed to enter into trance—then plays a decisive role in the process, and this is what explains why music, which also has a part in it, indisputably, but which is no more than one element among others, should ultimately play so very variable a role. Sometimes it is its identificatory character that is at work, and then we are in the realm of cultural convention. Sometimes it is its power to create, through its ability to excite and agitate (hence the frequent use of accelerando and crescendo) a certain state of effervescence that seems to be particularly propitious, very understandably, to the onset of trance. And in this case we are in the realm of the natural. Sometimes it is its association with a particular circumstance, or idea, or character, charged, for the adept, with emotional power. And then we are in the realm of the individual. In the triggering of trance, music contributes sometimes through one of its aspects—most often, again, its identificatory aspect—sometimes through another, sometimes decisively, sometimes accessorily. In extreme cases it may not contribute to it at all. This is true of tarantism, where, it will be remembered, the trance—or, more correctly, the crisis (and fall)—usually occurs outside any relation with music. This is an extremely significant fact. On the hand, the tarantulee, when no longer in crisis but in trance, dances to the sound of the tarantella, and it is in fact this tarantella (as long as it is the "right tune") that ends the crisis and causes it to develop into trance. Although it is conceivable that a subject can enter into trance without music, it is inconceivable that a subject could experience the trance itself without music. Let us say that, in possession, music is the condition sine qua non of the trance experience. This is so for two reasons. First, because possession trance is a change of identity, because that change of identity has no meaning for the subject unless his new identity is recognized by everyone, and because it is the music that signals it. Second, because this new identity must be manifested and because dance is (usually with costume, but not always) its principal and frequently sole expression. Provided, then, that it is not absolutely fleeting (I am thinking of Malkam Ayyahu's trances, described by Leiris, which often lasted no more than an instant, just long enough to express it with a gesture, word, pose), provided that it has duration, this trance, which is the experience of another identity, has an absolute need for music in order to continue to exist, since it is music that, through its identificatory character, maintains the illusion and that, through its function as support of the dance, enables it to be manifested. Conclusion

The major function of music in possession trance seems to be maintaining the trance, much like an electric current keeping a tuning fork vibrating at the same pitch frequency. Music is not just physically "in tune" with trance but also "in tune" on the psychological level, as it puts the individual experiencing their transitory identity "in phase" with the group recognizing or imposing it upon them.

In shamanic trance, music is a corporeal technique, while in communal trance, it is a communication technique. Shamanic trance involves changing worlds and is primarily an individual affair, while possession trance is about changing identity, requiring group recognition. The music in possession trance is provided by the group, as the possessed person only exists for the group.

Music is the instrument of communication between the subject and group, with both parties speaking simultaneously, one through music and the other through dance. The dialogue is addressed to a third party, the spectators, who are essential to the blossoming of trance.

Music has often been thought of as having the mysterious power of triggering possession, but this is not true. However, possession cults, as institutions, make use of great musical skill that has developed over a long period of time.

At the ceremony or theater level, music creates an emotional climate for the adepts. It also leads adepts toward the identification with the spirit possessing them. Music is indispensable in providing the adept with the means to manifest this identification and exteriorize their trance.

In conclusion, music is essential because it speaks simultaneously to the head and legs, provides a mirror for the entranced person to read their borrowed identity, and enables them to reflect this identity back to the group in the form of dance. There is no mystery to it at all, and if there is, it lies in the trance state itself, as a special state of consciousness. This is the source from which trance springs. Music does nothing more than socialize it, and enable it to attain its full development.

Notes

1. On the universality of trance, see Erika Bourguignon 1973, 9-11.
2. Taber’s Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary, 9th ed, 1963.
3. Dictionnaire des termes techniques de médecine, 16th ed., Maloine, 1955.
4. Cf., for example, the captions to photographs 13a and 13b.
5. The Book of the Right Usages of Audition and Trance. We will deal with this work at length in chapter 7, “Music and Trance among the Arabs” in part two.
6. Speaking of states of hyperexcitation of the central nervous system, Bourguignon notes (1973, 5) that trance attains “an extreme in the ecstatic state of mystical rapture.” She is here following her own definition of ecstasy in a previous work (1965, 41). Borrowed from the dictionary of psychological and psychoanalytic terms by English and English (1958), this definition is: “Religious and emotionally marked trances are called ecstasy.”
7. See pp. 182-83, among others.
8. In the Dictionnaire des religions (Larousse 1966), only the term “extase” figures, pre- sented as (mainly for oracles) the result of trance. In the Dictionnaire de spiritualité, which is in the process of being published and has not yet gone beyond the letter L, a great deal of space is alloted to the word “extase”; various articles, totaling 140 columns in all, appear un- der this entry. The word “transe” occurs several times under the entry on shamanism (1961, cols. 2049-50)—and this is significant.
9. In his article on the definition of shamanism, Johan Reinhard (1976, 16) tackles the problem of how to distinguish between trance and ecstasy, but without attaching quite the importance to it that I have here.
10. Cf. “Vie écrite par elle-méme,” chap. 20 in Oeuvres completes 1949, 193; Obras completas 1948, 138.
11. Ibid. 1949, 308.
12. My italics.
13. Theresa of Avila 1949, 413.
14. Dictionnaire Bailly (1894). Cf. the index to Plato, Oeuvres completes, “Les Belles Lettres,” vol. 13.
15. Onthe meaning of ekstasis in Greek antiquity, see Dodds 1951, 94-95.
16. See the word “transe” in Le Petit Robert dictionary.
17. On the ecstasies of the early Church Fathers, see J. Kirchmayer (1961).
18. Mireille Helffer (personal communication).
19. Andras Zémpleni is the one who told me of the existence of these practices among the Wolof. They are totally distinct from the much better-known practices of the ndép, which of course involve trance. Evidently the khalwa is a borrowing from Sufism, and the word, meaning “reclusion, retreat,” was used to form the name of the Khalwatiyya (cf. Trimingham 1971).
20. This is Gardet’s suggested translation for sirr (1952, 673). The public dhikr, which leads not to ecstasy but to trance, will be discussed at length in part two.
328 NOTES TO PAGES 8-15
21. On nembutsu compared to other forms of mystic prayer, see Gardet (1952 and 1953).
22. In his study on the nature of y______ The quote is translated from the French, as I did not have access to the German edition (1921) or the English translation, which is said to be quite good.

The accounts they both left of their experiences of possession have been published. Oesterreich quotes large extracts from them, taken either from the Histoire des diables de Loudun (1716) or from the Bibliotheque diabolique, published late in the last century by the pupils of Charcot.

In a later chapter dealing with exorcism, I shall return to this reprobate form of trance.

Isay “in principle.” On this subject, see the reservations expressed by M. Leiris (1958) in his chapter, “Consciousness or Lack of It in Protagonists of Possession Seances.” However, I should point out that these reservations apply solely to the zar cult as observed by Leiris in Ethiopia.

In this case, we return—albeit by another path—to the concepts of Fischer (1969) and Ludwig (1968) to which Erika Bourguignon (1973, 5-8) refers her readers in her presentation of “altered states of consciousness.” The first is based on a continuous scale of neurophysiological factors determining a greater or lesser degree of awakening of the central nervous system. The second is based on a similar continuum, but one that is expressed in terms of the inducement of these “altered states.”

In her description of these Shakers, Jeannette J. Henney, from whom I have taken the data, makes no distinction between the two states and calls them both “trance.” Yet there are, as she herself clearly indicates, two very different states involved. This is a case—among many others—in which the distinction I suggest making between trance and ecstasy could have been usefully employed.

In India (C. Malamoud, personal communication), the person seized by the inspiration of the Veda is called, in Vedic Sanskrit, the “trembling one.” Oddly, in his well-known book, The Drums of Affliction (1968), in which trembling plays a central role and manifestly constitutes a form of trance behavior, V. W. Turner never once uses the word trance.

Signified/signifier: I am using here, of course, the well-known distinction made by Saussure between the two aspects of the sign.

cf. A Patristic Greek Lexicon (1961, s.v. “energeia”).

Michel de Certeau (1970, 33, 158, 205).

Or, sometimes, fallaciously. For it can happen not only that the trance is feigned (a subject to which we shall come later), but also that the extraordinary powers attributed to it are merely illusionist’s tricks. This explains why the famous “magician” Robert Houdin was sent to Algeria, in 1856, to beat the “marabouts” at their own game. (cf. Sergent 1952, 125-44 and 185-86). There are indisputably cases of fraud. However, this is merely a marginal and insignificant aspect of trance.

More precisely, of “conversion” hysteria as it has been known since Freud. The mechanism of the conversion, it will be remembered, “consists in a transposition of a psychic conflict and an attempt to resolve that conflict into somatic symptoms, either motor (e.g. paralysis) or sensorial (local anesthesia or pain, for instance. . . .) Symptoms of conversion are characterized by their symbolic meaning: they express repressed representations in physical form” (Laplanche and Pontalis 1967, s.v. “conversion”).

Cut out of the Mental Disorders Diagnostic Manual of the APA in 1952, it was replaced by “conversion symptom,” notes Ilza Veith (1973, 6), who makes several interesting references to possession. 37. D.S.M. III, Diagnostic Criteria Draft, American Psychiatric Association, Pre-publication 1.5.78.
38. See the issue of Confrontations psychiatriques entitled Hystérie (1968).
39. In his essay entitled “Normal et anormal” (1956), reprinted in 1970, p. 15.
40. In this passage, Bastide is concerned with possession rather than shamanism. It is still true, however, that he is talking about trance in general.
41. In his study on symbolic efficacy—which, as we know, is an interpretation of a shamanic text—Lévi-Strauss (1958, 222) recalls that Freud himself had already considered that “description of psychoses and neuroses in terms of their psychological structure would one day give way to a physiological or even biochemical conception of them.”
42. On the concept of “altered states of consciousness,” its origin, and its applications, see Bourguignon’s introduction (1973).
43. The same word is used in Bengal to denote the famous sect of inspired musicians who call themselves baul (“madmen”). On the music of the baul, see the record made by Georges Luneau (discography).
44. The word “representation” is of course taken here, and in the general course of this book, with the meaning attributed to it in sociology ever since Durkheim.
45. Eveline Lot-Falck 1963 (1977, 7).
46. All references are to the second edition (1968) of his book on shamanism, not to the first edition (1951).
47. For a very broad critical view of Eliade’s positions on shamanism, see Eveline Lot-Falck 1973, 1-2.
48. Used as though they were synonymous, as we have seen.
49. L. Delaby (1976, 130), according to Shirokogoroff. On the shamanic journey as related to that of the spirits and to the life of the hunter, see Delaby 1977.
50. See C. MacDonald, “De quelques manifestations chamaniques a Palawan” (1973, 11-20) and various contributions to the issues where this study has appeared.
51. To my knowledge, Dodds was the first to formulate clearly the distinction that ought to be made between shamanism and possession: “some writers . . . use the terms ‘shamanism’ and ‘possession’ as if they were synonymous. But the characteristic feature of shamanism is not the entry of an alien spirit into the shaman; it is the liberation of the shaman’s spirit, which leaves his body and sets off a mantic journey or ‘psychic excursion.’ Supernatural beings may assist him, but his own personality is the decisive element” (1951, 88 n. 43).
52. On the general relation of the shaman to his “guardian spirit” and “auxiliary spirits,” see Eliade’s chapter (1968), “Acquiring Shamanic Powers.” For the Tungus in particular, see L. Delaby 1976, 83ff.
53. The place of “possession” in shamanism and its specific characteristics in that context are set forth in various passages of Eliade’s book, notably pp. 23, 89, 388, and 399 of the 1968 edition.
54. Presented in “Possession et chamanisme” and developed in parts 3 and 4 of “La folie des dieux et la raison des hommes,” studies that follow one another in Pourquoi l’épouser? (1971).
55. For Eliade (1968, 388), the importance that the incorporation of spirits has acquired in Tungus shamanism is a relatively recent thing, attributable to foreign influence. Tungus melodies are said to betray a “Chinese origin______ 56. "Shamanizing to the lower world is practiced among all Tungus groups," Shirokogor-off (1935, 306) observes at the end of his long description of a shamanic journey to the lower world.
57. On the problem of the definition of shamanism and the relative importance that should be accorded to the journey of the soul as opposed to possession, see Johan Reinhard's article (1976, 12-18) which includes a critical examination of Eliade's ideas on this point. Without going into detail, let me say that the views expounded in this article are somewhat at variance with my own, and that the reason lies partly in what I shall have to say later about possession.
58. The Gold are a subgroup of the Tunguso-Manchu family, whose territory lies in eastern Siberia. Cf. Delaby 1976, 7 and 12.
59. Cf. Delaby 1976, 67.
60. Italicized in the original.
61. Described in this way, the situation is not specific to the Tungus alone. It has broad analogies with that among the Yakut. Cf. E. Lot-Falck (1970) and the distinction made between "incorporation and possession," and between the mandrik "plaything of the spirits" and the "tamer" shaman.
62. Johan Reinhard 1976, 16.
63. For Laurence Delaby (personal communication) the difference lies above all in this last distinction.
64. In "Formes et transformations de la possession" and "Vers le chamanisme" (1971, 255-76).
65. Ecstatic Religion (1971), photo 11b.
66. See P. Verger (1957, 150-58 and photos 83-86).
67. Onthe word wajd, see p. 258ff.
68. Segurola (1963) s.v. vodun.
69. Cf. P. de Félice 1947, 160).
70. On the importance of identificatory behavior in Haitian voodoo, see Louis Mars (1953, 218) and his inventory of the "types of identification in some cases of possession."
71. On these two words see the second part of this book.
72. On these flagellants, see the summary of P. de Félice (1947, 204-7) and the long reviews by Robert Hertz (1928, 229-49) of K. K. Grass's book on Russian sects.
73. Cf. M. de Certeau (1970), the chapter "Le théatre des possédées" and p. 289.
74. Although -si certainly stems from -asi meaning "female," "wife," in vodunsi, as in various other words formed in the same way, the suffix -si actually indicates a state of dependence rather than the state of being a wife. Vodunsi, in fact, designates boys as much as girls. However, this is not the place to discuss this point in detail.
75. "Individual" in the sense A. Zempléni uses the word (1966, 316), meaning "one whose starting point, original cause, lies in an individual problem," but nevertheless affects the "familial unit."
76. Herskovits (1938, 2:146-47) gives an example observed among the Fon. In this instance the child-to-be was consecrated to Sakpata.
77. Nago: a subgroup of the Yoruba.
78. For many reasons I think that among the Gun (as among the Fon) this recruitment as a consequence of a "history of illness," as Jane Belo would say in the case of Bali, or, by personal vocation, one might say, in opposition to "impersonal vocation," is to be found alongside the other. But it seems certain that it by far the less______ "Speaking in tongues" in Christian trances is a practice linked to the use of secret languages. See the article on "don des langues" in the Dictionnaire de spiritualité (1976, vol. 9, cols. 223-27).

Concerning the use of the word "crisis" in the present context, the situation is slightly different in French from what it is in English. A few examples chosen at random will suffice to show that, as a whole, the problem remains quite comparable in both languages. In the introduction to her book, Jane Belo, who often uses the word "fit" (1960, notably pp. 223-24), writes (ibid, 4) about Balinese "occasional trancers" that "it was sometimes possible to observe in these crises [italics are mine] of involvement an analogy to sexual excitement," while Robin Horton, speaking of the Kalabari in Africa, refers (1969, 24) to "times of communal crisis" when the priest was "apt to become spontaneously possessed," a quite different use of the term, as we can see. On the other hand, "crisis," which is an important entry in the index—from which "fit" is absent—of Religious Movements in Contemporary America (Zarzetsky and Leone, eds., 1974), refers to trance in general but also to "crisis cults," which perfectly illustrates our point.


========================\n\n\n



Elias Canetti CROWDS AND POWER

The Dissolution of the Sting______ The Double Figure of the Totem Crowds and Transformation in Delirium Tremens Imitation and Simulation The Figure and the Mask The Power of Unmasking Prohibitions on Transformation Slavery ASPECTS OF POWER Human Postures and Their Relation to Power. Standing. Sitting. Lying. Sitting on the Ground. Kneeling The Orchestral Conductor Fame The Regulation of Time The Court The Rising Throne of the Emperor of Byzantium General Paralytics and Their Notions of Greatness RULERS AND PARANOIACS African Kings A Sultan of Delhi: Muhammad Tughlak The Case of Schreber: I The Case of Schreber: II EPILOGUE The End of the Survivor NOTES BIBLIOGRAPHY 483 THE CROWD The Fear of being Touched ‘Ture 1s NoTHiING that man fears more than the touch of the un- known. He wants to see what is reaching towards him, and to be able to recognize or at least classify it. Man always tends to avoid physical contact with anything strange. In the dark, the fear of an unexpected touch can mount to panic. Even clothes give insufficient security: it is easy to tear them and pierce through to the naked, smooth, defenceless flesh of the victim. All the distances which men create round themselves are dictated by this fear. They shut themselves in houses which no-one may enter, and only there feel some measure of security. The fear of burglars is not only the fear of being robbed, but also the fear of a sudden and un- expected clutch out of the darkness. The repugnance to being touched remains with us when we go about among people; the way we move in a busy street, in restaurants, trains or buses, is governed by it. Even when we are standing next to them and are able to watch and examine them closely, we avoid actual contact if we can. If we do not avoid it, it is because we feel attracted to someone; and then it is we who make the approach. The promptness with which apology is offered for an unintentional contact, the tension with which it is awaited, our violent and sometimes even physical reaction when it is not forthcoming, the antipathy and hatred we feel for the offender, even when we cannot be certain who it is—the whole knot of shifting and intensely sensitive reactions to an alien touch—proves that we are dealing here with a human propensity as deep-seated as it is alert and insidious; something which never leaves a man when he has once established the boundaries of his personality. Even in sleep, when he is far more unguarded, he can all too easily be disturbed by a touch. It is only in a crowd that man can become free of this fear of being touched. That is the only situation in which the fear changes into its opposite. The crowd he needs is the dense crowd, in which body is pressed to body; a crowd, too, whose psychical constitution is also dense, or compact, so that he no longer notices who it is that presses against him. As soon as a man has surrendered himself to the crowd, he ceases to fear its touch. Ideally, all are equal there; no distinctions count, not even that of sex. The man pressed against him is the same as 16 CROWDS AND POWER himself. He feels him as he feels himself. Suddenly it is as though everything were happening in one and the same body. This is perhaps one of the reasons why a crowd seeks to close in on itself: it wants to rid each individual as completely as possible of the fear of being touched. The more fiercely people press together, the more certain they feel that they do not fear each other. This reversal of the fear of being touched belongs to the nature of crowds. The feeling of relief is most striking where the density of the crowd is greatest. The Open and the Closed Crowd

Tue cROwD, suddenly there where there was nothing before, is a mysterious and universal phenomenon. A few people may have been standing together—five, ten or twelve, not more; nothing has been announced, nothing is expected. Suddenly, everywhere is black with people and more come streaming from all sides as though streets had only one direction. Most of them do not know what has happened and, if questioned, have no answer; but they hurry to be there where most other people are. There is a determination in their movement which is quite different from the expression of ordinary curiosity. It seems as though the movement of some of them transmits itself to the others. But that is not all; they have a goal which is there before they can find words for it. This goal is the blackest spot where most people are gathered. This is the extreme form of the spontaneous crowd and much more will have to be said about it later. In its innermost core, it is not quite as spontaneous as it appears, but, except for these 5, 10 or 12 people with whom it actually originates, it is everywhere spontaneous. As soon as it happens, it wants to consist of more people: the urge to grow is the first and supreme attribute of the crowd. It wants to seize everyone within reach; anything shaped like a human being can join it. The natural crowd is the open crowd; there are no limits whatever to its growth; it does not recognize houses, doors or locks, and those who shut themselves in are suspect. ““Open’ is to be understood here in the fullest sense of the word; it means open everywhere and in any direction. The open crowd exists as long as it grows; it disintegrates as soon as it stops growing. For just as suddenly as it originates, the crowd disintegrates. In its spontaneous form, it is a sensitive thing. The openness that enables it to grow is, at the same time, its danger. A foreboding of threatening disintegration is always alive in the crowd. It seeks, through rapid increase, to avoid this for as long as it can; it absorbs everyone, and, because it does, must ultimately fall to pieces.

In contrast to the open crowd, which can grow indefinitely and which is of universal interest because it may spring up anywhere, there is the closed crowd. The closed crowd renounces growth and puts the stress on permanence. The first thing to be noticed about it is that it has a boundary. It establishes itself by accepting its limitation. It creates a space for itself which it will fill. This space can be compared to a vessel into which liquid is being poured and whose capacity is known. The entrances to this space are limited in number, and only these entrances can be used; the boundary is respected whether it consists of stone, of solid wall, or of some special act of acceptance, or entrance fee. Once the space is completely filled, no one else is allowed in. Even if there is an overflow, the important thing is always the dense crowd in the closed room; those standing outside do not really belong. The boundary prevents disorderly increase, but it also makes it more difficult for the crowd to disperse and so postpones its dissolution. In this way, the crowd sacrifices its chance of growth, but gains in staying power. It is protected from outside influences which could become hostile and dangerous, and it sets its hope on repetition. It is the expectation of reassembly that enables its members to accept each dispersal. The building is waiting for them; it exists for their sake, and as long as it is there, they will be able to meet in the same manner. The space is theirs, even during the ebb, and in its emptiness, it reminds them of the flood.

The Discharge is the most important occurrence within the crowd. Before this, the crowd does not actually exist; it is the discharge that creates it. This is the moment when all who belong to the crowd get rid of their differences and feel equal. These differences are mainly imposed from outside; they are distinctions of rank, status, and property. Men, as individuals, are always conscious of these distinctions; they weigh heavily on them and keep them firmly apart from one another.

A man stands by himself on a secure and well-defined spot, his every gesture asserting his right to keep others at a distance. He stands there like a windmill on an enormous plain, moving expressively; and there is nothing between him and the next mill. All life, so far as he knows it, is laid out in distances—the house in which he shuts himself and his property, the positions he holds, the rank he desires—all these serve to create distances, to confirm and extend them. Any free or large gesture of approach towards another human being is inhibited. Impulse and counter-impulse ooze away in a desert. No man can get near another, nor reach his height.

In every sphere of life, firmly established hierarchies prevent him from touching anyone more exalted than himself, or descending, except in appearance, to anyone lower. In different societies, the distances are differently balanced against each other; the stress in some lies on birth, in others on occupation or property. It is essential to know that they exist everywhere and that they gain a decisive hold on men's minds and determine their behavior to each other.

But the satisfaction of being higher in rank than others does not compensate for the loss of freedom of movement. Man petrifies and darkens in the distances he has created. He drags at the burden of them, but cannot move. He forgets that it is self-inflicted and longs for liberation. But how, alone, can he free himself? Whatever he does, and however determined he is, he will always find himself among others who thwart his efforts. So long as they hold fast to their distances, he can never come any nearer to them.

Only together can men free themselves from their burdens of distance; and this, precisely, is what happens in a crowd. During the discharge, distinctions are thrown off, and all feel equal. In that density, where there is scarcely any space between, and body presses against body, each man is as near the other as he is to himself; and an immense feeling of relief ensues. It is for the sake of this blessed moment, when no one is greater or better than another, that people become a crowd.

But the moment of discharge, so desired and so happy, contains its own danger. It is based on an illusion; the people who suddenly feel equal have not really become equal; nor will they feel equal for ever. They return to their separate houses, they lie down on their own beds, they keep their possessions and their names. They do not cast out their relations nor run away from their families. Only true conversion leads men to give up their old associations and form new ones. Such associations, which by their very nature are only able to accept a limited number of members, have to secure their continuance by rigid rules. The crowd, called crowd crystals, disintegrates, fearing its own disintegration. New members are needed to prevent the crowd's decay. The destructiveness of the crowd is often mentioned, and it is attributed to the ease with which objects can be broken. However, the ease of destruction is not the decisive factor. The destruction of representational images signifies the disintegration of a hierarchy that is no longer recognized. It is the violation of established and visible distances. The act of discharge accomplishes itself through destruction.

Destruction of windows and doors allows the crowd to enter houses and remove the individuality of those who tried to stay away from the crowd. The individual feels a sense of relief when distances are removed, and they are free from the burdens of distance. They want others to experience the same freedom.

The crowd, called crowd crystals, disintegrates, fearing its own disintegration. New members are needed to prevent the crowd's decay. The destructiveness of the crowd is often mentioned, and it is attributed to the ease with which objects can be broken. However, the ease of destruction is not the decisive factor. The destruction of representational images signifies the disintegration of a hierarchy that is no longer recognized. It is the violation of established and visible distances. The act of discharge accomplishes itself through destruction.

Destruction of windows and doors allows the crowd to enter houses and remove the individuality of those who tried to stay away from the crowd. The individual feels a sense of relief when distances are removed, and they are free from the burdens of distance. They want others to experience the same freedom. The closed doors of a house irritate him. Rites and ceremonies, anything which preserves distances, threaten him and seem unbearable. He fears that, sooner or later, an attempt will be made to force the disintegrating crowd back into these pre-existing vessels. To the crowd in its nakedness, everything seems a Bastille. Of all means of destruction, the most impressive is fire. It can be seen from far off and it attracts ever more people. It destroys irrevocably; nothing after a fire is as it was before. A crowd setting fire to something feels irresistible; so long as the fire spreads, everyone will join it and everything hostile will be destroyed. After the destruction, crowd and fire die away.

The Fruption "Tue open crown is the true crowd, the crowd abandoning itself freely to its natural urge for growth. An open crowd has no clear feeling or idea of the size it may attain; it does not depend on a known building which it has to fill; its size is not determined; it wants to grow indefinitely and what it needs for this is more and more people. In this naked state, the crowd is at its most conspicuous, but, because it always disintegrates, it seems something outside the ordinary course of life and so is never taken quite seriously. Men might have gone on disregarding it if the enormous increase of population in modern times, and the rapid growth of cities, had not more and more often given rise to its formation.

THE CROWD 

The closed crowds of the past, of which more will be heard later, had turned into familiar institutions. The peculiar state of mind characteristic of their members seemed something natural. They always met for a special purpose of a religious, festal or martial kind; and this purpose seemed to sanctify their state. A man attending a sermon honestly believed that it was the sermon that mattered to him, and he would have felt astonished or even indignant had it been explained to him that the large number of listeners present gave him more satisfaction than the sermon itself. All ceremonies and rules pertaining to such institutions are basically intent on capturing the crowd; they prefer a church-full secure to the whole world insecure. The regularity of church-going and the precise and familiar repetition of certain rites safeguard for the crowd something like a domesticated experience of itself. These performances and their recurrence at fixed times supplant needs for something harsher and more violent.

Such institutions might have proved adequate if the number of human beings had remained the same, but more and more people filled the towns and the accelerating increase in the growth of populations during the last few centuries continually provided fresh incitements to the formation of new and larger crowds. And nothing, not even the most experienced and subtle leadership, could have prevented them forming in such conditions.

All the rebellions against traditional ceremonial recounted in the history of religions have been directed against the confinement of the crowd which wants to feel the sensation of its own growth again. The Sermon on the Mount in the New Testament comes to mind. It is enacted in the open, thousands are able to listen and there is no doubt that it is directed against the limiting ceremoniousness of the official temple. One remembers the tendency of Pauline Christianity to break out of the national and tribal boundaries of Judaism and to become a universal faith for all men. One remembers the contempt of Buddhism for the caste-system of contemporary India. The inner history of various world religions is rich in similar occurrences. The Crusades turned into massive crowd formations that no church building of today could accommodate. Later, entire towns became spectators of the flagellants' performances, who wandered from town to town. Wesley, in the 18th century, based his movement on open-air sermons. He was aware of the importance of the immense crowds that listened to him and recorded the numbers in his Journals.

Eruptions from closed localities indicate that the crowd wishes to regain its old pleasure in sudden, rapid, and unlimited growth. I call this sudden transition from a closed to an open crowd an "eruption." It is a frequent occurrence and should not be understood as only related to space. A crowd of ten seems to overflow from a well-guarded space into a town's squares and streets, moving freely and attracting everyone.

The French Revolution made eruptions more modern. The crowd has freed itself from traditional religion, making it easier to see its "nakedness" or biological state. The last 150 years have seen a spate of such eruptions, including mass wars. The crowd is never content with pious promises and conditionals; it wants to experience its own animal force and passion.

Crowds never feel saturated, remaining hungry as long as there is one human being it hasn't reached. Its only hope is in forming double crowds, measuring itself against another. Rivals' closeness in power and intensity determines how long both crowds will stay alive.

Persecution is one of the most striking traits of a crowd's inner life. The crowd feels persecuted, displaying an angry sensitiveness and irritability directed at nominated enemies. The enemies' behavior is interpreted as springing from an unshakable malevolence, a premeditated intention to destroy the crowd. To understand this feeling, one must start from the basic fact that the crowd, once formed, wants to grow rapidly. As long as it feels growth, anything opposing it is seen as constricting. It can be dispersed and scattered by police, but this has only a temporary effect, like a hand moving through a swarm of mosquitoes. But it can also be attacked from within, namely by meeting the demands which led to its formation. Its weaker adherents then drop away and others on the point of joining turn back. An attack from outside can only strengthen the crowd; those who have been physically scattered are more strongly drawn together again. An attack from within, on the other hand, is really dangerous; a strike which has achieved any gains crumbles visibly. It is an appeal to individual appetites and the crowd, as such, regards it as bribery, as "immoral"; it runs counter to its clear-cut basic conviction. Everyone belonging to such a crowd carries within him a small traitor who wants to eat, drink, make love and be left alone. As long as he does all this on the quiet and does not make too much fuss about it, the crowd allows him to proceed. But, as soon as he makes a noise about it, it starts to hate and to fear him. It knows then that he has been listening to the enticements of the enemy.

The crowd here is like a besieged city and, as in many sieges, it has enemies before its walls and enemies within them. During the fighting it attracts more and more partisans from the country around. These slip through the enemy lines and collect in front of the gates, begging to be let in. In favourable moments their wish is granted; or they may climb over the walls. Thus the city daily gains new defenders, but each of these brings with him that small invisible traitor we spoke of before, who quickly disappears into a cellar to join the traitors already hidden there. Meanwhile the siege continues. The besiegers certainly watch for a chance to attack, but they also try to prevent new recruits reaching the city. To do this they keep on strengthening the walls from outside. (In this strange siege the walls are more important to the assailants than to the defenders.) Or they try to bribe newcomers to keep away. If they fail in both, they do what they can to strengthen and encourage that traitor to his own cause which each newcomer carries with him into the city. The crowd's feeling of persecution is nothing but the intuition of this double threat; the walls outside become more and more constricting and the cellars within more and more undermined.

The activities of the enemy outside on the walls are open and can be watched; in the cellars they are hidden and insidious. But images of this kind never convey more than a part of the truth. Those streaming from outside, wanting to get into the city, are not only new partisans, a reinforcement and a support; they are also the food of the crowd. A crowd which is not increasing is in a state of fast—there are ways of holding out through such a fast and religions have developed a great mastery of these. I propose now to show how the world religions have succeeded in holding their crowds even when these are not in the stage of fierce and rapid growth.

Domestication of Crowds in the World Religions

Religions which claim to universality have been acknowledged very soon change the accent of their appeal. In the beginning their aim is to reach and to win all who can be reached and won. The crowd they envisage is universal; every single soul counts and every soul shall be theirs. But the fight they have to sustain leads gradually to a kind of hidden respect for adversaries whose institutions are already in existence. They see how difficult it is to hold one’s ground; institutions which offer solidarity and permanence seem more and more important to them. Stimulated by those of their adversaries, they make great efforts to introduce institutions of their own, and these, if they succeed, grow in importance with time. The dead weight of institutions, which have a life of their own, then gradually tames the impetus of the original appeal. Churches are built to contain the existing faithful and are enlarged only with reluctance and circumspection when there is real need. There is, too, a strong tendency to collect the faithful in separate units. When they become many, there is always a danger of disintegration, which must be continually countered. A sense of the treacherousness of the crowd, is, so to speak, in the blood of all the historical world religions. Their own traditions, which are of a binding character, teach them how suddenly and unexpectedly they grew. Their stories of mass conversions appear miraculous to them, and they are so. In the heretical movements which the churches fear and persecute, the same kind of miracle turns against themselves, and the injuries thus inflicted on their bodies are painful and unforgettable.

Both the rapid growth of their early days and the no less rapid defections later keep their suspicion of the crowd always alive.

The crowd's essential tendency to quick growth is renounced by the churches. They are satisfied with a temporary fiction of equality among the faithful, though this is never too strictly imposed. They seek a defined density kept within moderate bounds and a strong direction. The goal they place in the far distance, in that other world which no man may enter so long as he is alive and which he has to earn by many efforts and submissions. Gradually, the direction becomes the most important thing; the more distant the goal, the better the prospect of its permanence.

The seemingly indispensable principle of growth has been replaced by something quite different: repetition. The faithful are gathered together at appointed places and times and, through performances which are always the same, they are transported into a mild state of crowd feeling sufficient to impress itself on them without becoming dangerous, and to which they grow accustomed. Their feeling of unity is dispensed to them in doses, and the continuance of the church depends on the rightness of the dosage.

Wherever men have grown accustomed to this precisely repeated and limited experience in their churches or temples, they can no longer do without it. They need it as they need food and anything else which is part of their existence. No sudden suppression of their cult, no prohibition by edict of the state, can remain without consequences. Any disturbance of their carefully balanced crowd-economy must ultimately lead to the eruption of an open crowd, which will have all the elemental attributes one knows. It will spread rapidly and bring about a real instead of a fictitious equality; it will find new and far more fervent densities; it will give up for the moment that far-off and scarcely attainable goal for which it has been educated, and set itself a goal here, in the immediate surroundings of this concrete life. All suddenly prohibited religions revenge themselves by a kind of secularization. The character of their adherents' faith changes completely in an eruption of great and unexpected ferocity, but they do not understand this. They think they still hold their old faith and convictions and their only intention is to keep them. But, in reality, they have suddenly become quite different people. They are filled with the unique and violent feeling of the open crowd which they now compose, and at all costs they want to remain part of it.

Panic
Panic in the theatre, as has often been noted, is a disintegration of the crowd. The more people were bound together by the performance and the more closed the form of the theatre which contained them, the more violent the disintegration. It is also possible that the performance alone was not enough to create a genuine crowd. The audience may have remained together, not because they felt gripped by it, but simply because they happened to be there. What the play could not achieve is immediately achieved by a fire. Fire is as dangerous to human beings as it is to animals; it is the strongest and oldest symbol of the crowd. However little crowd feeling there may have been in the audience, awareness of a fire brings it suddenly to a head. The common unmistakable danger creates a common fear. For a short time the audience becomes something like a real crowd. If they were not in a theatre, people could flee together like a herd of animals in danger, and increase the impetus of their flight by the simultaneity of identical movements. An active crowd-fear of this kind is the common collective experience of all animals who live together in herds and whose joint safety depends on their speed.

In a theatre, on the other hand, the crowd inevitably disintegrates in the most violent manner. Only one or two persons can get through each exit at a time and thus the energy of flight turns into an energy of struggle to push others back. Only one man at a time can pass between the rows of seats and each seat is neatly separated from the rest. Each man has his place and sits or stands by himself. A normal theatre is arranged with the intention of pinning people down and allowing them only the use of their hands and voices; their use of their legs is restricted as far as possible. The sudden command to flee which the fire gives is immediately countered by the impossibility of any common movement. Each man sees the door through which he must pass; and he sees himself alone in it, sharply cut off from all the others. It is the frame of a picture which very soon dominates him. Thus the crowd, a moment ago at its apex, must disintegrate violently, and the transmutation shows itself in violent individual action: everyone shoves, hits and kicks in all directions. The more fiercely each man "fights for his life", the clearer it becomes that he is fighting against all the others who hem him in. They stand there like chairs, balustrades, closed doors, but different from these in that they are alive and hostile. They push him in this or that direction, as it suits them or, rather, as they are pushed themselves. Neither women, children nor old people are spared: they are not distinguished from men. Whilst the individual no longer feels himself as "crowd", he is still completely surrounded by it. Panic is a disintegration of the crowd within the crowd. The individual breaks away and wants to escape from it because the crowd, as a whole, is endangered. But, because he is physically still stuck in it, he must attack it. To abandon himself to it now would be his ruin, because it itself is threatened by ruin. In such a moment a man cannot insist too strongly on his separateness. Hitting and pushing, he evokes hitting and pushing; and the more blows he inflicts and the more he receives, the more himself he feels. The boundaries of his own person become clear to him again.

It is strange to observe how strongly for the person struggling with it the crowd assumes the character of fire. It originated with the unexpected sight of flames or with a shout of “fire” and it plays like flames with the man who is trying to escape from it. The people he pushes away are like burning objects to him; their touch is hostile, and on every part of his body; and it terrifies him. Anyone who stands in his way is tainted with the general hostility of fire.

The manner in which fire spreads and gradually works its way round a person until he is entirely surrounded by it is very similar to the crowd threatening him on all sides. The incalculable movements within it, the thrusting forth of an arm, a fist or a leg, are like the flames of a fire which may suddenly spring up on any side. Fire in the form of a conflagration of forest or steppe actually is a hostile crowd and fear of it can be awakened in any human being. Fire, as a symbol for the crowd, has entered the whole economy of man’s feelings and become an immutable part of it.

That emphatic trampling on people, so often observed in panics and apparently so senseless, is nothing but the stamping out of fire. Disintegration through panic can only be averted by prolonging the original state of united crowd fear. In a threatened church there is a way of achieving this: people pray in common fear to a common God in whose hand it lies to extinguish the fire by a miracle.


An arena contains a crowd which is doubly closed. On account of this curious quality its examination may not be entirely without value. The arena is well demarcated from the outside world. It is usually visible from far off and its situation in the city—the space which it occupies—is well known. People always feel where it is, even if they are not thinking of it. Shouts from the arena carry far and, when it is open at the top, something of the life which goes on inside communicates itself to the surrounding city. But however exciting these communications may be, an uninhibited flow into the arena is not possible.

The number of seats it contains is limited; its maximum density is fixed in advance. The seats are arranged so that people are not too closely crushed. The occupants are meant to be comfortable in them and to be able to watch, each from his own seat, without disturbing others. Outside, facing the city, the arena displays a lifeless wall; inside is a wall of people. The spectators turn their backs to the city. They have been lifted out of its structure of walls and streets and, for the duration of their time in the arena, they do not care about anything which happens there; they have left behind all their associations, rules and habits. Their remaining together in large numbers for a stated period of time is secure and their excitement has been promised them. But only under one definite condition: the discharge must take place inside the arena. The seats are arranged in tiers around the arena, so that everyone can see what is happening below. The consequence of this is that the crowd is seated opposite itself. Every spectator has a thousand heads in front of him. As long as he is there, all the others are there too, and whatever excites him excites them. They are seated some distance away from him, so that the differing details which make individuals of them are blurred; they all look alike and they all behave in a similar manner. He notices in them only the things which he himself is full of. Their visible excitement increases his own. There is no break in the crowd which sits like this, exhibiting itself to itself. The tiered ring of fascinated faces has something strangely homogeneous about it. It embraces and contains everything which happens below; no one relaxes his grip on this; no one tries to get away. Any gap in the ring might remind him of disintegration and subsequent dispersal. But there is no gap; this crowd is doubly closed, to the world outside and in itself.

The Attributes of the Crowd

I try to undertake a classification of crowds. It may be useful to summarize briefly their main attributes. The following four traits are important:

1. The crowd always wants to grow. There are no natural boundaries to its growth. Where such boundaries have been artificially created—e.g. in all institutions which are used for the preservation of closed crowds—an eruption of the crowd is always possible and will, in fact, happen from time to time. There are no institutions which can be absolutely relied on to prevent the growth of the crowd once and for all.
2. Within the crowd there is equality. This is absolute and indisputable and never questioned by the crowd itself. It is of fundamental importance and one might even define a crowd as a state of absolute equality. A head is a head, an arm is an arm, and differences between individual heads and arms are irrelevant. It is for the sake of this equality that people become a crowd and they tend to overlook anything which might detract from it. All demands for justice and all theories of equality ultimately derive their energy from the actual experience of equality familiar to anyone who has been part of a crowd.
3. The crowd loves density. It can never feel too dense. Nothing must stand between its parts or divide them; everything must be the crowd itself. The feeling of density is strongest in the moment of discharge. One day it may be possible to determine this density more accurately and even to measure it.
4. The crowd needs a direction. It is in movement and it moves towards a goal. The direction, which is common to all its members, strengthens the feeling of equality. A goal outside the individual members and common to all of them drives underground all the private differing goals which are fatal to the crowd as such. Direction is essential for the continuing existence of the crowd. Its constant fear of disintegration means that it will accept any goal. A crowd exists so long as it has an unattained goal. There is, however, another tendency hidden in the crowd, which appears to lead to new and superior kinds of formation. The nature of these is often not predictable.

Each of these four attributes will be found in any crowd to a greater or lesser degree. How a crowd is to be classified will depend on which of them predominates in it. I have discussed open and closed crowds and explained that these terms refer to their growth. The crowd is open so long as its growth is not impeded; it is closed when its growth is limited. Another distinction is that between rhythmic and stagnating crowds. This refers to the next two attributes, equality and density; and to both of them simultaneously. The stagnating crowd lives for its discharge. But it feels certain of this and puts it off. It desires a relatively long period of density to prepare for the moment of discharge. It, so to speak, warms itself at its density and delays as long as possible with the discharge. The process here starts not with equality, but with density; and equality then becomes the main goal of the crowd, which in the end it reaches. Every shout, every utterance in common is a valid expression of this equality.

In the rhythmic crowd, on the other hand (for example the crowd of the dance), density and equality coincide from the beginning. Everything here depends on movement. All the physical stimuli involved function in a predetermined manner and are passed on from one dancer to another. Density is embodied in the formal recurrence of retreat and approach; equality is manifest in the movements themselves. And thus, by the skilful enactment of density and equality, a crowd feeling is engendered. These rhythmic formations spring up very quickly and it is only physical exhaustion which brings them to an end.

The next pair of concepts—the slow and the quick crowd—refer exclusively to the nature of the goal. The conspicuous crowds which are the ones usually mentioned and which form such an essential part of modern life—the political, sporting and war like crowds we see daily— are all quick crowds. Very different from these are the religious crowds whose goal is a heaven, or crowds formed of pilgrims. Their goal is distant, the way to it long, and the true formation of the crowd is relegated to a far off country or to another world. Of these slow crowds we actually see only the tributaries, for the end they strive after is invisible and not to be attained by the unbelieving. The slow crowd gathers slowly and only sees itself as permanent in a far distance. This is a mere indication of the nature of these forms. We shall have to consider them more closely.

THE CROWD 31

Rhythm Rayvrum ts ortematry the rhythm of the feet. Every human being walks, and, since he walks on two legs with which he strikes the ground in turn and since he only moves if he continues to do this, whether intentionally or not, a rhythmic sound ensues. The two feet never strike the ground with exactly the same force. The difference between them can be larger or smaller according to individual constitution or mood. It is also possible to walk faster or slower, to run, to stand still suddenly, or to jump. Man has always listened to the footsteps of other men; he has certainly paid more attention to them than to his own. Animals too have their familiar gait; their rhythms are often richer and more audible than those of men; hoofed animals flee in herds, like regiments of drummers. The knowledge of the animals by which he was surrounded, which threatened him and which he hunted, was man’s oldest knowledge. He learnt to know animals by the rhythm of their movement. The earliest writing he learnt to read was that of their tracks; it was a kind of rhythmic notation imprinted on the soft ground and, as he read it, he connected it with the sound of its formation. Many of these footprints were in large numbers close together and, just by looking quietly at them, men, who themselves originally lived in small hordes, were made aware of the contrast between their own numbers and the enormous numbers of some animal herds. They were always hungry and on the watch for game; and the more there was of it, the better for them. But they also wanted to be more themselves. Man's feeling for his own increase was always strong and is certainly not to be understood only as his urge for self-propagation. Men wanted to be more, then and there; the large numbers of the herd which they hunted blended in their feelings with their own numbers which they wished to be large, and they expressed this in a specific state of communal excitement which I shall call the rhythmic or throbbing crowd.

The means of achieving this state was first of all the rhythm of their feet, repeating and multiplied. Steps added to steps in quick succession conjure up a larger number of men than there are. The men do not move away but, dancing, remain on the same spot. The sound of their steps does not die away, for these are continually repeated; there is a long stretch of time during which they continue to sound loud and alive. What they lack in numbers the dancers make up in intensity; if they stamp harder, it sounds as if there were more of them. As long as they go on dancing, they exert an attraction on all in their neighbourhood. Everyone within hearing joins them and remains with them. The natural thing would be for new people to go on joining them for ever, but soon there are none left and the dancers have to conjure up increase out of their own limited numbers. They move as though there were more and more of them. Their excitement grows and reaches frenzy.

How do they compensate for the increase in numbers which they cannot have? First, it is important that they should all do the same thing. They all stamp the ground and they all do it in the same way; they all swing their arms to and fro and shake their heads. The equivalence of the dancers becomes, and ramifies as, the equivalence of their limbs. Every part of a man which can move gains a life of its own and acts as if independent, but the movements are all parallel, the limbs appearing superimposed on each other. They are close together, one often resting on another, and thus density is added to their state of equivalence. Density and equality become one and the same. In the end, there appears to be a single creature dancing, a creature with fifty heads and a hundred legs and arms, all performing in exactly the same way and with the same purpose. When their excitement is at its height, these people really feel as one, and nothing but physical exhaustion can stop them.

Thanks to the dominance of rhythm, all throbbing crowds have something similar in their appearance. The following account of one such dance was written in the first third of the last century. It describes the haka of the New Zealand Maoris, which was originally a war dance. "The Maoris placed themselves in an extended line, in ranks four deep. This dance, called Haka, to a stranger witnessing it for the first time, is calculated to excite the most alarming fears; the entire body of performers, male and female, bond and free, were mixed together, without reference to the rank they held in the community. All the male performers were quite naked, except for the cartouche-box around the body, filled with ball cartridges. All were armed with muskets or bayonets put on the ends of spears or sticks; the young women, including the wives of the chief who joined in the dance, were exposed to the waist. "In the chant that accompanied the dance, proper time was kept; as was equally well displayed in the various performances of agility exhibited in these hakas, especially in the perpendicular jump from the ground which was often repeated in a simultaneous manner, as if the whole body of performers were actuated by one impulse. The implements with which they armed themselves were brandished at the same moment, and the distortions of countenance, with the long tresses of hair that often adorn either sex, gave them the appearance of an army of Gorgons. “The countenances of all were distorted into every possible shape permitted by the muscles of the “,uman face; every new grimace was instantly adopted by all the performers in exact unison. Thus, if one commenced screwing up his face with a rigidity as if the appliance of a vice had been made use of, he was instantly followed by the whole body with a similar gesticulation, so that at times the whites of the eyes were only visible, the eyeballs rolling to and fro. They almost rolled their eyes out of their sockets, and distended their mouths, like hammer-headed sharks, from ear to ear. Their tongues were thrust out of the mouth with an extension impossible for an European to copy; early and long practice"only could accomplish it. Altogether their countenances presented so horrible a spectacle that I was glad to relieve myself by withdrawing my gaze. . . . “Every part of their body was in separate activity, fingers, toes, eyes, tongues as well as arms and legs. With the flattened hand they struck themselves on the left breast, or on the thigh. The noise of their chant was deafening. At least 350 performers took part in the haka. It is easy to imagine the effect of these dances in times of war, in raising the bravery, and heightening the antipathy that is felt by the contending parties against each other.” The rolling of the eyes and the thrusting out of the tongue are signs of defiance and challenge. But though war is usually a matter for men, that is, for free men, everyone abandons himself to the excitement of the haka. The crowd here knows neither age, sex nor rank; all act as equals. But what distinguishes this dance from others of a similar purpose is the exceptionally extreme ramification of equality. It is as though each body was taken to pieces, not only the arms and legs, but also the fingers, toes, tongues and eyes; and then all the tongues got together and did exactly the same thing at the same moment; all the toes and all the eyes became equal in one and the same enterprise. Each part of each dancer is seized by this feeling of equality; and it is always represented in action of increasing violence. The sight of 350 human beings, who together leap from the ground, together thrust out their tongues and together roll their eyes, must make an impression of invincible unity. Density here is not only a density of people, but also, and equally, one of their several limbs. One could imagine fingers and tongues coming together on their own to fight. The rhythm of the haka gives substance to each one of these equalities; mounting together to their common climax they are irresistible. For everything happens under the supposition that it is seen. The enemy is watching and the essence of the haka is the intensity of the common threat. But, once in existence, the dance becomes something more as well. It is practised from an early age, assumes many shapes and is performed on all kinds of occasion. Many travellers have been welcomed with a haka; the report quoted above derives from one such occasion. When one friendly group meets another, they salute each other with a haka, which looks so much in earnest that the innocent spectator fears the immediate outbreak of a battle. At the funeral ceremonies of a great chief, after all the phases of violent lament and self-mutilation customary with the Maoris, or after a festive and abundant meal, every one suddenly jumps up, reaches for his musket and forms into a haka. In this dance, in which all may participate, the tribe feels themselves a crowd. They make use of it whenever they feel a need to be a crowd or to appear as one in front of others. In the rhythmic perfection it has attained, the haka serves this purpose reliably. Thanks to it, their unity is never seriously threatened from within.

Stagnation: Their stagnating crowd is closely compressed; it is impossible for it to move really freely. Its state has something passive in it; it waits. It waits for a head to be shown, or for words, or it watches a fight. What really matters to it is density. The pressure which each member feels around him will also be felt as the measure of the strength of the formation of which he is now part. The more people who flow into that formation, the stronger the pressure becomes; feet have nowhere to move, arms are pinned down, and only heads remain free, to see and to hear; every impulse is passed directly from body to body. Each individual knows that there must be a number of people there, but, because they are so closely jammed together, they are felt to be one. This kind of density allows itself time; its effects are constant over a certain period; it is amorphous and not subject to a practiced and familiar rhythm. For a long time, nothing happens, but the desire for action accumulates and increases until it bursts forth with enhanced violence.

The patience of a stagnating crowd becomes less astonishing if one realizes fully the importance this feeling of density has for it. The denser it is, the more people it attracts. Its density is the measure of its size, but is also the stimulus to further growth; the densest crowd grows fastest. Stagnation before the discharge is an exhibition of this density; the longer a crowd remains stagnant, the longer it feels and manifests its density. For the individuals who compose such a crowd, the period of stagnation is a period of marvels; laid down are all the stings and weapons with which, at other times, they arm themselves against each other; they touch one another, but do not feel confined; a clutch is a clutch no longer; they do not fear each other. Before they set forth, in whatever direction this will be, they want to make sure that they will remain together when they do. They want to grow closer together beforehand, and to do this, they need to be undisturbed.

The stagnating crowd is not quite sure of its unity and therefore keeps still for as long as possible. But this patience has its limits. The discharge must come sometime. Without it, it would be impossible to say that there really was a crowd. The outcry which used to be heard at public executions when the head of the malefactor was held up by the executioner, and the outcry heard today at sporting occasions, are the voice of the crowd. But the outcry must be spontaneous. Rehearsed and regularly repeated shouts are no proof that the crowd has achieved a life of its own. They may lead to it, but they may also be only external, like the drill of a military unit. Contrasted with them, the spontaneous and never quite predictable outcry of a crowd is unmistakable, and its effect enormous. It can express emotions of any kind; which emotions often matters less than their strength and variety and the freedom of their sequence. It is they which give the crowd its "feeling"' space. They can also, however, be so violent and concentrated that they immediately tear the crowd apart. This is what happens at public executions; one and the same victim can be killed only once. If he happens to be someone thought inviolable, there will, up to the very last moment, be some doubt as to whether he can in fact be killed; and this doubt will accentuate the inherent stagnation of the crowd. All the sharper and more effective, then, will be the sight of the severed head. The succeeding outcry will be terrible, but it will be the last outcry of this particular crowd. We may say that, in this case, the crowd pays for the lengthened period of stagnant expectation, which it will have enjoyed intensely, with its own immediate death.

Our modern arrangements for sport are more practical. The spectators can sit: universal patience is made visible to itself. They are free to stamp their feet, but they stay in the same place; they are free to clap their hands. A definite time is allowed for the occasion, and in general, they can count on its not being shortened. For this time, at least, they will remain together. Within it, however, anything may happen. No one can know whether, or when, or on which side, goals will be shot; and, apart from these longed-for occurrences, there are many other lesser events which can lead to vociferous eruptions, many occasions on which the crowd will hear its own voice. The final disintegration and scattering of this crowd is made somewhat less painful by being determined in advance. It is known, too, that the beaten side will have an opportunity of taking its revenge; everything is not over for good. The crowd can really feel comfortable at a match; first it can jam the entrances and then it can settle down in the seats. It can shout as opportunity arises and, even when everything is over, it can hope for similar occasions in the future.

Stagnant crowds of a much more passive kind form in theatres. Ideally, actors play to full houses; the desired number of spectators is fixed from the start. People arrive on their own. There may be small aggregations in front of the box-office, but people find their way separately into the auditorium. They are taken to their seats. Everything is fixed: the play they are going to see, the actors who will perform, the time the curtain will rise, and the spectators themselves in their seats. Late-comers are received with slight hostility. There they all sit, like a well-drilled herd, still and infinitely patient. But everyone is very well aware of his own separate existence. He has paid for his seat and he notices who sits next to him. Till the play starts, he leisurely contemplates the rows of assembled heads. They awaken in him an agreeable but not too pressing feeling of density. The equality of the spectators really consists only in the fact that they are all exposed to the same performance. But their spontaneous reactions to it are limited. Even their applause has its prescribed times; in general people clap only when they are supposed to. The strength of the applause is the only clue to the extent to which they have become a crowd; it is the only measure of this, and is valued accordingly by the actors. Stagnation in the theatre has become so much a rite that individuals feel only gentle external pressure, which does not stir them too deeply and scarcely ever gives them a feeling of inner unity and togetherness. But one should not underestimate the extent of their real and shared expectation, nor forget that it persists during the whole of the performance. People rarely leave a theatre before the end of the play; even when disappointed they sit it through, which means that, for that period anyway, they stay together. The contrast between the stillness of the listeners and the din of the apparatus inflicting itself on them is even more striking in concerts. Here, everything depends on the audience being completely undisturbed; any movement is frowned on, any sound taboo. 

The music performed draws a good part of its life from its rhythm, yet no rhythmical effect on the listeners is allowed. The continually fluctuating emotions set free by the music are of the most varied and intense kind. Most of those present must feel them and, in addition, must feel them together, at the same time. But all outward reactions are prohibited. People sit there motionless, as though they managed to hear nothing. It is obvious that a long and artificial training in stagnation has been necessary here. We have grown accustomed to its results, but, to an unprejudiced mind, there are few phenomena of our cultural life as astonishing as a concert audience.

People who allow music to affect them in a natural way behave quite differently; and those who hear it for the first time, never having heard any before, show unbridled excitement. When French sailors played the Marseillaise to the aborigines of Tasmania, these expressed their satisfaction by such strange contortions of their body and such astounding gestures that the sailors shook with laughter. One young man was so enchanted by it that he tore out his hair, scratched his head with both hands, and repeatedly uttered loud, piercing cries.

A meagre remnant of physical discharge is preserved even in our concerts. Clapping is offered as thanks to the performers: a brief, chaotic noise in exchange for a long, well-organized one. If applause is suppressed and people disperse as quietly as they have sat, it is because they feel that they are within the sphere of religious devotion. It is from this sphere that the stillness of the concert originally derives.

The standing together before God is a practice common to many religions. It is characterized by the same features with which we have become familiar in secular crowds, and it can lead to just as sudden and violent discharges. Perhaps the most impressive case is the famous “Standing on Arafat,” the climax of the pilgrimage to Mecca. On a ritually appointed day, 600-700,000 pilgrims gather on the plain of Arafat, some hours distance from Mecca. They group themselves in a large circle round “The Mount of Mercy,” a bare hill that rises in the middle of the plain. They take up their positions towards two o'clock, when the sun is hottest, and remain standing there until it sets. They are all bare-headed and dressed in the white robes of pilgrims. In passionate tension, they listen to the words of the preacher who speaks to them from the summit of the hill. His sermon is an uninterrupted glorification of God, and the pilgrims respond with one formula, repeated a thousand times: “We wait for your commands, O Lord. We wait for your commands.” Some sob with excitement, some beat their chest. Many faint in the terrible heat. But it is essential that they should endure through the long burning hours on the sacred plain. Only at sunset is the signal for departure given. Subsequent events, which are amongst the most enigmatic of all known religious observances, will be described and interpreted later, in another context. All we are interested in here is this hour-long moment of stagnation. Hundreds of thousands of human beings in a state of mounting excitement are kept there on that plain. They stand before God, and whatever happens to them, they may not abandon their station. Together they take their places and receive the signal for departure. They are set on fire by the sermon and set themselves on fire with their own voices. Their "waiting" is contained in the formula they use, which recurs again and again. The sun, moving with imperceptible slowness, immerses everything in the same blazing light, the same burning glow. It is the embodiment of stagnation.

Every gradation of stiffening and stillness can be found among religious crowds, but the highest degree of passivity ever attained by a crowd is that imposed on it from outside, by force. In a battle, two crowds meet, each of which wants to be stronger than the other. With the help of battle-cries, each tries to prove to the enemy and to itself that it is the stronger. The aim of the battle is to silence the other side. Their loud and united voice is a threat, rightly feared; when they have all been cut down, it is silenced for ever.

The stillest crowd is the crowd of enemy dead. The more dangerous they were, the stronger the desire to see them in a motionless heap. The experience of seeing them thus, as a defenceless heap of dead, evokes an intense and peculiar emotion, for it was only a short time before that they were experienced as a living host, which fought and shouted for blood. In former times, this stilled crowd of the dead was by no means felt to be lifeless. It was assumed that, in a way of their own, they would go on living some- where else, all of them together still; and basically their life would be as one had known it. The enemy who lay on the battlefield as corpses represented for the beholder an extreme case of a stagnating crowd.

But this conception can be carried still one degree further. Instead of the slaughtered enemy, it can be all the dead everywhere who lie in the common earth and await resurrection. Everyone who dies and is buried adds to their number. All who have ever lived belong there, and there are so many of them that they cannot be counted. The earth between them is their density, and though they lie there separately, they are felt to be close to each other. They will lie there for an eternity, until the Day of the Last Judgment. Their life stagnates until the moment of resurrection, and this moment coincides with that of their assembly together before God, who will judge them. Nothing happens in between. As a crowd they lie there; as a crowd, they rise again. There is no more sublime proof of the reality and significance of the stagnating crowd than the development of this conception of Resurrection and Last Judgment.

Slowness, or the Remoteness of the Goal: This stagnating crowd is characterized by the remoteness of its goal. It is composed of people who move with great persistence towards an immovable goal, and who keep together in all circumstances. The road is long, the obstacles unknown, and dangers threaten them from all sides. No discharge is permitted before the goal has been reached. The slow crowd has the form of a train. Sometimes it includes from the beginning everyone who is going to belong to it, as with the Exodus of the Children of Israel from Egypt. Their goal is the Promised Land, and they are a crowd so long as they believe in this goal. The story of their wandering is the story of their belief. Often the difficulties are so great that they begin to doubt. They hunger and thirst, and, as soon as they grumble, they are threatened with disintegration. Again and again, the man who leads them strives to re-establish their faith. Again and again, he succeeds, or, if he does not, the threat of enemies does. Their wandering stretches over forty years and contains many examples of the formation of quick, transitory crowds. Much could be said about these, but the point now is that here they are all subordinated to the more comprehensive conception of a single slow crowd moving onwards to its goal, the country that was promised it. The adults in it grow old and die; children are born and grow up. But even if all the individuals are different, the Exodus as a whole remains the same. No new groups join it; from the start, it had been decided who belonged to it and had a claim on the Promised Land. It is a crowd which cannot grow by leaps and bounds, and one question remained paramount during the whole migration: how was such a crowd to avoid disintegration?

There is a second type of slow crowd which can best be compared to a network of streams. It starts with small rivulets, gradually running together. Into the stream thus formed, other streams flow, and these, if enough land lies ahead, will in time become a river whose goal is the sea. The annual pilgrimage to Mecca is perhaps the most impressive example of this type of slow crowd. From the remotest parts of the Islamic world, caravans of pilgrims set out, all in the direction of Mecca. Some of these begin small; others are equipped with great splendor by princes and, from the start, are the pride of the countries where they originate. But all of them, in the course of their wanderings, encounter other caravans with the same goal; and so they grow and grow until, near their goal, they become enormous rivers. Mecca is the sea into which they flow. Such caravans are so constituted that the pilgrims have ample scope for ordinary experiences, quite unconnected to the purpose of their journey as a whole. They live the recurring day, contend with many dangers, and, as they are mostly poor, have difficulty in providing themselves with food and drink. They live in alien and continually changing surroundings and are far more exposed to dangers than they are at home; and these dangers are not always related to their enterprise. Thus they remain, to a large extent, individuals, living their separate lives as people do anywhere. But as long as they stick to their goal—and most pilgrims do—they are also always part of a slow crowd which exists, however they behave in relation to it, and which will continue to exist until the goal is reached.

A third variant of the slow crowd is to be found in formations which have reference to an invisible goal, not attainable in this life. The world where the blessed await all those who have merited their place in it is a well-defined goal and belongs to the faithful alone. They see it clearly and distinctly in front of them; they do not have to be satisfied with a vague symbol. Life is a pilgrimage towards it, but between them and their goal stands death. The way ahead is difficult to know, for it is nowhere marked; many go astray and get lost. But the hope of the world beyond still colors the life of the believer to such a degree that we are entitled to speak of a slow crowd to which all the followers of a faith belong in common. The anonymity of this crowd is particularly impressive. Its members do not know each other, for they live dispersed in many cities and countries. But what does it look like from inside and what chiefly distinguishes it from a quick crowd? The discharge is denied to the slow crowd. We could say that this was its most important distinguishing mark and, instead of slow crowds, we could speak of crowds which have no discharge. But the first term is preferable, for the discharge cannot be entirely renounced. It will always be contained in the conception of the final state. It is only postponed to a far distance; where the goal is, there too is the discharge. A vision of it is always strongly present, though its actuality lies at the end of the way.

The slow crowd tends to lengthen and protract the process which leads to the discharge. The great religions have developed a particular mastery of this business of delay. Their concern is to keep the followers they have won and, in order to do this and also to win new ones, they have to assemble them from time to time. Such assemblies will result in violent discharges and, once these have happened, they have to be repeated and, if possible, surpassed in violence. Their regular recurrence, at least, is essential if the unity of the faithful is not to be lost.

But the events likely to happen in the course of services enacted, as these are, by rhythmic crowds, cannot be controlled over large distances. The central problem of the universal religions is how to dominate believers spread over wide stretches of the earth. The only way to do it is by a conscious slowing down of crowd events. Distant goals must gain in importance, near ones losing more and more of their weight until, in the end, they appear valueless.

An earthly discharge is too brief; only one which is removed into the world beyond has permanence. In this way, goal and discharge coincide; and the goal is inviolate. A promised land here on earth can be occupied and laid waste by enemies; the people to whom it was sworn can be expelled from it. Mecca was conquered and plundered by the Carmathians and the holy stone Kaaba carried off; for many years no pilgrimage could be undertaken. But the heaven of the blessed is secure from all such devastations. It subsists on faith alone and is only vulnerable there.

The disintegration of the slow crowd of Christianity set in as soon as faith in this other world began to decay. 42 CROWDS AND POWER Invisible Crowds Over THE WHOLE earth, wherever there are men, is found the conception of the invisible dead. It is tempting to call it humanity’s oldest conception. There is certainly no horde, no tribe, no people which does not have abundant ideas about its dead. Man has been obsessed by them; they have been of enormous importance for him; the action of the dead upon the living has been an essential part of life itself. They were thought of as being together, just as men are together, and generally it was assumed that there were a great many of them.

“The old Bechuana, in common with all other South African natives, believed all space to be full of the spirits of their ancestors. Earth, air and sky were crowded with ghosts who could exercise a baleful influence on the living if they chose.”

“The Boloki folk in the Congo believe that they are surrounded by spirits who try to thwart them at every twist and turn and to harm them every hour of the day and night. The rivers and creeks are crowded with the spirits of their ancestors, and the forests and bush are full also of spirits, ever seeking to injure the living who are overtaken by night when travelling by road or canoe.

I never met among them a man daring enough to go at night through the forest that divided our village from the next, even though a large reward was offered. Their invariable reply was: “There are too many spirits in bush and forest.” Men usually believe that the dead live together in a distant country, under the earth, on an island, or in a heavenly house.

The following is part of a song from the Pygmies in Gaboon. “The gates of the cave Are shut. The gates of the cave Are shut. The souls of the dead are crowding there in droves, Like a swarm of flies, Like a swarm of flies, dancing at evening time. A swarm of flies dancing at evening time When the night has grown dark, When the sun has vanished, When the night has grown dark, A swarm of flies. The whirling of dead leaves In a howling tempest.”

But it is not only that the numbers of the dead increase and a feeling of their density prevails. They also move about and undertake expeditions together. To ordinary people they remain invisible, but there are people with special gifts, called Shamans, who have power to conjure up and subdue the spirits and turn them into their servants.

Among the Chukchee in Siberia “a good Shaman has whole legions of auxiliary spirits and, when he calls them all, they come in such numbers that, they surround the small sleeping tent where the exorcism takes place, like a wall on all sides.” The Shamans feel what they see. “In a voice trembling with emotion, the Shaman calls out through the snow hut: ‘The space of heaven is filled with naked beings rushing through the air; men, naked men, naked women who rush through the air and rouse gale and snowstorm. ‘Do you hear it roaring? Roaring like the wing-beat of great birds high in the air. That is the fear of naked men. That is the flight of naked men. The spirits of the air breathe out storm. The spirits of the air drive the whirling snow over the earth.’”

This mighty vision of naked spirits in their flight comes from the Eskimos. Some peoples imagine their dead, or certain of them, as fighting hosts. The Celts of the Scottish Highlands have a special word for the host of the dead: sluagh, meaning “spirit-multitude”.

“The spirits fly about in great clouds like starlings, up and down the face of the world, and come back to the scenes of their earthly transgressions. With their venomous unerring darts they kill cats and dogs, sheep and cattle. They fight battles in the air as men do on the earth. They may be heard and seen on clear, frosty nights, advancing and retreating, retreating and advancing against one another. After a battle their crimson blood may be seen staining rocks and stones.”

The word gairm means shout or cry, and sluagh-ghairm was the battle-cry of the dead. This word later became “slogan”. The expression we use for the battle-cries of our modern crowds derives from the Highland hosts of the dead.

Two widely separated northern peoples, the Lapps in Europe and the Tlinkit Indians in Alaska, share the same conception of the Aurora Borealis as a battle. “The Kolta Lapps imagine that they see in the Northern Lights those who have fallen in war and who, as spirits, con-tinue their fight in the air. The Russian Lapps see in the Lights the spirits of the slain. They live together in a house where they assemble from time to time and there stab each other to death; the floor is covered with blood. The Northern Lights announce the start of these battles between the souls of the slain.” Among the Tlinkit of Alaska, those who do not fall in battle but die of disease pass into the underworld. Heaven is reserved for brave warriors who die in wars. From time to time, heaven opens to receive new spirits, which appear as fully armed warriors. Their souls are reflected in the Aurora Borealis, resembling arrows and sheaves of light. A strong Aurora Borealis announces great slaughter, as it is believed.

The Germanic peoples believe that enormous numbers of warriors are gathered together in Valhalla. Those who have fallen in battle since the beginning of the world go to Valhalla. Their numbers grow continually, as there is no end to wars. In Valhalla, they revel and gorge themselves; food and drink are renewed eternally. They seize their weapons and go out to fight, killing each other in sport but standing up again. Through 640 gates, they re-enter Valhalla in groups of 800 men.

In an old Jewish text, it is said that the space between heaven and earth is not empty but is filled with troops and multitudes. Some of these beings are pure, full of grace and goodness, while others are unclean creatures, tormentors, and doers of harm. They all fly to and fro in the air, with some seeking peace, others war, some doing good, and others evil. Some bring life, while others bring death.

In the religion of the old Persians, the demons—Daevas—form a specific host under a high command of their own. In their holy book, the Zend-Avesta, there is a formula for their innumerability: “Thousands of thousands of those Daevas, their ten thousands of ten thousands, their numberless myriads.”

The Christian Middle Ages gave serious thought to the number of devils. In Caesarius von Heisterbach's Dialogue of Miracles, there is a report of how they once thronged the choir of a church in such numbers that they disturbed the chant of the monks. The demons flew from one side of the choir to the other, mingling with the monks and causing confusion. If so many demons can gather in one place to interrupt a single service, how many must there be in the whole world?

Later, Caesarius adds that a legion entered into one man. He also tells how a wanton priest on his deathbed said to a kins-woman who sat near him, "Do you see that great barn opposite us? Under its roof are as many separate straws as there are demons now gathered round me." They lay in ambush for his soul, waiting to carry it to punishment. But they also tried their luck at the deathbeds of the pious. At the funeral of a good abbess, there were more devils gathered together than there are leaves on the trees of a great forest. At the deathbed of a dying abbot, there were more than the grains of sand on the sea shore. These particulars came from a devil who had been there in person and gave an account of it all to a knight with whom he fell into conversation. He did not disguise his disappointment over these fruitless endeavors and admitted that he had been present, sitting on an arm of the Cross, when Jesus expired. It is clear that the importunity of these devils was as monstrous as their numbers. Whenever Richalm, a Cistercian abbot, closed his eyes, he saw them around him as thick as dust. There were more precise estimates of their numbers, two of which are known to me, but they differ widely: one is 44,635,569; the other is 11 billion. There is a natural and wide contrast between men's conception of devils and their conception of angels and saints. With the latter, everything is calm. There is no more striving, for the goal has been reached. But they, too, are gathered together, a heavenly host, "a multitude of angels, patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs, confessors, virgins and other righteous ones." Ranged in great circles, they stand round the throne of their Lord, like courtiers turned towards their king. Head pressed close to head, their bliss is grounded in their nearness to him. He has accepted them forever, and, in as much as they will never leave him, they will never separate from each other. They remain in contemplation of him, and they sing his praises. It is the only thing they still do, and they do it together.

The minds of the faithful are full of such images of invisible crowds. Whether these are the dead, or devils, or saints, they are imagined as large, concentrated hosts. It could be argued that religions begin with these invisible crowds. They may be differently grouped, and in each faith, a different balance between them has developed. It would be both possible and fruitful to classify religions according to the way in which they manipulate their invisible crowds. Here the higher religions —by which I mean all those which have attained universal validity—exhibit a superior degree of certainty and clarity. These invisible hosts are kept alive by religious teaching. They are the life-blood of faith. The hopes and desires of men cling to them. When they fade, faith weakens, and whilst it dies slowly away, fresh hosts come to take the place of the faded.

One of these crowds, and perhaps the most important of all, has not been mentioned yet. It is the only one which, in spite of its invisibility, seems natural to us today: I mean posterity. For two, or perhaps three, generations, a man can count his posterity; from then on, it lies entirely in the future. It is precisely when it has become numberless that posterity is visible to no one. It is known that it must increase, first gradually and then with growing acceleration. Tribes and whole peoples trace their origin back to a common ancestor, and the promises claimed to have been given to him show how glorious, and especially how numerous, a progeny he desired; innumerable as the stars in heaven and the sand on the shores of the sea. In the Shi-King, the classical Book of Songs of the Chinese, there is a poem in which progeny is compared to a swarm of locusts: "The locusts' wings say 'throng, throng'; Well may your sons and grandsons Be a host innumerable. The locusts' wings say 'bind, bind'; Well may your sons and grandsons, Continue in an endless line. The locusts' wings say 'join, join'; Well may your sons and grandsons Be forever at one." Large numbers, unbroken succession—a kind of density throughout time—and unity: these are the three wishes for progeny pronounced here. The use of the swarm of locusts as a symbol for the crowd of progeny is particularly striking in that it exhibits them not as harmful vermin, but as praiseworthy in their exemplary power of increase. The feeling for posterity is as alive today as it ever was, but the image of abundance has detached itself from our own progeny and transferred itself to future humanity as a whole. For most of us, the hosts of the dead are an empty superstition, but we regard it as a noble and by no means fruitless endeavor to care for the future crowd of the unborn; to want their good and to prepare for them a better and a juster life. In the universal anxiety about the future of the earth, this feeling for the unborn is of the greatest importance. Disgust at the thought of their malformation, the thought of what they may look like if we continue to conduct our grotesque wars, may well do more than all our private fears for ourselves to lead to the abolition of these wars, and of war altogether.

If we now consider the fate of the invisible crowds we have spoken of, we shall conclude that some of them have disappeared completely, and others in large part. Among the latter are the devils. In spite of their former numbers, they are no longer to be found anywhere in their familiar shape. But they have left their traces. The fact that they were small is proved by the striking instances adduced by Caesarius von Heisterbach, who was contemporary with the time of their flowering. Since then, they have given up all the traits which might remind us of a human figure and become much smaller still. It is greatly changed, and in even larger numbers, that they turn up again in the 19th century as bacilli. Instead of the souls, they now attack the bodies of men; and to these they can be very dangerous. Only a tiny minority of people have looked into a microscope and really seen them there. But everyone has heard of them and is continually aware of their presence and makes every effort not to come into contact with them—though this, considering their invisibility, is a somewhat vague endeavor. Their power to harm and their concentration in enormous numbers in very small spaces is undoubtedly taken over from devils.

An invisible crowd which has always existed, but which has only been recognized as such since the invention of the microscope, is the crowd of spermatozoa. 200 million of these animalcules set out together on their way. They are equal among themselves and in a state of very great density. They all have the same goal and, except for one, they all perish on the way. It may be objected that they are not human beings and that it is therefore not correct to speak of them as a crowd in the sense the word has been used. But this objection does not really touch the essentials of the matter. Each of these animalcules carries with it everything of our ancestors which will be preserved. It contains our ancestors; it is them, and it is overwhelmingly strange to find them here again, between one human existence and another, in a radically changed form, all of them within one tiny invisible creature, and this creature present in such uncountable numbers.

Classification of Crowds according to Their Prevailing Emotion
The crowds we have become acquainted with are filled with all kinds of emotions, and scarcely anything has been said about these. The first aim of our enquiry was a classification according to formal principles, but the statement that a crowd is open or closed, slow or quick, visible or invisible, tells us very little about what it feels, what its content is. Now this content is by no means always to be found in a pure state. 

There are occasions when the crowd runs through a whole series of emotions in quick succession. People can spend hours in a theatre and the experiences they share there are of the most varied kind. In a concert, their feelings are even more detached from the occasion and may be said, in fact, to attain the maximum of variety. But these occasions are artificial; their richness is an end-product of high and complex cultures. Their effect is moderated because in them, extremes cancel each other out. They serve, on the whole, to soften and diminish the passions at whose mercy people feel when alone.

The main emotional types of crowd can be traced much further back than this. They make a very early appearance; their history is as old as that of humanity itself, and in two cases even older. Each of these types is distinguished by a homogeneous colour; a single passion dominates them. Once they have been properly understood, it is impossible ever to confound them again. I propose to distinguish five types of crowd in accordance with their crucial content. The oldest of these are the baiting crowd and the flight crowd. These are to be found among animals as well as amongst men, and it is probable that their formation among men has time and again been influenced by the example of animals. The prohibition, the reversal, and the feast crowd, on the other hand, are specifically human. A description of these five main types is indispensable, and its interpretation can afford insights of considerable importance.

Baiting Crowds

The sarine crowd forms with reference to a quickly attainable goal. The goal is known and clearly marked, and is also near. This crowd is out for killing and it knows whom it wants to kill. It heads for this goal with unique determination and cannot be cheated of it. The proclaiming of the goal, the spreading about of who it is that is to perish, is enough to make the crowd form. This concentration on killing is of a special kind and of an unsurpassed intensity. Everyone wants to participate; everyone strikes a blow and, in order to do this, pushes as near as he can to the victim. If he cannot hit him himself, he wants to see others hit him. Every arm is thrust out as if they all belonged to one and the same creature. But the arms which actually do the hitting count for most. The goal is also the point of greatest density. It is where the actions of all the participants unite. Goal and density coincide.

One important reason for the rapid growth of the baiting crowd is that there is no risk involved. There is no risk because the crowd have immense superiority on their side. The victim can do nothing to them. He is either bound or in flight, and cannot hit back; in his defenselessness he is victim only. Also, he has been made over to them for destruction; he is destined for it and thus no-one need fear the sanction attached to killing. His permitted murder stands for all the murders people have to deny themselves for fear of the penalties for their perpetration. A murder shared with many others, which is not only safe and permitted, but indeed recommended, is irresistible to the great majority of men.

There is, too, another factor which must be remembered. The threat of death hangs over all men and, however disguised it may be, and even if it is sometimes forgotten, it affects them all the time and creates in them a need to deflect death on to others. The formation of baiting crowds answers this need. It is so easy and everything happens so quickly that people have to hurry to get there in time. The speed, elation, and conviction of a baiting crowd is something uncanny. It is the excitement of blind men who are blindest when they suddenly think they can see. The crowd advances towards victim and execution in order to rid itself once and for all of its own deaths. But what actually happens to it is the opposite of this. Through the execution, though only after it, it feels more menaced than ever by death; it disintegrates and disperses in a kind of 50 CROWDS AND POWER flight. The greater the victim, the greater the fear. It can only hold together if a series of similar events follow each other in quick succession.

The baiting crowd is very old. It goes back to the most primitive dynamic unit known among men: the hunting pack. I shall say more later about packs, which are smaller than crowds, and differ from them in many other respects also. Here I only want to treat of a few general occasions which give rise to the formation of baiting crowds.

Among the death penalties which a horde or a people can inflict on an individual, two main forms can be distinguished. The first is expulsion. The individual is marooned where he is at the mercy of wild animals without any kind of defence, or where he will starve. The people to whom he formerly belonged will have nothing to do with him any more; they are not allowed to shelter him or give him food; any intercourse with him defiles them and makes them guilty. Solitude in its most rigorous form is the ultimate penalty here; separation from one’s group is a torture which very few can survive, especially under primitive conditions. A variant of this isolation is handing over to the enemy. This is particularly cruel and humiliating for men who suffer it otherwise than after fighting. For them it is a double death.

The other way of punishing is collective killing. The condemned man is taken out to a field and stoned. Everyone has a share in his death; everyone throws a stone and it is under their joint impact that the transgressor collapses. No one has been appointed executioner; the community as a whole does the killing. The stones stand for the community; they are the monument both to its decision and to its deed. Even where stoning is no longer customary, the inclination for collective killing persists. Death by fire can be compared to it; fire represents the multitude which desires the condemned person’s death. The victim is assailed from all sides by the flames, which set on him simultaneously and kill him.

The religions of hell go further. Collective killing by fire —fire stands as a symbol for the crowd—is associated with the idea of expulsion, namely, expulsion to hell, and surrender to diabolic enemies. The flames of hell reach up to the earth and fetch down the heretic who is forfeit to them. The studding of a victim with arrows and the shooting of a condemned man by a detachment of soldiers both present the executing group as the delegates of the whole community. With the burying of men in ant-heaps, as practised in Africa and elsewhere, the ants stand for the multitude and do its painful business. All forms of public execution are connected with the old practice of collective killing. The real executioner is the crowd gathered round the scaffold. It approves the spectacle and, with passionate excitement, gathers from far and near to watch it from beginning to end.

It wants it to happen and hates being cheated of its victim. The account of Christ's condemnation contains the root of the matter. The cry of "Crucify Him!" comes from the crowd; it is the crowd which is truly active here. On another occasion it might have done everything itself and stoned Jesus. The tribunal pronouncing judgment—normally in front of a limited number of people only—stands for the multitude which later attends the execution. The sentence of death, which sounds abstract and unreal when pronounced in the name of justice, becomes real when it is carried out in the presence of the crowd. It is actually for the sake of the crowd that justice is done and it is the crowd we have in mind when we speak of the importance of justice being public.

In the Middle Ages, executions were carried out with pomp and solemnity, and as slowly as possible. Sometimes the victim exhorted the spectators with pious speeches. He declared his concern for them and expatiated on the manner of life which had led him to where he stood, so that they might avoid his fate. The crowd felt flattered by his concern, and to him, it may have been a last satisfaction to stand there once more as an equal amongst them, a good man like themselves, with them renouncing his former life and condemning it.

This repentance in the face of death, which priests do their utmost to bring about in malefactors and infidels, has another significance besides the professed purpose of soul-saving. It transfuses the emotional state of the baiting crowd with premonitions of a future festal crowd. All who are present feel confirmed in their righteous convictions and in their belief in a heavenly reward.

In revolutionary periods, executions are accelerated. Samson, the Paris executioner, boasted that his assistants only needed "a minute per person." Much of the feverish excitement of such times is due to the rapid succession of innumerable executions. It is important for the crowd that the executioner should show it the severed head. This, and this alone, is the moment of discharge. Whoever the head has belonged to, it is degraded now; during the short moment it stares at the crowd, it becomes a head like all other heads. Though it may have started on the shoulders of a king, it is made level with them by this lightning process of public degradation.

The crowd here consists of staring heads and it attains its feeling of equality during the moment that the head stares back at it. The greater the former power of the executed man, the greater the distance which used to separate him from the crowd, and the stronger, therefore, the excitement of the discharge. In the case of a king, or a person with similar power, there is, in addition, the satisfaction of reversal. The right of capital punishment, which had been his so long, has been turned against him. Those he used to kill have now killed him. It is impossible to overrate the importance of this reversal. There is a type of crowd which is created by reversal alone.

The effect of displaying the victim's head to the crowd is by no means confined to the discharge. The impact of his downfall is tremendous. By it, he becomes no more than they are. They recognize him as one of themselves and thus he makes them all equal to one another, for they all see themselves in him. But the severed head of the victim is also a threat. They have looked into those dead eyes with such passion that now they cannot free themselves from him. His head has become part of the crowd, and so the crowd itself is struck at in his death. Terrified and stricken by a mysterious disease, it begins to disintegrate, and finally disperses in a kind of flight from him. Once a baiting crowd has attained its victim, it disintegrates rapidly. Rulers in danger are well aware of this fact and throw a victim to the crowd in order to impede its growth. Many political executions are arranged solely for this purpose. The spokesman of radical parties, on the other hand, often fail to understand that the public execution of a dangerous enemy may cut deeper into their own flesh than into that of the enemy party. It may well be that the crowd of their partisans will scatter after such an execution, and that they will not regain their strength for a long time, and perhaps never. Disgust at collective killing is of very recent date and should not be over-estimated.

Today, everyone takes part in public executions through the newspapers. Like everything else, however, it is more comfortable than it was. We sit peacefully at home and, out of a hundred details, can choose those to linger over which offer a special thrill. We only applaud when everything is over and there is no feeling of guilty connivance to spoil our pleasure. We are not responsible for the sentence, nor for the journalists who report its execution, nor for the papers which print them. None the less, we know more about the business than our predecessors, who may have walked miles to see it, hung around for hours, and, in the end, seen very little. The baiting crowd is preserved in the newspaper reading public, in a milder form it is true, but, because of its distance from events, a more irresponsible one. One is tempted to say that it is the most despicable and, at the same time, most stable form of such a crowd. Since it does not even have to assemble, it escapes disintegration; variety is catered for by the daily re-appearance of the papers.

The crowd of flight is created by a threat. Everyone flees; everyone is drawn along. The danger which threatens is the same for all. It is concentrated at a definite point and makes no distinctions there. It can threaten the inhabitants of a city, or all those who belong to a particular faith, or speak a particular language. People flee together because it is best to flee that way. They feel the same excitement and the energy of some increases the energy of others; people push each other along in the same direction. So long as they keep together they feel that the danger is distributed, for the ancient belief persists that danger springs at one point only. They argue that, whilst the enemy is seizing one of them, all the others can escape. The flanks of the flight are uncovered, but since they are extended, they think it impossible for danger to attack all of them at the same time. No-one is going to assume that he, out of so many, will be the victim and, since the sole movement of the whole flight is towards salvation, each is convinced that he personally will attain it. For the most striking thing about a mass flight is the force of its direction. The crowd has, as it were, become all direction, away from danger. Since the goal of safety and the distance from it are the only things which matter, all the previously existing distances between men become unimportant. Strange and widely dissimilar creatures who have never come near each other before suddenly find themselves together. In their flight, all the distances between them disappear, though the differences of course do not. The flight crowd is the most comprehensive of all crowds. It contains absolutely everybody and the picture of diversity which it thus presents is further complicated by the differing speeds of the fugitives: there are young and old among them, strong and weak, those less and those more burdened. But the picture is misleading. Its motley colours are only incidental and, measured against the overpowering force of direction, utterly insignificant.

The impetus of the flight continues to multiply so long as everyone recognizes that there are others fleeing with him. He may press them forwards, but he must not push them aside. The moment he starts to think only of himself and to regard those around him purely as obstacles, the character of the mass flight changes completely and it turns into its exact opposite; it becomes a panic, a struggle of each against all who stand in his way. This reversal generally occurs when the direction of the flight has been repeatedly impeded. To block the crowd's way is enough to make it break out in another direction. If its way is repeatedly blocked, it soon no longer knows where to turn. It grows confused about its direction and thus loses its coherence. The danger which, till then, had united its members and given them wings, now sets each man up as an enemy of the next. Everyone is intent only on saving himself.

The mass flight, on the other hand, contrary to the panic, derives its energy from its coherence. As long as it remains one powerful and undivided river and does not allow itself to be dispersed and split, so long does the fear by which it is driven remain bearable. Once a mass flight is under way it is characterized by a kind of exaltation—the exaltation of common movement. No one person is in any less danger than any other and, though he continues to run or ride with all his might to save his own life, he still occupies a recognized place amongst all the others and sticks to it throughout the turmoil.

The flight can last for days or weeks and, during it, some remain behind, either stricken by the enemy, or because their strength is gone. Everyone who falls by the way acts as a spur to the others. Fate has overtaken him and exempted them. He is a sacrifice offered to danger. However important he may have been to some of them as a companion in flight, by falling he becomes important to all of them. The sight of him gives new strength to the weary; he has proved weaker than they are; the danger was aimed at him and not at them. The isolation in which he remains behind, and in which they still see him for a short time, heightens for them the value of their being together.

Anyone who falls has thus an incalculable importance for the cohesion of the flight. The natural end of the flight is the attainment of the goal; once this crowd is in safety it dissolves. But the danger can also be arrested at its source. An armistice may be declared and the city from which people were fleeing be no longer in danger. They fled together, but they return singly, and soon everything is again as separate as it used to be. But there is also a third possibility, which may be called the oozing away of the flight in sand. The goal is too far off, the surroundings are hostile and the people starve and grow exhausted. It is no longer only a few, but hundreds and thousands who collapse and remain behind. This text is cleaned up and separated into paragraphs:

This physical disintegration sets in only gradually, for the original impetus lasts for a long time; people crawl on even when every chance of salvation has vanished. Of all types of crowd, the flight crowd is the one which exhibits the greatest tenacity; its remnants keep together until the very last moment.

There is no dearth of examples of mass flights. Our own time alone is rich in them. Until the last war one would have thought first of the fate of Napoleon’s Grande Armée in its retreat from Moscow, for this is the most striking example we know of, and we know it in all its details: an army composed of men of so many different countries and languages, the terrible winter, the immense stretch of country they had to traverse, most of them on foot—this was a retreat which was bound to degenerate into a mass flight. The first civilian flight from a metropolis of comparable size was probably that which took place when the Germans approached Paris in 1940. This famous exodus did not last long, for an armistice was soon concluded, but such was the extent and intensity of the movement that for the French it has become the central mass memory of the last war.

I do not intend to accumulate examples from recent times, for they are still fresh in everyone’s memory. But it is worth pointing out that mass flight has always been known to men, even in the times when they still lived together in quite small groups. It played a part in their imagination long before they could have experienced it in actual numbers. One remembers the vision of the Eskimo Shaman: “The space of heaven is filled with naked beings rushing through the air. Men, naked men, naked women who rush through the air and rouse gale and snowstorm. Do you hear it roaring? Roaring like the wing-beat of great birds high in the air. That is the fear of naked men. That is the flight of naked men.”

A special type of crowd is created by a refusal: a large number of people together refuse to continue to do what, till then, they had done singly. They obey a prohibition, and this prohibition is sudden and self-imposed. It can be an old prohibition which has been forgotten, or one which is resuscitated from time to time. But, in any case, it strikes with enormous power. It is as absolute as a command, but what is decisive about it is its negative character. Contrary to appearances, it never really comes from outside, but always originates in some need in those it affects. As soon as the prohibition has been enunciated the crowd begins to form. Its members all refuse to do what the outside world expects them to do. What, till then, they had done without any fuss, as if it was natural to them and not at all difficult, they now suddenly refuse to do in any circumstances; and the firmness of their refusal is the measure of their togetherness.

From the moment of its birth this crowd is transfused with the negativeness of prohibition, and this remains its essential characteristic as long as it exists. Thus one could also speak of a negative crowd. It is formed by resistance; the prohibition is a frontier nothing can cross, a dam nothing can pierce. Each person watches the other to see whether he remains part of the dam. Anyone who gives way and transgresses the prohibition is outlawed by all the others. In our own time the best example of a negative, or prohibition, crowd is the strike. The majority of workers are accustomed to do their work regularly at certain hours. The actual tasks vary from man to man, one doing one thing and another something quite different. But large groups start work at the same time and leave it at the same time. They are equals in relation to this common moment of starting and stopping work. In addition, most of them do their work with their hands, and all of them alike get paid for working. Their wages, however, differ according to the work they do, and it is clear in general that their equality does not go very far and is not pronounced enough to lead by itself to the formation of a crowd.

When a strike breaks out, the workers' equality becomes far more stringent. It consists then in their common refusal to continue work, and this refusal is something which permeates the whole man. The conviction created by a prohibition on work is both keen and strongly resistant. The moment of standstill is a great moment, and has been celebrated in workers' songs. There are many things which contribute to the workers' feeling of relief at the start of a strike. The fictitious equality, which they had heard made so much of, had never really meant more than that they all used their hands. Now it has suddenly become a real equality. As long as they were working, they had very varied things to do, and everything they did was prescribed. But, when they stop work, they all do the same thing. It is as though their hands had all dropped at exactly the same moment and now they had to exert all their strength not to lift them up again, however hungry their families. Stopping work makes the workers equals.

Their concrete demands are actually of less importance than the effect of this moment. The aim of the strike may be a wage increase, and they certainly feel at one in this aim. But by itself, it is not sufficient to make a crowd out of them. The hands that drop infect other hands. Their inaction spreads to the whole of society. Sympathetic strikes prevent others, who had not been thinking of a stoppage, from following their normal occupations.

The essence of a strike is to prevent others working while the strikers are idle. The more nearly they achieve this, the greater their chance of victory. Within the actual strike, it is essential that everyone should abide by the undertaking not to work. Spontaneously from within the crowd itself, there springs up an organization with the functions of a state. It is fully conscious of the shortness of its life and has only a very small number of laws; but these are strictly kept. Pickets guard the entrances to the place where the strike started, and the workplace itself is forbidden ground. The interdict on it lifts it out of its everyday triviality and endows it with a special dignity. In its emptiness and stillness, it has something sacred. The fact that the strikers have taken over responsibility for it turns it into a common possession and, as such, it is protected and invested with a higher significance.

Anyone who comes near it is examined about his convictions. Anyone who approaches it with profane intentions, wanting to work there, is treated as an enemy or traitor. The organization sees to it that food and money are fairly distributed. What they have must last for as long as possible, so it is important that everyone should receive equally little. It does not occur to the strong to think that they should have more, and even the greedy are satisfied with their portion. As there is usually only a very little for everyone, and as distribution is settled in good faith and publicly, it adds to the pride which the crowd feels in its equality. There is something deeply serious and worthy of respect about such an organization, and when the ferocity and destructiveness of crowds are mentioned, one cannot help remembering the responsibility and dignity of these structures sprung spontaneously from crowds. An examination of the prohibition crowd is essential, if only for the reason that it exhibits entirely different, and indeed, contrary, qualities. As long as it remains true to its nature, it is averse to destruction. But it is true that it is not easy to keep it in this state. When things go badly and want reaches proportions difficult to bear, and especially if it is assailed or besieged, the negative crowd tends to revert to a positive and active one. The strikers are men who have suddenly denied themselves the normal activity of their hands, and after a time, it can cost them no small effort to go on not using them. As soon as they feel the unity of their stand threatened, they incline towards destruction, particularly towards destruction in the sphere of their own familiar activity. It is here that the most important task of the organization begins. It must keep the character of the prohibition crowd intact and prevent any positive or separate action. It must also recognize when the moment has come to lift the prohibition to which the crowd owes its existence. If its insight corresponds to the feeling of the crowd, it will, by withdrawing the prohibition, decree its own dissolution.

Reversal Crowds
"Dear Frienp, the wolves have always eaten the sheep; are the sheep going to eat the wolves this time?" This sentence, which comes from a letter which Madame Jullien wrote to her son during the French Revolution, contains the essence of reversal. So far, a few wolves have held down many sheep. Now the time has come for the many sheep to turn against the few wolves. It is true that sheep are not carnivorous, but, in its very absurdity, the sentence is full of meaning. Revolutions are times of reversal; those who have been defenceless for so long suddenly find teeth. Their numbers have to make up for the experience in viciousness which they lack. Reversal presupposes a stratified society. A clear separation of classes, one enjoying more rights than the other, must have lasted for some time, and made itself felt in men's daily life before the need for reversal arises. The stratification may have occurred as the result of internal events, or the higher group may have acquired the right to give orders to the lower one by conquering the country and thus setting itself above the natives. Every command leaves behind a painful sting in the person who is forced to carry it out. The nature of these stings will be examined in more detail later. All I want to say here is that they are indestructible. People who are habitually ordered about are full of them, and feel a strong urge to get rid of them. They can free themselves in two different ways. They can pass on to others the orders which they have received from above; but, for them to be able to do this, there must be others below them who are ready to accept their orders. Or they can try to pay back to their superiors themselves what they have suffered and stored up from them. One man alone, weak and helpless as he is, will only rarely be fortunate enough to find an opportunity for this, but, if many men find themselves together in a crowd, they may jointly succeed in what was denied them singly: together they can turn on those who, till now, have given them orders. A revolutionary situation can be defined as a state of reversal, and a crowd whose discharge consists mainly in its collective deliverance from the stings of command should be called a reversal crowd. The French Revolution is usually considered to have begun with the storming of the Bastille. It actually began earlier with a massacre of hares. In May 1789, the States General were assembled at Versailles. They were deliberating the abolition of feudal rights, among them the hunting rights of the nobility. On June 10th, a month before the storming of the Bastille, Camille Desmoulins, who was present as a deputy, wrote to his father: “The Bretons are provisionally carrying out some of the articles of their cahiers de doléance. They are killing pigeons and game. And here in this part, some 50 young people are creating havoc among hares and rabbits. They are said to have killed between four and five thousand head of game under the eyes of the wardens in the plain of St. Germain.”

Before they dare attack the wolves, the sheep turn against hares. Before the reversal directed against superiors, they turn on the lowliest available quarry. But the real event is the Day of the Bastille. The whole city provided itself with arms. The rising was directed against the king’s justice, embodied in the stormed and conquered building. Prisoners were set free, who were then able to join the crowd. The Governor responsible for the defence of the Bastille, and his assistants, were executed. But thieves, too, were strung from the lamp posts. The Bastille was razed to the ground and carried away stone by stone. Justice in its two main aspects—the right of inflicting capital punishment and the right of mercy—was taken over by the people. The reversal had, for the moment, accomplished itself.

Crowds of this type form in the most diverse circumstances; they may be revolts of slaves against their masters, of soldiers against their officers, of coloured people against the whites who have settled in their midst. But, in all cases, the one group will have been subject for a long time to the commands of the other group; the rebels are always driven to act by the stings they carry within them; and it always takes a long time before they can do so.

Much of the surface activity of revolutions, on the other hand, is due to baiting crowds. Single people are hunted and, when caught, are killed by the crowd, with or without the formality of a trial. But the revolution by no means consists solely of this. The baiting crowds which quickly attain their natural goal are not the whole of it. Once started, the reversal goes on spreading. Everyone tries to get into a position where he can free himself of his stings of command; and everyone has a large number of these. The reversal is a process which takes hold of the whole of a society and, even if attended with success from the start, it comes to an end only slowly and with difficulty. The successive baiting crowds run their brief course on the surface while the waves of reversal rise slowly from the depths. But the process may be much slower even than this; the reversal may be promised for heaven: “The last shall be first.”” Between the present state and that other stands death. In the other world, men will live again. The poorest here, if he has done no evil, will stand highest there. He will live on as a new man and one, moreover, who has a better position. The believer is promised deliverance from his stings. But nothing is said about the precise circumstances of this deliverance. Though physical proximity is part of the concept of heaven, there is no actual indication that the crowd is the substratum of this reversal. At the center of this kind of promise stands the idea of revival. Cases of people brought back to life by Christ are reported in the Gospels. The preachers of the famous "revivals" in Anglo-Saxon countries made every possible use of death and resurrection, threatening the assembled sinners with the most fearful pains of hell until they were reduced to an indescribable state of terror, imagining a lake of fire and brimstone yawning to swallow them and the hand of the Almighty thrusting them down in the horrible abyss. It was said of one of the preachers that the terror inspired by the fierceness of his invective was heightened still further by the hideousness of his visage and the thunder of his tones. People came from 40, 50 or 100 miles away to hear such preachers. Men brought their families with them in covered wagons and came provided with bedding and food for several days. Round about 1800, one part of Kentucky was roused to a state of feverish excitement by meetings of this kind. The meetings were held in the open because no building then existing in the State could have held the enormous crowds. In August 1801, 20,000 people gathered at Cane Ridge and the memory of this meeting still lingered in Kentucky after the lapse of a century. The preachers went on terrifying their listeners until the latter fell down to the ground and remained lying there as though dead. It was God's commands that threatened them and from which they fled, seeking refuge in a semblance of death. And it was the conscious and declared intention of the preachers thus to strike them down. The place looked like a battlefield; right and left whole rows of people fell to the ground. The comparison with a battlefield was made by the preachers themselves. To achieve the moral reversal they wanted, this utmost and ultimate terror seemed essential. The success of the preaching was measured by the number of the "fallen." An eyewitness who kept a precise journal reports that, in the course of this meeting, which lasted for several days, 3,000 people fell helpless to the ground—nearly one-sixth of those present. Those who fell were carried to the meeting house nearby. At no time was the floor less than half covered with people lying there. Some lay quiet, unable to speak, or move. At times they would come to themselves for a few moments, then a deep groan, a piercing shout, or a fervent prayer for mercy would show that they were alive. "Some talked but could not move. Some beat the floor with their heels. Some, shrieking in agony, bounded about like a fish out of water. Many lay down and rolled over and over for hours at a time. Others rushed wildly over stumps and benches and plunged shouting 'Lost! Lost!' into the forest." When the fallen came to themselves, they were changed people. They rose and shouted 'Salvation!' They were "new-born" and ready to begin a good and pure life; their old sinful existence was left behind them. But the conversion could only be believed in if a kind of death had preceded it. There were also phenomena of a less extreme nature which tended to the same end. A whole meeting would suddenly break out weeping: many people were seized with irresistible jerks. Others, usually in groups of four or five, started barking like dogs. After a few years, when the excitement had begun to take milder forms, people would burst out, first singly and then in chorus together, into a “holy laugh”. But everything that happened, happened within a crowd, crowds more highly-charged and excited than almost any others we know of. The reversal aimed at in these revivals differs from that in revolutions. What is involved here is men’s relation to the divine commands. Men have been acting contrary to them and now the fear of God’s punishment has come over them. This fear, increased in every possible way by the preacher, has driven them into a state of unconsciousness. They feign death like hunted animals, but their fear is so great that they really lose consciousness. When they come to themselves, they declare their readiness to submit to God’s commands and prohibitions, and thus their acute fear of his immediate punishment subsides. It is, as it were, a process of domestication: a man allows himself to be tamed by the preacher to become God’s obedient servant. The process is exactly the opposite of what happens in a revolution. As we saw earlier, the essential there is liberation from the burden of all the stings resulting from long submission to some kind of domination. Here the essential is a new submission, submission to the 62 CROWDS AND POWER commands of God, and a willingness, therefore, to accept all the stings they may implant. The only factor common to both processes is the reversal itself, and the psychic scene where it takes place—in both cases the crowd.

Feast Crowds
Tue rirra tv of crowd is the feast crowd. There is abundance in a limited space, and everyone near can partake of it. The produce of all kinds of cultivation is exhibited in great heaps: a hundred pigs lie bound in a row; mountains of fruit are piled up; huge vessels of a favourite drink are prepared and stand waiting to be drunk. There is more of everything than everyone together can consume, and in order to consume it, more and more people come streaming in. As long as there is anything there, they partake of it, and it looks as though there would be no end to it. There is an abundance of women for the men, and an abundance of men for the women. Nothing and no-one threatens, and there is nothing to flee from; for the time being, life and pleasure are secure. Many prohibitions and distinctions are waived, and unaccustomed advances are not only permitted but smiled on. For the individual, the atmosphere is one of loosening, not discharge. There is no common identical goal which people have to try and attain together. The feast is the goal, and they are there. The density is very great, but the equality is in large part an equality simply of indulgence and pleasure. People move to and fro, not in one direction only. The things which are piled up, and of which everyone partakes, are a very important part of the density; they are its core. They were gathered together first, and only when they were all there did people gather round them. It may take years before everything is ready and people may have to endure a long period of want for this brief abundance. But they live for this moment and work steadily towards it. Men who can otherwise rarely see each other are ceremoniously invited with their own groups. The arrival of the various contingents is vigorously acclaimed, and each fresh arrival raises the level of universal joy. But another feeling also plays its part. By common enjoyment at this one feast, people prepare the way for many future feasts. From: The Double Crowd: Men and Women. The Living and the Dead

The first and most striking antithesis is that between men and women. The second that between the living and the dead; and the third that between friend and foe. This last is the one people almost invariably have in mind today when they speak of two opposing crowds. The connection between the first antithesis—that of men and women—and the formation of specific crowds is not immediately apparent. Men and women live together in families. They may tend to have different activities, but one scarcely thinks of them as confronting each other in separate, excited groups. One has to go to reports of more primitive conditions of life to acquire a real conception of the form this antithesis may take.

The second antithesis, that between the living and the dead, is the most complex and subtle. The living, in the most elementary sense, are those who, through some action or other, are active, and the dead, those who are affected by this action. The action may be the result of a ritual, a war, or any other activity that involves a group of people. The living are the ones who cause the action, and the dead are those who receive it. In this case, the action may involve a confrontation between two groups, and the dead will be the group that suffers the consequences of the action.

The third antithesis, that between friend and foe, is the one that people mostly think of when they speak of two opposing crowds. This antithesis is the most immediate and apparent, as it involves the confrontation between two groups that are rivals or threats to each other. The tension between the two groups exerts its pressure on everyone belonging to either, leading to a heightened sense of awareness and anticipation. The pressure can manifest itself in various forms, such as shame, humiliation, or the need for united and resolute defense.

In summary, the formation of a two-crowd structure requires both sides to feel roughly equal in strength. The antitheses mentioned above—men and women, the living and the dead, and friend and foe—play essential roles in the development and maintenance of these crowds. Jean de Léry, a young French Huguenot, witnessed a massive feast among the Tupinambu in Brazil in 1557. He recalled, "We were ordered to stay in the house where the women were. We didn't yet know what they would do, but suddenly we heard a deep voice from the house where the men were, less than thirty paces from us. It sounded like the murmur of prayers."

"As soon as the women, about 200 in number, heard this, they all jumped up, pricked their ears and pressed closely together in a heap. Soon afterwards the men raised their voices. We distinctly heard them all singing together and encouraging themselves by repeating over and over again the exclamation: 'He, he, he, he!' We were amazed when the women answered them with the same cry: 'He, he, he, he!' For more than a quarter of an hour they howled and screamed so loud that we did not know how to keep our countenances."

"In the midst of their howling they sprang in the air with great violence, their breasts shaking and their mouths foaming. Some fell unconscious to the ground, like people who have the falling sickness. It seemed to me that the devil had got into them and had made them mad."

"Quite near us we heard the uproar of the children, who were in a separate room by themselves. Though I had now lived among the natives for over half a year, and had got on quite well with them, I cannot deny that I was terrified. I asked myself how the thing would end and wished myself back in our fort."

The witches' sabbath calmed down in the end, the women and children fell silent, and Jean de Léry heard the men sing in chorus. He longed to see them and could not bear not to be with them. The women tried to hold him back, for they knew that they themselves were prohibited from joining the men. But he managed to sneak in among the men, and, with two other Frenchmen, he attended the feast.

Here the men and women are strictly separated from each other in different but adjacent houses. They cannot see each other, but this causes the one group to listen all the more intently for the noise of the other. They utter the same cries and work themselves into a state of crowd excitement which is common to both of them. The real events are enacted among the men, but the women take part in kindling the crowd.

It is remarkable how, as soon as they distinguish the first sounds from the men's house, they press together into a dense mass and respond more and more wildly to the wild shouts which they soon hear from thence. They are full of fear because they are shut in—in no circumstances are they allowed out—and, as they thus cannot know what is happening among the men, their excitement takes on a particular tinge. They jump high in the air as though to jump out. The hysterical symptoms that de Léry notes in them are characteristic of a prevented mass flight. Their natural tendency would be to flee to the men, but since a heavy prohibition lies on this, they flee, as it were, on the same spot.

The sensations of de Léry himself are worth noticing. He feels the excitement of the women, but cannot really belong to their crowd, for he is both a stranger and a man. In the midst of it and yet separated from it, he inevitably fears that he may become its victim. It is apparent from another part of the report (not quoted here) that the particular contribution of the women is not unimportant. The sorcerers of the tribe, or Caraibs as de Léry calls them, strictly forbid the women to leave their house, but they command them to listen attentively to the men's singing. The assemblage of women can have a significant effect on the crowd of their men, even when they are much further apart. There are times when the women are called on to make a contribution to the success of warlike expeditions. Three instances of this follow, drawn respectively from Asia, America, and Africa, that is, from peoples between whom there was never any contact and who certainly could not influence each other. Among the Kafirs of the Hindu-kush, the women perform the war dance while the men are absent on a raid. In this way, they give the warriors strength and courage and keep them awake to prevent being surprised by a wily enemy.

Among the Jivaros in South America, it is customary for the women to assemble every night in one house and perform a special dance with rattles of snail shells around their waist and chanting conjurations. This war dance of the women is supposed to have a special power: it protects their fathers, husbands, and sons against the lances and bullets of the enemy; it lulls the enemy into security so that he will not apprehend the danger before it is too late; and lastly, it prevents him from taking revenge for the defeat inflicted upon him.

Mirary is the name given in Madagascar to an old dance of the women that could be performed only in the actual moment of fighting. When a battle was imminent, the women were informed by messengers. They then let down their hair and started the dance. In this way, they were in communion with the fighters. When the Germans were marching on Paris in 1914, the women in Tananarive danced the Mirary for the protection of the French soldiers. It seems to have worked despite the intervening distance.

Throughout the world, there are feasts where men and women dance in separate groups. But they are visible to and usually dance towards each other. It is unnecessary to describe them, for they are widely known, and I have intentionally limited myself to a few extreme cases where the degree of separation, distance, and excitement is particularly striking. It is certainly possible to speak of the double crowd as something deeply rooted in the lives of these people. The two crowds in these cases are favorably disposed towards each other. The excitement of the one side is supposed to further the well-being and success of the other. Men and women belong to the same people and are dependent on each other.

In the legends of Amazons, which are not confined to Greek antiquity, examples being found even among the natives of South America, the women have separated from the men for good and make war on them as a hostile people would. But before we examine war, the most violent expression of what seems the inescapably dangerous essence of double crowds, it is desirable to consider briefly the age-old antagonism between the living and the dead. Everything that happens in connection with the dying and the dead is colored by the image of the much larger number of beings on the other side that the dead man will eventually join. The loss weakens the living, and if it is a man in his prime, it is particularly painful for his people. They resist it as well as they can, but they know that their resistance is not much use. The crowd on the other side is larger and stronger than theirs, and the dying man is dragged over to it. All their attempts to prevent it are made in full awareness of this superiority. Everything that might irritate the spirits must be avoided, for they have power to harm the living. Some people believe that the crowd of the dead is the reservoir from which the souls of newborns are taken. It depends on them whether the woman has children or not. Sometimes the spirits come as clouds and bring rain; they can also withhold plants and animals that serve as food; and they can fetch new victims for themselves from among the living. The dead man, who was surrendered only after strong resistance, must be appeased, for he is now a member of that powerful host.

Dying is a fight between two enemies of unequal strength. The piercing cries and the wounds self-inflicted in sorrow and despair are perhaps intended to express this fight. The dead man must not believe that he was given up easily; he was fought for. It is a unique kind of fight, a fight that is always lost, but the living are in flight; they make a pretense of accepting battle only in the hope of detaching themselves from the enemy in a rear-guard action.

The fight is also intended as flattery of the dying man who will soon increase the enemy's force. They want him to be well-disposed towards them when he arrives there, or at least not hostile. If he is angry when he arrives among the dead, he may incite them to fresh assaults.

The essence of this fight between the living and the dead is that it is intermittent. Nothing may happen for a long time, but one cannot count on it; each new blow comes suddenly out of the dark. There is no declaration of war; after a single death, everything may be over, or it may go on for a long time as in plagues and epidemics. The living are always on the retreat. Nothing is ever really over.

The third type of double crowd is that which forms in war, and this is the one that concerns us most today. After the experiences of the last fifty years, one would give much to understand and to be able to dissolve it.

War means killing, and the enemy ranks are "thinned." It is killing wholesale; as many of the enemy as possible are cut down. The aim is to transform a dangerous crowd of live adversaries into a heap of dead. The victor is the one who kills the largest number.

The adversary in war is the growing crowd of one's neighbors. Their increase is frightening in itself, and the threat it contains is enough to release the aggressive drive of one's own corresponding crowd. During the war, each side seeks to obtain superiority of numbers at the crucial spot and to exploit the enemy's weakness in every possible way before he can increase his own numbers.

The detailed conduct of war exactly mirrors the nature of war as a whole. Each side wants to constitute the larger crowd of living fighters and it wants the opposing side to constitute the larger heap of dead. In this rivalry between growing crowds lies an essential, and it may even be the prime, cause of wars. As well as killing enemies, one can also make slaves of them, especially of the women and children; and these slaves will serve to increase one's own crowd. But the war is not a true war unless its first aim is a heap of enemy dead. All the only too familiar phrases in both modern and ancient languages describing the events of war point to precisely this fact. People speak of massacre, butchery, and carnage; rivers run red with blood. The enemy is cut down to the last man, and quarter is neither given nor taken. It is important to realize that the heap of the dead is also felt to be a unit. Some languages have a special word for it. The German word "Walstatt" for battlefield contains the old root "Wal," which means "those who are left dead on the field." The Old Norse "Valr" means "the corpses on the battlefield." Valhalla is nothing but "the dwelling of the fallen warriors." The word "wuol," meaning "defeat," is derived by ablaut from the Old High German "wal." The corresponding word "wol" in Anglo-Saxon means "plague, pestilence." All these words, whether they refer to those who are left on the field of battle, to defeat, or to plague and pestilence, have one thing in common: they contain the idea of a heap of dead. This conception is found everywhere and is by no means purely Germanic.

The prophet Jeremiah saw in a vision the whole earth as one field of rotting corpses: "And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth; they shall not be lamented, neither gathered nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground." The prophet Mohammed had a strong sense of the heap of his dead enemies. After the battle of Bedr, his first great victory over his enemies from Mecca, he gave orders that the enemy slain should be thrown into a pit. Only one of them was buried beneath earth and stones because his body had swelled so much that it was impossible to remove his armor, and thus he was left to lie where he had fallen.

"As the others were thrown in the pit, the apostle stood and said, 'O people of the pit! Have you found that what God threatened is true? For I have found that what my Lord promised me is true.' His companions said, 'Are you speaking to dead people?' He replied, 'They hear what I say to them.' Crowded together in the pit, and in safe keeping there, he had assembled those who had formerly refused to listen to his words. I know no more striking instance of the attribution of a residue of life and crowd-like character to the heap of enemy dead. They could no longer threaten, but they could be threatened. Anything could be perpetrated on them with impunity. Whether they felt it or not, the victor assumed that they did, in order to heighten his own triumph. They lay so close in the pit that none of them could move. If one of them awoke, he would find nothing but dead men round him, his own people would suffocate him; the world to which he returned would be a world of the dead, and the dead would be those who had been closest to him living.

Among the peoples of antiquity, the Egyptians were not reckoned truly warlike, the energy of their Old Kingdom being directed more to the building of Pyramids than to conquest. But some campaigns were undertaken even at this early period. One of them was described by Une, a high judge who had been appointed by his king Pepy as commander-in-chief against the Bedouin. His report, as inscribed in his tomb, runs as follows: "This host went happy and hacked to pieces the land of the Bedouin. This host went happy and destroyed the land of the Bedouin. This host went happy and overthrew its towers. This host went happy and cut down its figs and vines. This host went happy and threw fire into its villages. This host went happy and slaughtered its armies, many ten thousands. This host went happy and brought home prisoners, a large multitude." This powerful image of destruction culminates in the line announcing the slaughter of tens of thousands of enemies. In the New Kingdom, the Egyptians began, though they did not long continue, a planned policy of aggression. Rameses II undertook prolonged wars against the Hittites. A hymn in his praise runs as follows: "He treadeth down the 70 CROWDS AND POWER land of the Khatti and maketh it a heap of corpses like Sekhmet when she rageth after the pestilence." Already in myth, the lion-headed goddess Sekhmet has wrought terrible carnage among rebellious humans. She remains the goddess of war and slaughter, and the poet of this song of praise associates the image of the Hittite heap of dead with that of the victims of a plague—a conjunction already familiar to us.

In his famous report on the battle of Kadesh, which he fought against the Hittites, Rameses II tells how he was cut off from his own men and how, through superhuman strength and courage, he won the battle alone. His men "found that all peoples amongst whom I had forced my way were lying slaughtered in heaps in their blood, even all the best warriors of Khatti, and the children and brethren of their prince. I had caused the field of Kadesh to become white, and one knew not where to tread because of their multitude." The corpses were clothed in white, and it was their numbers which changed the color of the field. It is a most terrifying and graphic description of the result of a battle. But it is a result which only soldiers see. The battle may be fought abroad, and people at home want a share in the heap of the dead.

Merenptah, the son and successor of Rameses II, won a great battle against the Libyans. We hear how their whole camp, with all its treasures and all the relations of their prince, fell into the hands of the Egyptians and was first plundered and then burnt. The booty included 9,376 prisoners, but this was not enough; in order to prove the number of the dead to the people at home, the private parts of the fallen were cut off; or, if they were circumcised, the hands were taken instead. All this booty was loaded on to donkeys. Rameses III also fought against the Libyans; on this occasion, the trophies numbered 12,535. It is clear that these ghastly loads are simply contributions to the mound of enemy dead, which, in them, is made 'transportable and capable of demonstration to the whole people. Each of the fallen contributes part of his body to the heap, and—and this is important—all these parts are identical. Other peoples preferred heads. Among the Assyrians, a reward was offered for every head of an enemy; a soldier sought to procure as many as possible for himself. A relief from the time of King Assur-banipal shows the scribes in their large tents noting down the number of severed heads. Each soldier brings his heads, throws them on a common heap, gives his name and that of his detachment, and then goes away. The Assyrian kings had a passion for these mounds of heads. When with the army, they presided at the bringing in of the trophies and themselves distributed the rewards to the soldiers. When absent, they had the whole heap of heads brought to them; if that was impossible, they made do with those of the enemy leaders. Thus, the immediate and quite concrete goal of war is clear, and we need not search for a further illustration of it. Written history abounds in them; indeed, one forms the impression that they are its favorite subject matter, and that only by great and repeated efforts has it been made to turn its attention to humanity's other memories. If we consider both warring parties simultaneously, war presents a picture of two doubly interlocked crowds. An army, itself as large as possible, is bent on creating the largest possible heap of enemy dead. And exactly the same is true of the other side. Thus, every participant in the war belongs simultaneously to two crowds. From the point of view of his own people, he belongs to the crowd of living fighters; from that of the enemy, to the potential and desired crowd of dead.

In order to maintain a bellicose spirit, each side has to assert, over and over again, first how strong it is itself—that is, how many fighters it disposes of; and second, how weak the enemy is—that is, how many of them are already dead. From the earliest times, war reports have been characterized by these twofold statistics: on the one side, so many men on the move; on the other, so many dead. There is a strong tendency to exaggerate, particularly the number of enemy dead. None of those involved in a war like admitting that the number of living enemies is too great for them. Even if aware of it, they keep silent about it and try to redress the balance by skillful distribution of the fighting troops.

The self-sufficiency and mobility of army units is increased, and, as has been said before, everything possible is done to ensure superiority on the spot. Only after the war do people speak openly of the losses on their own side. The fact that wars can last so long, and may be carried on well after they have been lost, arises from the deep urge of the crowd to maintain itself in the acute stage; not to disintegrate; to remain a crowd. This feeling is sometimes so strong that people prefer to perish together with open eyes, rather than acknowledge defeat and thus experience the disintegration of their own crowd.

But how does a belligerent crowd form? What, from one moment to another, creates that uncanny coherence? What is it that suddenly moves men to risk their all? The phenomenon is so mysterious that it must be approached with a measure of caution. War is an astonishing business. People decide that they are threatened with physical destruction and proclaim the fact publicly to the whole world. They say "I can be killed," and secretly add "because I myself want to kill this or that man." The stress properly belongs on the second half of this sentence. It should run: "I want to kill this or that man, therefore I can be killed myself." But when it is a question of a war starting, of its eruption and the awakening of a bellicose spirit within the nation, the first version will be the only one openly admitted. Even if in fact the aggressor, each side will always attempt to prove that it is threatened. The threat consists in someone arrogating to himself the right to kill one. Every single person on one's own side stands under the same threat and is made equal by it, for it is directed against everybody. From a given moment, which is the same for everyone—the moment of the declaration of war—the same thing can and may happen to everyone. Life within a community is normally a protection against physical destruction, but now this has come very close, just because one belongs to a community. One and the same terrible threat has been pronounced against all counting themselves members of one nation. Singly, but simultaneously, a thousand people have been told "You shall die," and they unite in order to ward off this danger of death. Quickly they seek to attract all those who might be similarly threatened and, for the sake of their common defence, submit to a common direction of action. On both sides, those involved tisually come together very quickly, whether in physical actuality or in imagination and feeling. The outbreak of a war is primarily an eruption of two crowds. As soon as these crowds have formed, the supreme purpose of each is to preserve its existence through both belief and action. To abandon the crowd would be to abandon life itself. A belligerent crowd always acts as though everything outside it were death. The individual may have survived many wars but, with each new war, he surrenders himself afresh to the same illusion. Death, which in truth threatens every man all the time, must have been proclaimed as a collective sentence before people will oppose it actively. There are, as it were, declared times of death, times when it turns on a definite, arbitrarily selected group as a whole. It is "Death to the French" or "Death to the English". The enthusiasm with which men accept such declarations has its root in the individual's cowardice before death; no one likes facing it alone. It is easier in a duel, when two enemies, as it were, execute sentence on each other; and the death that thousands approach together is entirely different. The worst THE CROWD 23 that can happen to men in war is to perish together; and this spares them death as individuals, which is what they most fear. But they do not even believe that this worst will happen, for they see that there is a possibility of deflecting the common sentence passed on them and of turning it against others. The death-conductor here is the enemy, and all they must do is to forestall his doing the same thing. But they have to be quick; this business of killing does not admit of even a moment's hesitation. And the enemy is there, ready to their hand. It was he who first pronounced sentence, who first said "You shall die". What he intended for others recoils on him. It is always the enemy who started it. Even if he was not the first to speak out, he was certainly planning it; and if he was not actually planning it, he was thinking of it; and, if he was not thinking of it, he would have thought of it. The wish to see death is everywhere and one does not have to go deep into men to bring it to light.

The curious and unmistakable high-tension which characterizes all the processes of war has two causes: people want to forestall death, and they are acting as a crowd. Without the latter element there is no chance whatsoever of success in the first. As long as the war lasts they must remain a crowd, and the war really ends as soon as they cease to be one. War offers the crowd the hope of a definite duration of life, and this is a considerable factor in its popularity. It can be shown that the coherence and duration of wars in modern times is associated with the greatly increased size and density of the double crowds involved in them.

Crowd Crystals
Crown crystals are the small, rigid groups of men, strictly de-limited and of great constancy, which serve to precipitate crowds. Their structure is such that they can be comprehended and taken in at a glance. Their unity is more important than their size. Their réle must be familiar; people must know what they are there for. Doubt about their function would render them meaningless. They should preferably always appear the same and it should be impossible to confound one with another; a uniform or a definite sphere of operation serves to promote this. The crowd crystal is constant; it never changes its size. Its members are trained in both action and faith. They may be allotted different parts, as in an orchestra, but they must appear as a unit, and the first impression of anyone seeing or experiencing them should be that this is a unit which will never fall apart. Their life outside the crystal does not count. Even where the unit is a merely professional one, as with orchestral players, no one thinks of their private existence; they are the orchestra. In other cases they wear uniform, and it is only in uniform that one sees them together; out of it they are entirely different people. Soldiers and monks are the most important examples of this type. With them the uniform expresses the fact that members of a crystal live together. Even when they appear separately, people always think of the rigid unit to which they belong, the monastery or the regiment.

The clarity, isolation, and constancy of the crystal form an uncanny contrast with the excited flux of the surrounding crowd. The process of rapid, uncontrollable growth, and the threat of disintegration, which together give the crowd its peculiar restlessness, do not operate within the crystal. Even in the midst of the greatest excitement, the crystal stands out against it. Whatever the nature of the crowd it gives birth to, and however much it may appear to merge with it, it never completely loses the sense of its own identity and always recombines again after the disintegration of the crowd.

The closed crowd differs from the crystal not only by being larger, but because its sense of itself is more spontaneous and does not permit of any real allocation of functions. All it has in common with the crystal is defined limits and regular repetition. But the crystal is all limits; everyone belonging to it constitutes part of its boundary, whereas the closed crowd has its boundary imposed on it from outside, if only by the shape and size of the building where it meets. Within this boundary, where its members touch each other, it remains fluid, and sudden surprises and unexpected changes of behavior are therefore always possible. Enclosed though it is, it can always attain that degree of density and fervor which leads to an eruption.

The crowd crystal, on the other hand, is solid throughout; the nature of its activity is prescribed, and it remains precisely conscious of all its utterances and movements. Another astonishing thing about these crowd crystals is their historical permanence. It is true that new ones continually arise, but the old obstinately persist side by side with them. They may, for a time, withdraw into the background, lose something of their edge and cease to be indispensable; the crowds belonging to them may have died away or been completely suppressed. But, as harmless groups, without effect on the outside world, the crystals go on living on their own. Small groups of religious communities continue to exist in countries Fire is always the same, whether it is large or small, or started in different locations. The image of fire is like a scar, strongly marked, irremovable, and precise. Fire spreads and is contagious, insatiable, and ruthless. It can originate anywhere and is sudden, often with no known cause. Fire is multiple, with one Agni, manifoldly ablaze. It is destructive and can be fought and tamed, with an elemental enemy, water, in the form of rivers and cloudbursts. Their enmity is proverbial; the expression "fire and water" denotes the animosity of the most extreme and irreconcilable kind. In ancient pretigurations of the end of the world, either one or the other is victorious. The deluge ends all life by water; the universal conflagration destroys the world by fire. Sometimes they appear together in one and the same mythology, both therefore diminished. But, in this temporal existence, man has learned to dominate fire. Not only can he always ally himself with water in the fight against it, but he has also succeeded in dividing and storing it. He keeps it captive in hearths and ovens, and feeds it as he feeds an animal; he can starve it, or he can choke it.

This brings us to the last important characteristic of fire: it is treated as though it were alive. It lives restlessly, and it dies. It may be completely smothered in one place, but it will go on living in another.

The crowd, too, shares these traits: it is the same wherever it breaks out, spreads rapidly, is contagious and insatiable, can break out anywhere, and with great suddenness. It is multiple, destructive, and has an enemy. It dies, and is treated as though it were alive.

The likenesses between fire and the crowd have led to the close assimilation of their images; they enter into each other and can stand for each other. Fire is one of the most important and malleable of the crowd symbols which have always played a part in the history of mankind.

The dangerous traits of the crowd are often pointed out, and the most striking is the propensity to incendiarism. This propen- sity has its roots in the burning of forests. The forest, itself an age-old crowd symbol, is set on fire by men in order to create space for settlements. There is a clear prehistoric connection between forest and fire. Fields were situated in burnt-out clearings in forests, and whenever they needed to be renewed or enlarged, more forest had to be burnt.

Animals flee from the burning forest; mass fear is the natural and perpetual reaction of animals to large fires; and it was once man's reaction too. But man has taken possession of fire. He holds the fire-brand in his hand and need not fear it. His new power has overlaid his old fear, and the two of them have entered into a strange alliance. The crowd, which used to run from fire, now feels strongly attracted by it. As is well known, conflagrations of all kinds have a magical effect on men. Men are not satisfied with the hearths and ovens which each domiciliary group maintains privately for itself; they want a fire that is visible from afar, which they can all surround and where they can all be together. If the conflagration is large enough, a curious reversal of their old mass fear commands them to hurry to its site, and they feel there something of the glowing warmth which formerly united them. In periods of peace, they have to go without this experience for a long time, but one of the strongest instincts of the crowd, as soon as it has formed at all, is to create such a fire for itself and to use its attraction to further its own growth. The matchbox that modern man carries in his pocket is a small remnant of these ancient and deeply significant associations. It represents the serried tree trunks of a wood, all reduced to an agreeable uniformity, and each provided with a combustible head. It is possible to light several, or indeed all, of them together and thus create an artificial conflagration. One may feel tempted to do this, but it is not usually done, because the tiny size of the ensuing conflagration would deprive fire of all its ancient splendour.

But the attraction of fire may go even further than this. Not only do men rush to it and surround it, but there are old ceremonies by which they actually identify themselves with it. One of the finest examples of these is the famous fire-dance of the Navajo Indians. "The Navajos of North Mexico prepare a huge fire around which they dance all night in presenting eleven distinct acts between sunset and sunrise. As soon as the disc of the sun has disappeared, the performers dance wildly into the clearing, almost naked, bedaubed with paint, and allowing their long hair to flow freely as they whirl about. They carry dancing staffs with tufts of feathers at the ends, and with wild bounds, they approach the high flames. Those Indians dance with a clumsy constraint, half crouching, and creeping, in fact, the fire is so hot that the performers have to wriggle on the ground iv cider iv ger near enough 1 to set alight the feathers at the ends of their dancing sticks. A disc representing the sun is held aloft, and around this, the wild dancing continues; each time the symbol is lowered and raised, a new dance begins. Towards sunrise, the sacred ceremonies draw to a close. Men daubed with white come forward and light pieces of bark at the dying embers, then they spring again into a wild chase round the fire, throwing sparks, smoke, and flames all over their bodies. They actually leap among the embers, trusting to the white clay to prevent serious burns." They dance fire itself; they become fire; their movements are those of flames. What they hold in their hands and set alight appears as though it was they themselves who were burning. Finally, they throw THE CROWD 79 the sparks from the smouldering ashes up into the air, continuing until the rising sun takes over the fire from them, as they had taken it over from the sun at its setting. The fire here, then, is still a live crowd. Just as other Indians, dancing, become buffaloes, so these act fire. For later peoples, this living fire, into which the Navajos transform themselves, becomes a mere crowd symbol. Behind every recognized crowd symbol, one can find the concrete crowd which nourishes it; nor need one depend here on guesswork alone. The human urge to become fire, to re-activate this ancient symbol, is still alive in later and more complex cultures. Besieged cities which have abandoned all hope of relief often set fire to themselves. Kings in the last straits of despair burn themselves with their whole court. (Examples of this can be found among the old Mediterranean cultures as well as among the Indians and Chinese.) The Middle Ages, which believed in hell-fire, were satisfied with the burning of a single heretic instead of a whole audience. They, as it were, despatched representatives to hell, and saw to it that they really burned. An analysis of the significance which fire has acquired in different religions is of the greatest interest, but it would have little value unless treated at length and must therefore be reserved for another occasion.

It seems appropriate, however, to speak here of the significance of impulsive incendiarism in relation to the individual who commits it, an individual who is really isolated and outside the sphere of any religious or political faith. Krapelin describes the case of a lonely old woman who, starting as a small child, committed arson about 20 times in her life. Six times she was accused of it, and 24 years of her life were spent in penitentiaries. "If only it would burn" she thinks to herself; arson is a fixed idea, she feels driven to it as though by an invisible power, and particularly when she has matches in her pocket. She certainly likes watching fire, but she also likes confessing, and confessing very circumstantially. She must, early in her life, have experienced fire as a means of attracting people; the commotion around a fire was probably her first experience of a crowd, and it was easy later for fire to take the place of the crowd. Her self-accusation results from her feeling that everyone is watching her. She likes this feeling and, through it, transforms herself into the fire that people are watching. Thus she has a double relationship with arson. Isolated at an early age by her lamentable history, she has had, particularly during her endless prison terms, no opportunity of mingling with crowds and now she wants, first of all, to be part of the crowd staring at the fire—a fire which is reflected in all eyes and under whose powerful compulsion all eyes turn in the same direction. When the initial blaze is over and the crowd threatens to disperse and escape her, she keeps it alive by suddenly transforming herself into the fire. This she achieves very simply: she confesses that she caused it. The fuller and more detailed her story, the longer she will be stared at; the longer she herself will remain the fire. Cases of this kind are not as rare as one might think. Though not always so extreme, they provide irrefutable proof of the connection between fire and the crowd, even in isolated individuals.

The Sea

The sea is multiple, it moves, and it is dense and cohesive. Its multiplicity lies in its waves; they constitute it. They are innumerable; the seafarer is completely surrounded by them. The sameness of their movement does not preclude difference of size. They are never entirely still. The wind coming from outside them determines their motion; they beat in this or that direction in accordance with its command. The dense coherence of the waves is something which men in a crowd know well. It entails a yielding to others as though they were oneself, as though there were no strict division between oneself and them. The sea is a vast, all-encompassing entity, both in its size and changeable emotions. It serves as a model for the crowd, which aims to grow and become as large as the sea. The ocean, as a final expression of the solemn dignity of the sea, is universal, reaching everywhere and touching all lands. The sea's persistence and constancy are impressive, as it never sleeps and is always heard. It is changeable in its emotions, but always present, lacking the mystery and suddenness of fire. The life it teems with and the multitudes of plants and animals hidden within it enhance its sublimity. The sea has no interior frontiers and is not divided into peoples and territories, with a single language that is the same everywhere. It is too comprehensive to correspond exactly to any of the crowds we know, but it is an image of stilled humanity; all life flows into it and it contains all life. Rain, all over the world and particularly where it is rare, is felt as a unit before it falls. As a cloud, it approaches and covers the sky; the air grows dark before it rains, and everything is shrouded in greyness. During this moment when it is imminent, rain is more strongly felt as a unit than when it is actually falling, for it is often ardently longed for, and may indeed be literally vital. Even when prayed for, however, it does not always appear; magic is called in aid, and there are numerous and varied methods of luring it.

Rain falls in drops. There are many of them, and the direction of their movement is particularly noticeable. All languages speak of rain falling. It is seen as parallel streaks, and the number of the falling drops emphasizes the uniformity of their direction. There is no movement that makes more impression on man than that of falling; compared with it, all others seem secondary and derived. From a very early age, falling is what one fears most; it is the first thing in life which one is armed against. Children learn to beware of it, and after a certain age, it becomes ridiculous or dangerous.

In contrast to man, rain is what should fall, and there is nothing which falls so often or in such multiplicity. It is possible that the heaviness and hardness of the fall are somewhat diminished by the great number of the falling drops. These can be heard hitting the ground, and it is a pleasant sound; they can be felt on the skin, and it is a pleasant sensation. Three senses at least—sight, hearing, and touch—participate in the experience of rain, and to all these senses, it is something multiple. It is easy to protect oneself against rain. Only rarely is it a serious menace; usually, it is something benevolent and dense, which wraps men round. There is a sameness in the impact of rain-drops, and the parallel lines of their fall and the uniformity, both of their sound and of their wetness on the skin, all serve to accentuate this sameness.

The density of rain is variable. Rain can be heavy or light, and the number of drops is subject to large fluctuations. One can by no means count on its continuous increase; on the contrary, one knows that it will end, and its drops ooze away in the earth without trace. In so far as rain has become a crowd symbol, it does not stand, as fire does, for the phase of raging and irresistible increase. Nor is it ever as constant as the sea, and only rarely as inexhaustible. Rain is the crowd in the moment of discharge, and stands also for its disintegration. The clouds whence it comes dissolve into rain; the drops fall because they can keep together no longer, and it is not clear whether, or when, they can coalesce again.

Rivers

The most striking thing about a river is its direction. It moves between unmoving banks, and these render its flux continuously apparent. The unresting and uninterrupted flow of its waters, the definiteness of its main direction—even if this changes in detail—the determination with which it makes towards the sea, its absorption of other, smaller streams—all this has an undeniably crowd-like character. And thus the river has become a symbol for the crowd, though not so much for the crowd in general as for some of its specific forms. The width of a river is limited; it cannot grow indefinitely or unexpectedly, and hence its use as a crowd symbol is always in some degree provisional only. It stands for processions; the people watching from the pavements are like trees on river-banks, the solid bordering the flowing. Demonstrations in large cities have a similar river-like character: tributaries come from various districts to feed the main stream. Rivers are especially a symbol for the time when the crowd is forming, the time before it has attained what it will attain. Rivers lack the contagiousness of fire and the universality of the sea. But, in place of these, they have an impetus which seems inexhaustible and which, because there is never a time when it is not being fed, is present from the beginning. Hence the fact that their origins are sometimes taken more seriously than their goal. A river is the crowd in its vanity, the crowd exhibiting itself. This being seen is as important as the element of direction. There is no river without banks; its bordering verdure is like a lane of people. All river-like formations, such as processions and demonstrations, want to be seen. They show as much as possible of their surface, extending as far as they can and offering themselves to the largest possible number of spectators. They want to be admired or feared. They have a provisional goal, but it is not really important. The important thing is the stretch which separates them from it, the length of street they have to traverse. The density among their participants need not be very high. It is higher among the spectators, and between spectators and participants a special kind of relationship develops, resembling the love-play of two snake-like creatures, the one slowly and tenderly drawing its length through the embrace of the other. Growth, of course, is determined at source and takes place only through precisely defined tributaries. In addition to water, a river also carries along with it many other different things, and its appearance is much more effectively changed by these than the appearance of the sea is changed by marine freights, which disappear on the enormous expanse of water. Summing up, we may conclude that the river is only a limited crowd symbol and differs in this respect from fire, sea, forest or corn. It is the symbol of a movement which is still under control, before the eruption and the discharge; it contains the threat of these rather than their actuality. It is the symbol of the slow crowd.

Forest
The forest is higher than man. It may be enclosed and overgrown with all kinds of scrub; it may be hard to penetrate, and still harder to traverse, but its real density, that which makes it a forest, is its foliage; and this is overhead. It is the foliage of single trees linked together which forms a continuous roof; it is the foliage which shuts out the light and throws a universal shadow. Man stands upright like a tree and he inserts himself amongst the other trees. But they are taller than he is and he has to look up at them. No other natural phenomenon of his surroundings is invariably above him and, at the same time, so near and so multiple in its formation as the concourse of trees. For clouds pass, rain dries up, and the stars are distant. Of all the multiple phenomena affecting him from above, none is as perpetually near him as the forest. Tree-tops are attainable; trees can be climbed and their fruit picked and brought down; people have lived in them. The direction in which a forest draws men's eyes is that of its own growth. A forest grows steadily upwards; the equality of its trees is approximate, consisting, in fact, only in uniformity of direction. Once in the forest, man feels sheltered. He is not at its point of greatest density. The top, where it goes on growing. On the contrary, the density is overhead and protects him. Thus the forest is the first image of awe. It compels men to look upwards, grateful for the protection above. Looking up at trees becomes looking up in general. The forest is a preparation for the feeling of being in church, the standing before God among pillars and columns. Its most harmonious and therefore most perfect expression is the vault of a dome, the trunks of many trees intertwined in a supreme and indivisible unity.

Another, and no less important, aspect of the forest is its multiple immovability. Every single trunk is rooted in the ground and no menace from outside can move it. Its resistance is absolute; it does not give an inch. It can be felled, but not shifted. And thus the forest has become the symbol of the army, an army which has taken up a position, which does not flee in any circumstances, and which allows itself to be cut down to the last man before it gives a foot of ground.

Corn, in more than one way, is a diminished and subjugated forest. It grows where forest stood before, and it never grows as high. It is man's work and entirely in his power. He sows it and reaps it and, by ancient rites, contributes to its growth. It is as pliant as grass and subject to the influence of every wind. The blades move together in accordance with the wind; the whole field bows down simultaneously. In storms it is struck down completely and remains lying thus for long periods. But it has a mysterious ability to straighten itself, and so long as it has not been too badly maltreated, will suddenly stand there again, the whole field of it.

The full ears are like heavy heads; they nod to one or turn away as the wind blows. Corn is usually shorter than man, but, even when it has grown above his head, he remains its master. It is cut all together, as it grew and was sown together. Even the grasses which man does not use remain together throughout their existence. But how much more striking is the sameness of the fate of blades of corn, sown, harvested, threshed and stored together!

As long as corn is growing, it remains rooted on the same spot; no one blade can get away from the other blades, and anything which happens to one happens to all. The blades vary in size, but no more than men; a cornfield as a whole generally appears uniform in height. Its rhythm when excited by the wind is that of a simple dance. Men readily see their own equality before death in the image of corn.

But blades of corn are cut simultaneously and this brings a quite specific death to mind: a common death in battle, whole rows of men mown down together. The cornfield is a battlefield. The pliancy of corn becomes submissiveness. It is like an assemblage of loyal subjects, incapable of conceiving the idea of resistance. Tremulously obedient they stand there, responsive to every command. When the enemy comes they are mercilessly trampled down. The heaps of seed from which corn originates are as significant as the heaps of grain it finally becomes. Whether it bears seven or one hundredfold, the latter are many times larger than the former. By growing and standing together it increases; and this increase is its blessing. The strength of wind varies, and with it, its voice. It can whine or howl, and, loud or soft, there are few sounds of which it is not capable. Thus, it affects men as something living, long after other natural phenomena have become inanimate. Apart from its voice, the most striking thing about wind is its direction; in order to name it, it is essential to know which quarter it comes from. Since man is entirely surrounded by air, the buffettings he receives from wind are felt as something peculiarly physical. One feels entirely contained in wind, it gathers everything to itself, and in a storm, everything that it seizes is driven along together. Wind is invisible, but the movement it imparts to clouds and waves, leaves and grasses, makes its multiplicity apparent.

In the hymns of the Vedas, the storm gods or Maruts, always appear in the plural. "Their numbers are stated as thrice seven or thrice sixty. . . They are brothers of equal age, having the same birthplace and the same abode. . . . The noise made by the Maruts is thunder and the roaring of winds. They cause the mountains to quake, they shatter trees and, like wild elephants, devour the forests. They are often called singers: the singing of the wind. They are mighty, fierce, terrible like lions, but also playful like children or calves." The age-old identification of wind and breath is proof of how concentrated wind is felt to be; it has the density of breath. Its invisibility, on the other hand, enables it to stand for invisible crowds, and thus for spirits. They come roaring like a storm, a wild host; or they are spirits in flight, as in the vision of the Eskimo Shaman. Flags are wind made visible. They are like bits cut from clouds, nearer and more varied in colour, tethered and given permanent shape. In their suv veiuent they are truly arresting. Nations use them to mark the air above them as their own, as though the wind could be partitioned.

Sand has various qualities relevant to this discussion, but two of these are especially important. The first is the smallness and sameness of its parts. This is one quality, not two, for grains of sand are felt to be the same only because they are so small. The second is the endlessness of sand. It is boundless; there is always more of it than the eye can take in. Where it appears in small heaps it is disregarded. It is only really striking when the number of grains is infinite, as on the sea-shore or in the desert.

Sand is continually shifting, and it is because of this that, as a crowd symbol, it stands midway between the fluid and the solid symbols. It forms waves like the sea and rises in clouds; dust is refined sand. Also important is the fact that sand is a threat, confronting man as something hostile and aggressive. The monotony, vastness and lifelessness of the desert, consisting as it does of innumerable, homogeneous particles, opposes to man a power which is almost invincible. Sand suffocates man as the sea does, but more maliciously because more slowly. Man's relationship to the sand of the desert anticipates the struggle he wages with growing power against huge swarms of tiny enemies. Locusts, like sand, wither vegetation, and man, as cultivator, fears them as he fears sand, for they leave desert behind them. It is puzzling that sand should ever have become a symbol of progeny. The fact that it has—and the Bible provides many instances of it—proves the intensity of man's desire for immense numbers of descendants. The stress here is not primarily on quality. It is true that people wish for a troop of strong and upright sons, but, for the remoter future, the sum of the life of generations, they want more than this. They want their posterity to be a crowd, and the largest, most boundless and least countable crowd they know is that of sand. How little the individual quality of descendants matters can be seen from the similar symbol of the Chinese, who equate progeny with a swarm of locusts, extolling their numbers and cohesion as a model for man's posterity. Another symbol which the Bible uses for posterity is the stars. Here, too, the essential is their innumerability. There is no mention of the brightness of single, special stars. What is important is the fact that they remain; that they never pass away, but are always there.

The Heap
Every heap which has human significance has been collected. The unity of a heap of fruit or grain is the result of activity. Many hands were occupied with the picking or harvesting. These are tied to a definite season and are of such decisive importance that the oldest division of the year is derived from them. Men celebrate in feasts their joy over the various heaps they have managed to collect. They exhibit them with pride and often their feasts are arranged round them. The things which have been collected are all of the same kind, one species of fruit or grain. They are piled as closely as possible and the more there is of them and the denser the pile, the better. It is close at hand and does not have to be fetched from far off. The heap must be large enough to last all of them for any length of time. As soon as they have got used to the gathering of things for these heaps, people go on and on making them larger and larger. They love to remember the years which brought the richest harvest and, as soon as annals are kept, these are recorded in them as the years of greatest happiness. From year to year and place to place harvests vie with each other. Whether they belong to the community or to individuals, the heaps of produce stand as exemplars to be guarded and cherished. It is true that they are then used up, sometimes quickly on special occasions, at other times slowly according to need. The time of their existence is limited. The idea of decrease is contained in them from the beginning, and their re-assembly is subject to the rhythm of the seasons. All harvesting is a rhythmic heaping, and feasts are celebrated in accordance with this rhythm.

Stone Heaps
But there are also heaps of an entirely different kind, which are not edible. Such heaps are of stone and are erected precisely because it is difficult to take them to pieces. They are meant to endure for a long time, for a kind of eternity, and should never decrease but remain always as they are. They do not make their way into people's bellies, nor are they always lived in. In their oldest form, each separate stone stands for the man who has contributed it to the heap. Later, the size and weight of the individual stone increase, and each can only be mastered by a number of men working together. Such monuments may represent different things, but each contains the concentrated effort of innumerable difficult journeys. Sometimes it is a mystery how they were erected at all, and the less they can be explained, and the more distant the origin of the stone, the greater the imagined number of their builders and the stronger the impression they make on later generations. They represent the rhythmic exertion of many men, of which nothing remains but these indestructible monuments. Treasure, like all other heaps, is something which has been collected. But, in contrast to fruit and grain, it consists of uxlits which are inedible and imperishable. What is essential is that each of these units should have a special value; it is only confidence in their retaining it which tempts men to amass treasure. A hoard of treasure is a heap which should be left to grow undisturbed. The man it belongs to may be powerful, but there are always others equally powerful to rob him. The prestige treasure gives its owner carries danger with it; fights and wars have arisen over treasure and many a man would have lived longer if his treasure had been smaller. Thus it is often of necessity kept secret. The peculiarity of treasure lies in the tension between the splendour it should radiate and the secrecy which is its protection. The lust of counting, of seeing numbers mount up, derives largely from treasure and is most comprehensible there. None of the other enumerations whose desired result is the highest possible figure—those of cattle, or of men, for example—share the same concentration of countable units. The image of the owner secretly counting his treasure is deeply engraved in the minds of men; and no less imperishable is their hope of discovering treasure for themselves, treasure which has been so well hidden that it lies forgotten in its hiding-place and no longer belongs to anyone. Disciplined armies have been corroded and overcome by their greed for treasure, and many victories turned to defeat. The transformation, even before battle, of an army into a band of treasure-seekers is described by Plutarch in his life of Pompey. “As soon as Pompey landed his fleet near Carthage, 7,000 of the enemy deserted and came over to him. His own army consisted of six legions at full strength. Here, they say, a rather absurd thing happened to him. It seems that some of his soldiers came across some hidden treasure and got a considerable amount of money. The story of this got abroad and all the rest of the army fancied that the place must be full of money which had been buried by the Carthaginians at some time of calamity. And so, for many days, Pompey could do nothing at all with his soldiers who were all busy looking for treasure. He merely went about laughing at the sight of so many thousands of men together digging up the ground and turning it over, until in the end they got tired of it and asked him to lead them wherever he liked; they had already, they said, suffered enough for their foolishness.” But apart from the heaps or hoards which are irresistible because they are hidden, there are others which are collected quite openly, as a kind of voluntary tax, and in the understanding that they will fall into the hands of one person, or of a few. To this group belong all kinds of lottery; they are quick accumulations of treasure. It is known that, immediately after the announcement of the result, they will be handed over to the fortunate winners. The smaller the number of these, the larger the treasure and the greater, therefore, its attraction. The greed which unites people on such occasions presupposes an absolute confidence in the units composing the treasure. It is difficult to exaggerate the strength of this confidence. A man identifies himself with the unit of his money; doubt cast on it offends him and, if it is shattered, his self-confidence is shaken. He feels slighted and humiliated by the lowering of the value of his monetary unit and, if this process is accelerated and inflation occurs, it is men who are depreciated until they find themselves in formations that can only be equated with flight-crowds. The more people lose, the more united are they in their fate. What appears as panic in the few who are fortunate enough to be able to save something for themselves, turns into mass-flight for all those others who have become equals by being deprived of their money. I shall describe in a later chapter the consequences of this phenomenon which, particularly in our own time, have been of incalculable general importance.

The Pack: Kinds of Pack
Crown crystats and crowds, in the modern sense of the word, both derive from an older unit in which they are still one. This unit is the pack. Among the small hordes which roam about as bands of ten or twenty men, it is the universal expression of communal excitement. Characteristic of the pack is the fact that it cannot grow. It is surrounded by emptiness, and there are literally no additional people who could join it. It consists of a group of men in a state of excitement whose fiercest wish is to be more. In whatever they undertake together, whether hunting or fighting, they would fare better if there were more of them. For a group consisting of so few, every single man who joined it would be a distinct, substantial, and indispensable addition. The strength he brought with him might be a tenth or twentieth part of their total strength. The position he occupied would be clear to all; he would really count in the economy of the group, in a way that scarcely any of us count today.

In the pack, which, from time to time, forms out of the group, and which most strongly expresses its feeling of unity, the individual can never lose himself as completely as modern man can in any crowd today. In the changing constellation of the pack, in its dances and "expeditions," he will again and again find himself at its edge. He may be in the centre, and then, immediately afterwards, at the edge again; at the edge and then back in the centre. When the pack forms a ring round the fire, each man will have neighbors to right and left, but no one behind him; his back is naked and exposed to the wilderness. Density within the pack is always something of an illusion. Men may press closely together and enact a multitude in traditional rhythmic movements, but they are not a multitude; they are a few, and have to make up in intensity what they lack in actual numbers.

Of the four essential attributes of the crowd which we have come to know, two are only fictitious as far as the pack is concerned, though these are the two which are most strenuously desired and enacted. Hence the other two must be all the more strongly present in actuality. Growth and density are only acted; equality and direction really exist. The first thing which strikes one about the pack is its unswerving direction; equality is expressed in the fact that all are obsessed by the same goal, the sight of an animal perhaps, which they want to kill.

The pack is limited in more ways than one. Not only do relatively few people belong to it, but these few know one another well. They have always lived together, they meet daily and, in many joint enterprises, have learned to value each other accurately. The pack can expect no addition; people who live in such conditions are too few, and too widely scattered.

But in one respect, it is superior to the crowd with its capacity for indefinite growth. Since it consists entirely of people who know each other well, it can always form again, even if scattered by adverse circumstances. It can count on continuing; its existence is guaranteed as long as its members are alive. It will develop rites and ceremonies, and those participating in them can be counted on to appear. They know where they belong and are not tempted to stray. Temptations to do so are indeed so few that the habit of giving way to them has no chance of developing. But, in so far as packs do grow, growth takes place in discrete quanta, and by mutual agreement of the participants. A pack formed from a second group may come across the first pack and, unless they fight, they may join forces for temporary purposes. But the separate consciousness of the two quanta will always be preserved. It may disappear temporarily in the heat of joint action, but not for long. It will in any case come to the fore again during the distribution of honours or other ceremonies. The feel of the pack is always stronger than the individual’s sense of what he himself is apart from it. At a certain level of communal life, the quantum-feeling of the pack is decisive, and unshakeable. I am here deliberately opposing all the usual concepts of tribe, sib, clan, with a different kind of unit, the unit of the pack. Those well-known sociological concepts, important as they are, all stand for something static. The pack, in contrast, is a unit of action, and its manifestations are concrete. To explore the origins of the behaviour of crowds, we have to start from the pack. It is their oldest and most limited form, and it existed long before crowds in the modern sense were known. It appears in various shapes, all of them easy to grasp, and, over tens of thousands of years, its active force has been such that there are traces of it everywhere, and even in our entirely different world, formations still exist which derive directly from it. From earliest times, the pack has had four different forms, or functions. They all have something fleeting about them, and each changes easily into another, but it is important to determine first of all the respects in which they differ. The truest and most natural pack is that from which our word derives, the hunting pack; and this forms wherever the object of the pack is an animal too strong and too dangerous to be captured by one man alone. It also forms whenever there is a prospect of a mass of game, so that as little as possible of it shall be lost. If the slaughtered animal is very large, a whale or an elephant, for example, its size means that it can only be brought in and divided up by numbers of men working together, even if it was originally struck down by one or two individuals. Thus, the hunting pack enters the stage of distribution. Distribution need not always be preceded by hunting, but the two stages, or states, are closely connected and should be examined together. The object of both is the prey; and the prey alone, its behaviour and nature, whether alive or dead, determines the behaviour of the pack which forms with it as object. The second type of pack is the war pack, and this has much in common with the hunting pack and is, indeed, connected with it by many transitional states. It postulates a second pack of men, and is always directed against what it feels to be one, even where this has not yet had time to form. In earlier times, its object was often a single life, one man on whom it had to take revenge. In the certainty with which it knows its victim, it comes particularly close to the hunting pack. The third type is the lamenting pack. This forms when a member of a group is torn from it by death. The group is small and feels every loss as irreplaceable, and unites for the occasion into a pack. It may be primarily concerned with keeping back the dying man, or with snatching from him, before he disappears completely, as much of his life as it can incorporate into itself; or it may want to propitiate his soul so that it does not become an enemy to the living. In any case, action of some kind is felt to be necessary, and there are no human beings anywhere who forgo it entirely.

Fourthly, I shall summarise a variety of phenomena which, in spite of all their diversity, have one thing in common: the intent to increase. Increase packs are formed so that the group itself, or the living beings, whether plants or animals, with which it is associated, should become more. They manifest themselves in dances to which a definite mythical significance is attributed. Like the other packs, they are found everywhere where there are men living together; and what they express is always the group's dissatisfaction with its numbers. One of the essential attributes of the modern crowd, namely its urge to grow, thus appears very early, in packs which are not themselves capable of growth. There are rites and ceremonies which are intended to compel growth and, whatever one may think of their effectiveness, the fact remains that, in the course of time, they have resulted in the formation of large crowds.

A detailed examination of the four different types of pack leads to surprising conclusions. All four share a tendency to change into one another, and there is nothing which has greater consequences than this transmutation of packs. The instability of the far larger crowd is already to be found in these small and seemingly more solid formations. Their mutations often give rise to peculiar religious phenomena. I shall show how hunting packs change into lamenting packs, and how special myths and cults have formed around this process. In such cases, the mourners want it forgotten that they were the hunters. The victim they bewail serves to purge them from the blood-guilt of the hunt.

The choice of the term "pack" for this older and more limited kind of crowd is intended to remind us that it owes its origin among men to the example of animals, the pack of animals hunting together. Wolves, which man knew well and from whom many of the dogs he uses derive, had impressed him very early. Their occurrence as mythical animals among so many peoples, the conception of a were-wolf, the stories of men who, disguised as wolves, assailed and dismembered other men, the legends of children brought up as wolves—all these things and many others prove how close the wolf was to man. A pack of hounds, trained to hunt together, is a living remnant of this old association. Men have learnt from wolves. There are dances in which they, as it were, practise being wolves. Other animals, of course, have also contributed to the development of similar abilities among hunting peoples. I use the word "pack" for men as well as for animals, because it best expresses the joint and swift movement involved, and the concreteness of the goal in view. The pack wants its prey; it wants its blood and its death. 

In order to attain what it is after, it must have speed, cunning and endurance, and must not allow itself to be deflected. It urges itself on with its joint clamour, and the importance of this noise, in which the voices of all the individual creatures unite, should not be underrated. It can swell and diminish, but it is persistent; it contains the attack. The prey, when it is finally captured and killed, is eaten by the whole pack together. Every member is customarily allowed a share; even among animals the rudiments of a distribution pack can be found. I use the same word "pack" for the three other basic formations I have mentioned. It is true that it would be difficult to find animal models for these, but I do not know of any better word to express the concreteness, directness and intensity of the processes involved.

The Hunting Pack

The hunting pack moves with all its force towards a living object which it wants to kill in order subsequently to incorporate it. Its end is always a kill; overtaking and surrounding are the means to this end. It pursues a single, large animal, or many smaller animals fleeing together. The prey is always in movement and has to be chased. What matters is the speed of the pack; it should be able to run faster than the quarry in order to tire it out. If it is a number of animals who are being chased, and if the pack succeeds in surrounding them, then their mass flight turns into a panic; each of the hunted animals will try to escape on its own from the circle of its enemies. The hunt extends over a large and changing area. If the quarry is a single animal, the pack will continue to exist as long as this fights for its life. The excitement mounts during the hunt; the shouts the hunters exchange increase their thirst for blood. The concentration on one continually moving object which disappears from sight and suddenly reappears, which is often lost and must be sought for again, which is never released from the hunters' deadly intent or from its own state of mortal fear—this concentration is shared by all the hunters together. Each of them has the same object in view and is closing in on it. The gradually diminishing distance between the pack and its quarry diminishes for each of them. The hunt has a joint and deadly pulse, which goes on beating for a long time and over changing ground, becoming more and more violent as it nears the animal. Once this is within reach and can be hit, each of the hunters has a chance of killing it, and each tries to do so. The spears and arrows of all the pursuers are concentrated on one creature; they are prolongations of the rapacious looks directed towards it during the hunt. For every process of this kind has its natural end. Once its goal has been reached, the pack undergoes a sudden change, as sharp and clear-cut as its goal had been. Its fury abates the moment the kill has taken place. Everyone suddenly stands still around the outstretched victim, From among those present a ring forms, consisting of all to whom a share of the game is due. They could fall on it with their teeth, like wolves who devour their prey alive, but men postpone this act of incorporation to a later moment. The distribution is carried out peacefully and according to definite rules. Whether the kill consists of a single large animal or of several smaller ones, it must, if it was a pack which hunted it down, be distributed among all the members of that pack. And this process of distribution is exactly the opposite of the process by which the pack was formed. Each man now wants something for himself, and wants as much as possible. If distribution were not precisely regulated and governed by something resembling law, with experienced men to watch over its execution, it would inevitably end in bloodshed. The law of distribution is the oldest law.

There are two basically different versions of this law. According to one, distribution is limited to the actual hunters; according to the other, women and men who had nothing to do with the hunt can also participate. The person in charge of the distribution, who sees that it is carried out in an orderly manner, originally derived no profit from the office. He may even, as is the case among some Eskimo whale-hunters, renounce his share for the sake of honour. The feeling of the common ownership of prey can be carried to great lengths. Among the Korjaks in Siberia, the ideal hunter invites everyone to partake of his kill and is himself satisfied with what is left over. The law of distribution is complex and variable. The portion of honour is not always allotted to the man who dealt the fatal blow. Sometimes the right to it belongs to the man who was the first to sight the game. But even those who were only distant witnesses of the kill may have a claim to part of the prey. When this is the case, spectators are counted as accomplices of the deed; they share the responsibility for it and partake of its fruits.

I mention this extreme and not very common instance in order to demonstrate the strength of the feeling of unity which radiates from the hunting pack.

The War Pack

The essential difference between the hunting pack and the war pack lies in the fact that the latter is only one half of a formation. As long as it is simply a question of an excited group in pursuit of a single man whom it wants to punish, we are dealing with a formation resembling a hunting pack. But if the hunted man belongs to a second group which does not want to abandon him, it rapidly becomes a case of pack against pack. The enemies do not differ very much from each other. They are all human beings, males, and warriors. In the original form of warfare they are so much alike that it is difficult to distinguish one from the other. Their method of attack and their weapons are more or less similar. They both utter wild and threatening shouts, and their reciprocal intentions are the same.

The hunting pack, in contrast, is one-sided. The animals which are being pursued do not try to surround or to hunt men; they are in flight and, if they fight back, this only happens during the moment of killing. For the most part they are no longer in a state to defend themselves against man. The factor determining the shape of the war pack is that there are two packs, both of them out to do exactly the same thing to each other. The duplication of the pack is unquestioned, and the cleavage between the two remains absolute so long as a state of war exists. To find out what it is they really intend to do to each other, it is sufficient to read the following report. The story of the South American tribe, the Taulipang, and their expedition against their enemies, the Pishauko, is recounted in a captivating narrative. The account, taken down word for word from a Taulipang man, provides an intimate and unparalleled perspective on the war. The narrator's enthusiasm for the expedition is evident, as he describes the events from his own side, in a raw and truthful manner.

The story begins with the friendship between the Taulipang and the Pishauko, which later turned into a quarrel over women. The Pishauko started killing individual Taulipang members, eventually seeking to eliminate the entire tribe. In response, the Taulipang war-chief, Manikuza, called his men together, with three leaders: Manikuza, the head-chief, and two sub-chiefs, one of whom was a small, stout, but very brave man; the other was his brother.

Manikuza prepared a fermented mass of Kashiri and had six canoes fitted up. The Pishauko lived in the mountains, and the Taulipang traveled to their settlement, bringing two women who were to set fire to the houses. They ate nothing but small fish, consuming no pepper, no bigger fish, or game, until the war was over. They also took paint and white clay with them for painting their bodies.

Manikuza sent five men to the Pishauko's house to gather information, learning that all Pishauko were present. The spies reported this to the chief, and the old man and the three chiefs blew on the fermented mass of Kashiri, the paint, and the white clay. The old men had bows and arrows with iron heads, while the others had guns and shot. They painted themselves with red and white stripes, and the women did the same.

Manikuza ordered water to be poured into the mass of Kashiri, and the spies informed him of the number of people in the houses. The Pishauko outnumbered the Taulipang, who were only fifteen men, including the one Arekuna. The warriors drank kashiri to gain courage, and Manikuza instructed them to shoot in succession, targeting the remaining standing men. They advanced in three groups, with the women behind them carrying the gourds full of drink. They arrived at the edge of the savanna. Manikuza said, "What shall we do now? They are very many. Perhaps it is best we turn back and fetch more people." But the Arekuna said, "No! Forward! When I burst into many people I find THE PACK Ior nobody to kill!" (meaning: All these many people are too few for my club since I kill very fast.) Manikuza replied, "Forward! Forward! Forward!" He urged them all on. They came near the house. It was night. A sorcerer was in the house, who was just blowing on a sick man. He said, "There are people coming!" and thus warned the inhabitants of the house. The master of the house, the chief of the Pishauko, said, "Let them come! I know who it is! It is Manikuza! But he won't get back from here!" The sorcerer continued to warn them, saying, "The people have arrived!" The chief said, "It is Manikuza! He won't get back! He will end his life here!"

Manikuza cut through the liana which bound the palisade together. The two women broke in and set fire to the house, one at the entrance, the other at the exit. There were a great many people in the house. Then both retired outside the stockade. The fire seized the house. An old man climbed up to extinguish the fire. Many people came out of the house, they shot a lot with their guns, but without aiming, for they saw nobody; only to frighten the enemies. The old chief of the Taulipang wanted to shoot a Pishauko with an arrow, but he missed him. The Pishauko was in his earth-hole. As the old man was fitting his second arrow, the Pishauko shot him down with his gun. Manikuza saw that his father was dead. Then the warriors did much shooting. They had surrounded the whole house and the Pishauko had no way out by which to flee.

A Taulipang warrior named Ewama forced his way in. Behind him came one of the sub-chiefs; behind him his brother; behind him Manikuza, the war-chief; behind him the Arekuna. The others remained outside to kill any Pishauko who wanted to escape. The other five burst in among their enemies and struck them down with their clubs. The Pishauko shot at them, but they hit no one. Manikuza killed the chief of the Pishauko. The sub-chief killed the sub-chief of the Pishauko. His brother and the Arekuna killed very fast, and many. Only two maidens fled, they still live on the upper reaches of the river, married to Taulipang. All the others were killed. Then they fired the house. The children wept. All the children were thrown into the fire.

Among the dead, there was a Pishauko who was still alive. He had smeared himself all over with blood and lay down among the dead, to make the enemies believe that he was dead. The Taulipang seized the fallen Pishauko one after the other and cut them right in two with a forest-knife. They found the man who was still alive, and seized and killed him. Then they took the fallen chief of the Pishauko, bound him with outstretched arms to a tree, and shot at him with the rest of their ammunition until he fell to pieces. Then they seized a dead woman. Manikuza pulled her genitals apart with his fingers and said to Ewama, "Look, here, here is something good for you to enter!"

The remaining Pishauko who were still in the three other smaller houses fled and scattered in the mountains of the region. There they still live today, deadly enemies of the other tribes and secret murderers, pursuing especially the Taulipang.

The Taulipang buried their old chief on the spot. Apart from him, they had only two men slightly wounded with shot in the belly. Then they returned home shouting "Hei-hei-hei-hei-hei!" The quarrel starts over women, and a few single men are killed. From this moment on, an unshakeable conviction reigns that the enemy wants to exterminate the whole tribe of the Taulipang. The chief, who knows his people well, now calls them together. There are not many of them, only sixteen counting the man from the neighbouring tribe, and they all know what they can expect of one another in a fight.

They keep a strict fast, being allowed to feed only on miserable small fish. A strong fermented drink has been prepared and they drink it before the battle in order to "make themselves brave". They make a kind of uniform with paint "so that the warriors should be able to recognise each other". Everything regarded as connected with war, and particularly the weapons, are "blown on", and so endowed with magic power, and blessed.

As soon as they arrive in the vicinity of the hostile settlement, spies are sent out to discover whether all of the enemy are there. They are, and it is essential that they should be, for they are all to be killed at the same time. It is a large house with a great many people in it, a superior and dangerous power. The sixteen men have every reason to drink for courage.

The chief gives his instructions exactly as an officer would. Once arrived near the enemy's house, he begins to feel his responsibility. "They are very many" he says, and hesitates. Should they return and fetch reinforcements? But there happens to be in his troop a man who can never have enough enemies to kill. His resolution imparts itself to the chief, who then gives the order to advance.

It is night, but the people in the house are awake. A sorcerer is holding a session; he is treating a sick man and everyone is gathered round. The sorcerer, more suspicious than the rest, is alert and senses the danger. "There are people coming", he says, and, soon after, "The people have arrived". But the chief knows exactly who it is.

He has one enemy, and of that man's enmity he is certain. But he is also certain that, if he comes, his enemy will lose his life. "He won't get back. He will end his life here." The blindness of the man who is to perish is as remarkable as the hesitation of the attacker. The man who is threatened does nothing, though disaster is already on him.

The house is soon in flames, set on fire by the women, and the inmates try to force their way out. They cannot see those who are shooting at them out of the darkness, but they themselves are well illuminated targets. Their enemies press in and club them, and the story of their destruction is completed in a few sentences. It is not a question of fighting, but of sheer annihilation.

The weeping children are thrown into the fire. One after another, the dead are cut into pieces. A survivor who had smeared himself with blood and lain down amongst them in the hope of escape, shares their fate. The dead chief is tied to a tree and shot at until he falls to pieces. The rape of a dead woman is the ghastly climax. Everything perishes completely in the fire.

The few who escape from the smaller neighbouring houses flee to the mountains and live there as "secret murderers". There is nothing to be added to this description of a war pack. Of all the innumerable similar reports, this one is the most truthful, because most naked, It contains nothing extraneous; nothing has been improved or glossed over by the narrator. The sixteen men who set out did not bring any booty home; their victory brought no riches. They left no woman or child alive. Their goal was to annihilate the hostile pack, leaving nothing of it. They described their actions with relish. The most impressive description of a lamenting pack comes from the Warramunga in Central Australia.

Before the sufferer's last breath, lamentations and self-inflicted wounds began. Native men ran to the spot, while women lay on the dying man. They dug sharp ends of yam-sticks into their heads, blood streaming down their faces. Men rushed to the scene, flinging themselves on the sufferer.

A man arrived, gashing both thighs with a knife, unable to stand. His mother, wife, and sisters dragged him out, applying their mouths to his wounds. The struggling mass untwined, revealing the sick man. His friends left him, and he died later that evening. The wailing became louder, and men and women rushed about, cutting themselves with knives and sharp-pointed sticks.

An hour later, a funeral procession carried the body to a wood. The deceased's ghost would hover, and nobody wished to meet it. The ground was strewed with men, their thighs gashed. They bore deep scars on their thighs as badges of honor. One man had 23 wounds he'd inflicted on himself. Meanwhile, women resumed lamentation. Forty or fifty of them sat down in groups of five or six, weeping and wailing frantically with their arms round each other, while the actual and tribal wives, mothers, wives’ mothers, daughters, THE PACK 105 sisters, mothers’ mothers, sisters’ husbands’ mothers, and grand-daughters, according to custom, once more cut their scalps open with yam-sticks, and the widows afterwards in addition seared the scalp-wounds with red-hot fire sticks.

One fact immediately stands out from this description (to which many similar ones might be added): What matters is the excitement itself. Many intentions play their part in the event, and it will be necessary to discuss them, but the essential thing is the excitement as such, the state of having something to lament in common. The ferocity of the lament, its duration, its resumption the next day in the new camp, the amazing rhythm in which it increases and, even after complete exhaustion, starts afresh—all this is proof of the fact that what matters here is the reciprocal stimulation to lament.

Even from this single case, typical of the Australian aborigine, it will be readily understood why this excitement is described as that of pack, and why it seems necessary to introduce the term lamenting pack. The whole thing begins with the news that death is near. The men turn to the spot at full speed and find the women already there. Those most closely related to the dying man lie in a heap on top of him. An important fact is that lament is not deferred until after death, but begins as soon as hope for the sick person has been given up. Directly they believe that he will die, those around him become unable to withhold their lament. The pack breaks out; it has been waiting for its opportunity and will not allow its victim to escape. The tremendous violence with which it falls on its object seals its fate. It is scarcely conceivable that a dangerously sick man should ever recover from such treatment. In the rabid howling of his people he is almost smothered; it is probable that he is sometimes actually stifled. In any event, his death is accelerated.

The feeling, so natural to us, that a man should be allowed to die in peace, would be utterly incomprehensible to these people, intent as they are on their own excitement. What does it mean, this heap which forms on top of a dying man, this mass of bodies obviously struggling to be as close to him as possible? We are told that the women, who are lying there at first, get up in order to make room for the men, as though these too, or at least some of them, had a right to be closest to him. Whatever explanation the natives may give of the formation of this tangle, what actually happens is that a heap of bodies completely absorbs the dying man into itself. The physical closeness of the members of the pack, their density, could be carried no further. Together with the sufferer, they form one 106 CROWDS AND POWER heap; he still belongs to them; they hold him back amongst themselves. Since he is unable to rise and stand with them, they lie down with him. Everyone with a right to him fights to become part of the heap of which he is the centre. It is as though they wanted to die with him. Their self-inflicted wounds, the way they throw themselves down on the heap or elsewhere, the collapse of the wounded—all this is meant to show the seriousness of their intention. It may also be correct to say that they want to be equal with him. But they do not really intend to do away with themselves. 

What they do want, and try by their behavior to ensure, is the continuance of the heap to which he belongs. The essence of the lamenting-pack consists in its assimilation to the dying man, so long as death has not actually occurred. Equally essential is the way it rejects him as soon as he is really dead. It is the sudden change from furious attachment to, and retention of, the dying to frightened rejection and isolation of the dead which creates the specific tension of the lamenting pack. During the same night, his body is hastily carried away. Every trace of his existence is destroyed, his tools, his hut, and everything belonging to him; even the camp where he lived with the rest is destroyed and burned. Suddenly and decisively they have turned against him. He has become dangerous because he has left them. Because he is dead, he may become jealous of the living and take his revenge on them. All the signs of their affection, and even their physical proximity, could not hold him back. His rancour makes an enemy of him; with a hundred tricks and ruses he may sneak back amongst them, and they must be equally cunning to protect themselves against him. They continue the lament in the new camp. The excitement which gave them their powerful feeling of unity is not relinquished immediately. They need it more than ever now, for the group is in danger. They make an exhibition of pain by continuing to wound themselves. It is like a war, but it is they who inflict on themselves what an enemy might. A man who carried on his body the scars of twenty-three such wounds regarded them as badges of honor, as though he had received them in war. We must consider whether this is the only significance of the dangerous wounds which men inflict on themselves on such occasions; and the women apparently go even further than the men in this; they certainly persevere longer in lament. There is much anger in this self-mutilation, anger at impotence in the face of death. It is as though they were punishing themselves for death, as though the individual wanted to exhibit the mutilation through loss of the whole group by the mutilation of his own body. But the destruction is also directed against their poor dwellings and, in this respect, reminds us of that destructive-ness of the crowd which we know already, and have explained in a previous chapter. By destroying all isolated objects the pack fulfills itself and thus also prolongs its existence. It also emphasizes the breach with the time in which it first recognized and then suffered impending disaster. Everything begins anew, and begins in a potent state of common excitement. To recapitulate the factors essential to the development of a lamenting pack: The first is a violent movement towards the dying man and the formation of an equivocal throng around him, which stands midway between life and death; the second is a terrified flight away from the dead man, and from everything which might have been touched by him. The Increase Pack Tr we observe the life of any primitive people we immediately come on the hunting, the war, or the lamenting packs which are central to its existence. The course which these three types of pack take is clear; there is something elemental about all of them. Even where one or other has receded into the background, there are usually remnants of it to be found, which prove its past existence and significance. In the increase pack, however, we have a formation of greater com-plexity. It is of immense importance, being the specific propelling force behind the spread of men. It has conquered the earth for him and has led to ever richer civilizations. The full range of its effectiveness has never been properly understood because the concept of propagation has distorted and obscured the actual processes of increase. These can, from their very beginning, only be understood in conjunction with the processes of transformation.

Early man, roaming about in small bands through large and often empty spaces, was confronted by a preponderance of animals. Not all of these were necessarily hostile; most, in fact, were not dangerous to man. But many of them existed in enormous numbers. Whether it was herds of buffaloes or springboks, shoals of fish, or swarms of locusts, bees, or ants, their numbers rendered those of man insignificant. For the progeny of man is sparse, coming singly and taking a long time to arrive.

The desire to be more, for the number of the people to whom one belongs to be larger, must always have been profound and urgent, and must, moreover, have been growing stronger all the time. Every occasion on which a pack formed must have strengthened the desire for a larger number of people. A larger hunting pack could round up more game. The quantity of game was never something that could be relied on; it might suddenly be abundant, and then, the more hunters there were, the larger the kill would be. In war, men wanted to be stronger than a hostile horde and were always conscious of the danger of small numbers. Every death they had to lament, especially that of an experienced and active man, was an incisive loss.

Man's weakness lay in the smallness of his numbers. It is true that the animals dangerous to man often lived singly or in small groups as he did. Like them, he was a beast of prey, though one which never wanted to be solitary. He may have lived in bands about the size of wolf-packs, but wolves were content with this, and he was not. In the enormously long period of time during which he lived in small groups, he, as it were, incorporated into himself, by transformations, all the animals he knew. It was through the development of transformation that he really became man; it was his specific gift and pleasure.

In his early transformations into other animals, he acted and danced many of the species which appear in large numbers. The more perfect his representation of such creatures was, the intenser his awareness of their numbers. He felt what it was to be many, and each time, was made conscious of his own isolation in small groups. It is certain that man, as soon as he was man, wanted to be more. All his beliefs, myths, rites, and ceremonies are full of this desire. There are many instances of this, and we shall encounter a number of them in the course of our enquiry.

Since everything in man directed towards increase is endowed with such elemental force, it may seem strange that, at the beginning of this chapter, stress should have been laid on the complexity of the increase-pack. But a little reflection will show why it appears in so many different forms. One must be on the watch for it everywhere, and it does indeed appear where one expects to find it. But it also has its secret hiding-places and will suddenly appear where least expected. For, originally, man does not think of his own increase detached from that of other creatures. He transfers his desire for increase to everything around him. Just as he wants the enlargement of his own horde through a plentiful supply of children, so he also wants more game and more fruit, more cattle and more grain, more of whatever he feeds on. For him to prosper and increase there must be plenty of everything he needs to live.

The Pack 109

When rain is rare he sets himself to bring about rainfall. Creatures like him need water most of all. Thus, in many parts of the world, rain and increase rites are identical. Whether the people dance rain themselves, as among the Pueblo Indians, or thirstily surround their magician as he conjures the rain for them, in all cases their state is that of an increase pack.

To understand the close connection between increase and transformation, we must touch on the rites of the Australian aborigines. These were thoroughly investigated by several explorers over half a century ago. The ancestors of which the legends of the aborigines treat are remarkable beings; their nature is dual, part human and part animal, or, more precisely, both at once. It was they who introduced ceremonies and these are performed because commanded by them. Each of them associates man with a specific animal or plant. Thus the kangaroo-ancestor is simultaneously man and kangaroo, and the emu-ancestor man and emu, but two animals are never represented in one ancestor. Man is always, as it were, half of them, the other half being a specific animal; and it cannot be sufficiently emphasised that both man and animal are simultaneously present in the one figure, their properties being mingled in what appears to us a most naive and startling manner.

It is clear that these ancestors are nothing but the products of transformation. The men who repeatedly succeeded in looking and feeling like a kangaroo became the kangaroo totem. Such a transformation, frequently practised and made use of, assumed the character of an acquisition and was handed on from one generation to another by the dramatic representation of myths. The ancestor of the actual kangaroos surrounding man became at the same time the ancestor of the group of men calling themselves kangaroo. The transformation which stands at the origin of this two-fold progeny was publicly represented on communal occasions. One or two men represented a kangaroo, the others taking part in the traditional transformation as spectators. Another time they might be the ones to dance the kangaroo, their ancestor.

The delight in the transformation, the particular weight which it acquired in the course of time, and its preciousness for new generations of men, were expressed in the sanctity of the rites during which it was practised. The successful and established transformation became a kind of endowment; it was cherished like the treasure of words which constitutes a language, or that other treasure of objects, by us felt to be purely material: weapons, ornaments and certain sacred utensils.

110 Crowds and Power

The transformation, which was a cherished tradition, and, as totem, the sign of the relationship existing between certain men and the kangaroos, signified also a connection with their number. The numbers of the kangaroos were always larger than those of men, and since they were connected with man, he desired their increase. When they increased, he also increased; the increase of the totem animal was identical with his own. Thus the strength of the link between increase and transformation cannot be overrated; the two go hand in hand. Once a transformation has become fixed and, in its precise shape, it ensures the increase of both the creatures which, in it, have become one and indivisible. One of these creatures is always man. With each totem, he ensures the increase of yet another animal. A tribe that consists of many totems has appropriated the increase of all of them. The great majority of Australian totems are animals, but there are also plants among them. Since these are usually plants on which man feeds, it is not particularly surprising that there should be rites for their increase. It seems natural that man should like plums and nuts and want plenty of them. Some of the insects which we regard as vermin, such as certain grubs, termites, and grasshoppers, are delicacies to the aborigines, and so they, too, occur as totems. But what are we to say when we encounter people who designate scorpions, lice, flies, or mosquitoes as their totem? In these cases, it is impossible to speak of usefulness in the vulgar sense of the word, for such creatures are as much plagues for the aborigine as they are for us. It can only be their immense number that attracts him; in establishing a relationship with them, he means to ensure their numbers for himself. The man who is descended from a mosquito totem wants his people to become as numerous as mosquitoes.

I cannot conclude this very provisional and summary reference to the double figures of the Australian aborigines without mentioning another kind of totem that is also found among them. The following list will surprise the reader, for it is already well-known to him in another connection. Among their totems are clouds, rain, wind, grass, burning grass, fire, sand, the sea, and the stars. This is the list of the natural crowd symbols that I have already interpreted at length. No better proof could be found of the antiquity and importance of these symbols than their existence in Australia as totems.

It would, however, be wrong to assume that all increase packs are connected with totems and that they always allow themselves as much time to fructify as among the Australian aborigines. There are operations of a simpler and more compact kind whose aim is the direct and immediate attraction of the desired animals.

The following description of the famous buffalo dance of the Mandan, a tribe of North American Indians, was written in the first half of the last century. “Buffaloes, it is known, are a sort of roaming creatures, congregating occasionally in huge masses, and strolling away about the country from east to west, or from north to south, or just where their whims or strange fancies may lead them; and the Mandans are sometimes, by this means, most unceremoniously left without anything to eat; and being a small tribe, and unwilling to risk their lives by going far from home in the face of their more powerful enemies, are often times left almost in a state of starvation. In any emergency of this kind, every man musters and brings out of his lodge his mask (the skin of a buffalo's head with the horns on), which he is obliged to keep in readiness for this occasion; and then commences the buffalo dance which is held for the purpose of making "‘buffalo come" (as they term it), of inducing the buffalo herds to change the direction of their wanderings, and, bend their course towards the Mandan village. “The dance takes place in the public arena in the centre of the village. About ten or fifteen Mandans at a time join in the dance, each one with the skin of the buffalo's head, or mask, placed over his head, and in his hand his favorite bow or lance, with which he is used to slay the buffalo. "The dance always has the desired effect; it never fails, nor can it, for it cannot be stopped but is going incessantly day and night, until "buffalo come". Drums are beating and rattles are shaken, and songs and yells are shouted incessantly, and lookers-on stand ready with masks on their heads, and weapons in hand, to take the place of each one as he becomes fatigued, and jumps out of the ring.

"During this time of general excitement, spies or 'lookers' are kept on the hills in the neighborhood of the village, who, when they discover buffaloes in sight, give the appropriate signal, 'by throwing their robes', which is instantly seen in the village, and understood by the whole tribe. These dances have sometimes been continued in this village two or three weeks without stopping an instant, until the joyful moment when buffaloes made their appearance. So they never fail; and they think they have been the means of bringing them in."

"The mask is put over the head, and generally has a strip of the skin hanging to it of the whole length of the animal, with the tail attached to it, which, passing down over the back of the dancer, is 112 CROWDS AND POWER dragging on the ground. When one becomes fatigued of the exercise he signifies it by bending quite forward, and sinking his body towards the ground; when another draws a bow upon him and hits him with a blunt arrow, and he falls like a buffalo and is seized by the bystanders, who drag him out of the ring by the heels, brandishing their knives about him; and having gone through the motions of skinning and cutting him up, they let him off, and his place is at once supplied by another, who dances into the ring with his mask on; and by this taking of places, the scene is easily kept up night and day, until the desired effect has been produced, that of 'making buffalo come'."

The dancers represent buffaloes and hunters simultaneously. They are disguised as buffaloes, but bows, arrows, and spears characterize them as hunters. As long as a man goes on dancing he is regarded as a buffalo, and acts as one. When he tires, he is a tired buffalo, and he is not allowed to leave the herd without being killed. It is because he has been hit by an arrow, and not from weariness, that he sinks down. Throughout his death-struggle he remains a buffalo; he is carried off by the hunters and cut up. He was first "herd" and then prey.

The idea that, by a violent and long-continuing dance, a pack can attract a herd of real buffaloes presupposes two things. The Mandan know from experience that a crowd grows and attracts into its orbit everything of the same kind which is near; wherever there are a large number of buffaloes together, more buffaloes approach. But they also know that the excitement of dancing increases the intensity of the pack. Its strength depends on the violence of its rhythmic movement; what the pack lacks in numbers it makes up in violence. The buffaloes, whose aspect and motion are so well known, resemble men in that they like dancing and allow themselves to be lured to a festivity by their disguised enemies. The dance lasts for a long time, for it has to take effect over large distances. From far off, the buffaloes sense a pack and succumb to its attraction so long as the dance continues. The Pack

113

The Communion

In the common meal, we find an increased ceremony of a special kind. In accordance with a particular rite, each of the participants is handed a piece of the slain animal. They eat together what they captured together. Parts of the same animal are incorporated into the whole pack. Some part of one body enters into all of them. They seize, bite, chew, and swallow the same thing. All those who have eaten of it are now joined together through this one animal; it is present in all of them. This rite of common incorporation is a communion. A special significance is attributed to it; it should take place in such a way that the animal which is eaten feels honored, and will return, bringing with it many of its kind. Its bones are not broken, but are carefully kept. If everything is done as it should be, they will reclothe themselves with flesh and the animal will rise up and allow itself to be hunted again. But, if things are done in the wrong way, the animal will feel insulted and withhold itself: It will flee away with all its brethren; none of them will ever be seen again, and men will starve.

There are feasts at which people imagine that the animal of which they partake is present in person. Thus, among certain Siberian peoples, the bear is treated as a guest at his own meal. He is honored by being offered the best parts of his own body. He is addressed in solemn and persuasive words and begged to intercede with his brethren. If one knows how to win his friendship, he will even willingly allow himself to be hunted. Such communions may lead to an enlargement of the hunting pack; women and those men who were not present at the hunt participate in them. But they may, on the other hand, be confined to the small group of the actual hunters. The inner process, in as far as it relates to the character of the pack, is always the same: the hunting pack changes into a pack of increase. One particular hunt has been successful and its members partake of their prey, but, in the solemn moment of the communion, their mind is filled with the idea of all future hunts. The image of the invisible crowd of the animals they desire is clearly present to all who partake of the meal, and they are meticulously intent on making it real.

The original communion of hunters is preserved even in cultures where the desires are for increase of an entirely different nature. Agricultural peoples are intent on the increase of the corn which is their daily bread, but they will still solemnly partake in common of the body of an animal, as in the days when they were exclusively hunters. In the higher religions, a new factor enters into the communion: the idea of the increase of the faithful. If the ceremony of the communion remains intact and is properly performed, the faith will go on spreading and will attract more and more believers. But even more important, of course, is the promise of revival and resurrection. The animal of which the hunters ceremoniously partook was to live again; it was to rise up and again allow itself to be hunted. This resurrection becomes the essential aim of higher communions, but instead of an animal, the body of a god is eaten, and the faithful relate his resurrection to their own. More will be said of this aspect of communion when we come to deal with the religions of lament. My present point is the transition of a hunting pack into a pack of increase; the increase of food is ensured by a certain ritual of eating, food being originally thought of as something living. Also apparent here is the urge to preserve the precious psychical substance of the pack by transmuting it into something new. Whatever this substance may be—and perhaps substance is not the right word for it—everything possible is done to prevent its dissolution or dispersal.

The connection between the common meal and the increase of food may also be a direct and immediate one, with no element of revival or resurrection in it, as in the New Testament miracles of the feeding of thousands of hungry people with a few small loaves and fishes.

Inward and Outward Packs

The four main types of pack can be grouped in several ways. We can distinguish first between inward and outward packs. The outward pack, which is the more striking and therefore easier to characterise, moves in the direction of a goal lying outside it. It covers large distances and its movement has an intensity greater than that of normal life. Both hunting and war packs are outward packs. The game to be hunted has to be found and captured; the enemy to be fought has to be looked for. However intense the excitement that a war dance or hunting dance achieves within a limited space, the true activity of the outward pack is directed outside itself, into a distance.

The inward pack is concentric. It revolves around a man who has died and must be buried. Its urge is to retain something, not to reach it.

The lament for the dead man stresses in every possible way the fact that he belongs to those gathered together round his corpse. When he sets out, it is alone; it is a dangerous and terrible journey until he arrives where the other dead expect and receive him. Since it is impossible to hold him back, he is, as it were, excorporated. The pack that laments him represents a kind of body, a whole from which, though not lightly, he is released and sundered.

The increase pack, too, is an inward pack. A band of dancers forms a nucleus which, it is intended, shall be joined from outside by something as yet invisible. More people are meant to join those who are already there, more animals those which are hunted or bred, more fruit that which is gathered. The dominant feeling is faith in the existence of all the things which are to join the actual visible units which are so dearly prized. These are all there, somewhere, and only need to be attracted. Ceremonies tend to be performed in places where a large, though invisible, number of these beings is suspected.

The communion is a significant transition from an outward to an inward pack. Through the incorporation of a particular animal captured in hunting, and through the solemn consciousness of the fact that some of this animal is contained in all those who have eaten of it, the pack turns in on itself. In this state, it awaits the revival of the eaten animal and, above all, its increase.

Another distinction is between tranquil and noisy packs. It is sufficient to recall how vociferous the lament is; it would have no meaning at all unless it made itself heard as stridently as possible. As soon as all the noise is over, the lamenting pack disperses and everyone is simply himself again. Hunting and war are, by their very nature, noisy. Silence may often be necessary to outwit the enemy, but then the climax of the assault is all the noisier. The barking of dogs and the shouts by which the hunters stimulate their excitement and thirst for blood are decisive elements in every hunt. And vehemence of challenge and the strident threatening of the enemy have always been indispensable in war; battle-cries and the din of battle echo throughout history, and, even today, war cannot dispense with the roar of explosions.

The tranquil pack is one of expectation. It is full of patience, a patience which is particularly striking when people are gathered together in this way. It appears wherever the goal of the pack is one which is not attainable by rapid and intense activity. “Tranquil” is possibly a somewhat misleading word here; the term “expectation pack” might be clearer, for this type of pack can be characterized by all kinds of activity, such as chants, exorcisms or sacrifices. What these have in common is the fact that they aim at something remote, which cannot be present for some time. It is this kind of expectation and stillness that has entered into those religions which profess belief in another world. Thus there are people who pass this life in the hope of a better one after it. But the most illuminating example of the tranquil pack is the communion. The process of incorporation necessitates, if it is to be perfect, a concentrated stillness and patience. The awe in face of something held to be sacred and full of profound meaning, which is yet contained in oneself, imposes for a time a quiet and dignified demeanor.

The pack's determination is terrible and unchanging, but it also contains an element of intimacy. A sort of tenderness for their prey can be discerned in primitive hunters. In lament and in rites of increase this familiar tenderness seems natural, but it sometimes lights even on an enemy, once he ceases to be excessively feared. The pack makes for the same goals over and over again. It is as endlessly repetitive as all other life-processes of man. This determination and repetition have given rise to formations which have proved uncannily constant. They are always there and ready for use, and it is this fact which explains how they can still be made to play a part in more complex civilizations. In an earlier chapter, I spoke of crowd crystals, giving as examples units of monks or of soldiers. It is as such THE PACK 117 crowd crystals that packs are used, over and over again, whenever, in fact, the quick formation of crowds is desired. But many of the genuinely archaic elements still persisting in modern cultures find their expression in a pack. The nostalgia for a simple and natural existence, released from the growing constraints and fetters of our time, signifies exactly this; it is a desire for life in isolated packs. Fox-hunting in England, ocean voyages in small boats with a minimum crew, expeditions to little known countries, even the dream of living with a few others in a natural paradise where everything grows of itself without human effort—all these are archaic situations and have one thing in common: the vision of a small number of people who know each other well and who participate in a clear and uncomplicated enterprise of a definite or limited nature. In addition there remains to this day one unashamedly primitive pack—the pack which operates under the name of lynch law. The word is as shameless as the thing, for what actually happens is a negation of law. The victim is not thought worthy of it; he perishes like an animal, with none of the forms usual amongst men. He differs in looks and behaviour from his murderers, and the cleavage they feel or imagine between themselves and him makes it easier for them to treat him like an animal. The longer he manages to evade them in his flight, the greedier the pack which they become. A man in his prime, who is a good runner, offers them an opportunity for a hunt which they seize eagerly. The very nature of the chase prevents it being frequent, and its rarity heightens its attraction. The brutalities they permit themselves may be explained by the fact that they cannot eat the man. They probably think themselves human because they do not actually sink their teeth in him. The sexual accusation in which this sort of pack often originates transforms the victim into a dangerous being. His actual or supposed misdeeds are imagined, and the association of a black man with a white woman, the vision of their physical proximity, emphasises the difference between them in the eyes of the avengers, the woman becoming whiter and whiter and the man blacker and blacker. She is innocent, for he, being a man, is the stronger. If she consented it was because she was deluded by his supposed prowess. It is the thought of his superiority in this which they find intolerable and which forces them to unite against him. Like a wild animal—for has he not mauled a woman?—he is chased and killed by all of them together. His murder appears to them both permissible and mandatory, and it fills them with undisguised satisfaction. 118 CROWDS AND POWER Packs in the Ancestor Legends of the Aranda Waar poss a pack look like in the minds of the Australian aborig- ines? Two of the ancestor legends of the Aranda give a clear picture of this. The first is the story of Ungutnika, a famous kangaroo of mythical times. The following are his adventures with the wild dogs. “He was not as yet fully grown, a little kangaroo, and after a short time he set out to go to a place After he had travelled about three miles, he came to an open plain, upon which he saw a mob of wild dogs, lying down close to their mother who was very large. He hopped about looking at the wild dogs, and presently they saw and chased him and, though he hopped away as fast as he could, they caught him on another plain, and, tearing him open, ate first his liver, and then, removing the skin, they threw it on one side and stripped all the meat off the bones. When they had done this, they again lay down. "Ungutnika was not, however, completely destroyed, for the skin and bones remained, and in front of the dogs, the skin came and covered the bones, and he stood up again and ran away, followed by the dogs, who caught him this time at Ulima, a hill. Ulima means the liver, and is so called because on this occasion the dogs did not eat the liver, but threw it on one side, and the hill, which is a dark looking one, arose to mark the spot.

The same performance was once more gone through, and again Ungutnika ran away, this time as far as Pulpunja, which is the name given to a peculiar sound made in imitation of little bats, and at this spot Ungutnika turned round and, jeering derisively at the dogs, made the noise. He was at once caught, cut open, and again reconstructed himself, much to the wonder of his pursuers.

After this, he ran straight towards Undiara, followed by the dogs, and when he reached a spot close to the water-hole, they caught and ate him, and, cutting off his tail, buried it at the place where it still remains in the form of a stone, which is called the Kangaroo Tail Churinga." At the increase ceremonies, it is always dug out, shown around, and carefully rubbed.

Four times the kangaroo is chased by the pack of wild dogs. It is killed, torn to pieces, and eaten. The first three times the skin and bones are left untouched. As long as these are intact, he can stand up again; his flesh grows and covers his bones, and the dogs chase him again. Thus, the same animal is eaten four times. The flesh which has been eaten is suddenly there again. One kangaroo has become four, and yet is always the same animal.

The pack II9 The chase, too, is the same, only its location changing. The places where the miraculous events occur are forever marked in the landscape. The thing which has been killed does not give up; it comes to life again and jeers at the pack, which is surprised afresh each time. But the pack does not give up either; it must kill its prey, even if it has already swallowed it. The determination of the pack and the repetitiveness of its action could be represented in no clearer or simpler manner.

Here, increase is achieved through a kind of resurrection. The animal is not full-grown and has not yet produced young. But, instead of this, it has quadrupled itself. One sees that increase and propagation are by no means identical. From bones and skin, the animal stands up again under the eyes of its pursuers, and incites them to further chase. The tail, which was buried, remains there as a stone, to commemorate and attest the miracle. The power of the fourfold resurrection is now contained in it and, if properly treated, as it is in the relevant ceremonies, time and again it will procure fresh increase.

The second legend begins with a single man in pursuit of a large and very strong kangaroo. He has seen it and he wants to kill and eat it. He follows it over great stretches of country; it is a wearisome chase, and they both have to camp at various places, but always a certain distance apart from each other. Wherever the animal stays, it leaves traces in the landscape. At one place, hearing a noise, it reared up on its hind legs, and there is now a stone, twenty-five feet high, which represents it standing thus. Later on, it scratched a hole in the ground to get water, and this hole remains to the present day. But at last, the animal feels utterly worn out and lies down. A number of men come up and meet the hunter. They asked him, "Have you got big spears?" He replied, "No, only little ones." They asked, "Have you got big spears?" They replied "No, only little ones." The hunter said, "Put down your spears on the ground." They replied, "Very well, put yours down too." The spears were thrown down and all the men advanced on the kangaroo together. The original hunter kept his shield and his Churinga, or sacred stone.

"The kangaroo was very strong and tossed them all about; then they all jumped upon him, and the hunter, getting underneath, was trampled to death. The kangaroo also appeared to be dead. They buried the hunter with his shield and Churinga, and then took the body of the kangaroo into Undiara. The animal was not really dead, but soon died, and was placed in the cave, but not eaten. The rock ledge in the cave arose where the body was put, and when the animal was dead its spirit part went into this. Shortly afterwards the men died, and their spirits went into the water-pool close by. Tradition says that great numbers of kangaroo animals came at a later time to the cave, and there went down into the ground, their spirits also going into the stone."

In this story, the one-man hunt changes into the hunt of a whole pack. The animal is attacked without weapons. It is to be buried under a heap of men; the united weight of all the hunters together is to stifle it. But it is very strong and kicks, and the men have a difficult task. In the confusion of the fight, the original hunter finds himself beneath the heap and it is he, and not the kangaroo, who is trampled to death. He is buried with his shield and sacred Churinga.

The story of a pack which is hunting a special animal and which, by mistake, kills the foremost hunter instead is found throughout the world. It ends with the lament for the dead. The hunting pack changes into the lamenting pack, and this transmutation forms the nucleus of many important and widely spread religions. Here too, in this legend of the Aranda, the burial of the victim is referred to. Shield and Churinga are buried with him, and the mention of the latter, which is regarded as sacred, imparts a tone of solemnity to the whole event.

The animal itself, which only died later, is buried at another place. Its cave becomes a centre for the kangaroos. In later periods, great numbers of them come to the same rock and enter into it. Undiara, as it is called, becomes a sacred place where members of the kangaroo totem enact their ceremonies. They serve the increase of this animal and, so long as they are properly performed, there will always be sufficient numbers of kangaroos in the neighbourhood.

This legend is remarkable in that it unites together two quite distinct, but equally essential, religious processes. The first, as we have already seen, is the transmutation of the hunting into the lamenting pack. The second, which occurs in the cave, is the change of a hunting into an increase pack. To the Australian aborigine, the second process is by far the more important; it stands at the very centre of his cult. The fact that the two processes occur next to each other supports one of the main theses of this enquiry. All the four main types of pack exist everywhere where there are human beings. Thus transmutations of one kind of pack into another are also always possible. Depending on which transmutation is stressed, different basic forms of religion develop. As the two most important forms, I distinguish the religions of lament from those of increase. But there are also, as I shall show, religions of hunting and of war. There are intimations of war even in the legend I have quoted. The interchange about spears between the first hunter and the band of men he meets contains the possibility of a fight. By throwing all their spears on the ground, they renounce this and only when they have done so do they unite to attack the kangaroo.

Here we come on the second point which seems to me remarkable in this legend: the heap of men who throw themselves on top of the kangaroo; the solid mass of human bodies which is to stifle it. These heaps of human bodies occur frequently among the Australian aborigines. They are found over and over again in their ceremonies. At one point during the ceremonies accompanying the circumcision of the young men, the candidate lies on the ground and a number of men lie down on top of him, so that he carries their full weight. In some tribes, a heap of men throw themselves on to a dying person and press themselves closely to him from all sides. This occurrence, which I have already described, is of particular interest. It represents the transition to that heap of the dying and the dead which has often been spoken of in this book.

A few instances of compact heaps among the aborigines are discussed in the next chapter. Here it is sufficient to say that the dense heap of living bodies, intentionally and violently brought into being, is no less important than the heap of the dead. If the latter seems more familiar to us, it is because it has assumed such monstrous proportions in the course of history. It must often seem that only when dead are human beings really close to each other in large numbers. But the heap of the living is, in fact, equally familiar to us. A crowd, in its core, is nothing else.

Temporary Formations among the Aranda

'The two texts cited in the last chapter are taken from the book by Spencer and Gillen about the Aranda tribe, whom they call the Arunta. The greater part of this famous work is devoted to a description of the tribe's feasts and ceremonies. It is impossible to conceive an exaggerated idea of their multiformity. The wealth of the physical groupings of men which form in the course of the ceremonies is particularly striking. Some of them are formations which are very familiar to us because they have kept their importance to this day, but there are others which astonish us by their extreme strangeness. The more important of them are briefly enumerated below.

Frequent in the course of those secret ceremonies which are carried out in silence, is the Indian or single file. In single file, the men turn out to fetch their sacred Churingas from the caves and other hiding places where they are kept. They travel for an hour perhaps before they reach their goal. The young men who are taken on these expeditions are not allowed to ask questions. When the old man who is their leader wants to explain to them certain features in the landscape, connected with the legends of their ancestors, he uses sign language.

During the actual ceremonies, there is usually only a very small number of performers, who are made up as the ancestors of a totem and act them. Generally, there are two or three performers, but sometimes only one. The young men form a circle, running round and round them, and uttering shouts. This running round and round in a circle is very frequent and is mentioned over and over again. On another occasion, during the Engwura ceremonies, which represent the most important and solemn event in the life of the tribe, the young men lie down flat on the ground in a row with their heads on a long low mound, and remain mute in this position for many hours. 

This lying down in a row is often repeated and may last for eight hours at a time, from 9 o'clock at night until 5 in the morning. There is another, much denser formation, which is very impressive. The men move together into a close group, the older men in the middle, the younger ones on the outside. This cylindrical formation, in which all the participants are packed together as closely as possible, sways backwards and forwards for two full hours without stopping, everyone singing throughout. Then they all sit down, and in this position, still closely packed together, they continue singing for perhaps another two hours. Sometimes the men stand in two rows opposite each other and sing.

For the crucial ceremony which ends the ritual part of the Engwura, the young men form a dense square and, accompanied by the old men, cross to the other side of the river-bed where the women and children await them. This ceremony is very rich in details, but, as we are here only concerned with groupings, I shall single out the heap on the ground, formed by all the men together. The three old men who between them carry their most sacred object, which represents the pouch in which the babies of primeval times were contained, are the first to throw themselves headlong on the ground, hiding with their bodies this object which the women and children are not allowed to see. Then all the other men, and principally the young ones for whose initiation these ceremonies are performed, throw themselves on top of the three old men and all remain lying together in a chaotic heap on the ground.

THE PACK 123 Nothing can be identified any longer; only the heads of the three old men can be seen projecting from the pile of bodies. Everyone remains lying there for a few minutes, then they all try to get up and disentangle themselves. Similar heaps on the ground are also formed at other times, but this is the biggest and most important occasion mentioned by the observers I am quoting.

During the ordeals by fire the young men lie down full length on smoking boughs, but not, of course, on top of one another. Fire ordeals occur in many different forms, one of the most frequent being the following: The young men move to the ground beyond the river bed, where the women await them in two groups. The women come forward to attack the men, throwing a hail of burning boughs over them. On another occasion the long row of young men stands opposite a row of women and children. The women dance and the men, with all their strength, throw fire-sticks over their heads. During one ceremony of circumcision six men lie on the ground together and form a table. The novice lies on top of them and is operated on in this position. The lying down on top of a novice, which belongs to the same ceremony, was noted in the preceding chapter.

If we try to find the meaning behind these formations, we may say as follows: The single file expresses migration. Its importance in the traditions of the tribe is very great. It is often supposed that the ancestors wandered even beneath the earth. It is as though the young men, one after the other, had to tread in the footprints of their ancestors. Their silence and the way they move contain the respect owed to sacred journeyings and destinations. The running round and round and the dancing in a circle appear to give stability to the performances enacted in the centre. These are protected from everything alien outside the circle. They are applauded, reverenced, and taken possession of. The lying down in a row could be an enactment of death. The novices remain in this position, entirely mute and, for long hours, nothing stirs. Then they suddenly jump up and are alive again. The two rows set up against each other, and interacting thus, represent cleavage into two hostile packs, the other sex sometimes standing for the enemy. The dense square already appears to be a formation for protection from all sides. It presupposes movement in hostile surroundings and is well-known in later history. There still remain the densest formations of all: the swaying cylinder, entirely compact of men, and the chaotic heap on the ground.

The cylinder, in its very movement, is an extreme example of a rhythmic crowd, a crowd as dense and closed as possible, with room in it for nothing but the men who compose it. The heap on the ground protects a precious secret. It indicates the existence of something which must be covered and held on to with all one's strength. It is in such a heap that a dying man is comprehended and thus, immediately before death, accorded a last honour. The heap is the measure of his preciousness to his people; with him in its midst, it resembles and recalls the heap of the dead.

Packs, as I have described them, have a tendency to change into one another. Though, in general, the pack is repetitive, each reappearance closely resembling earlier appearances, there is always something fluid about it during the course of any individual manifestation. The very attainment of the goal it was pursuing is inevitably followed by a change in its structure.

The communal hunt, if successful, leads to distribution. Apart from "pure" cases, where the aim is butchery of the enemy, victories degenerate into looting. Lament ends with the removal of the dead man. As soon as he is where people want him to be, and they can feel partially safe from him, the excitement of the pack abates and its members scatter. But their relationship to the dead man does not really finish here. They assume that he goes on living somewhere else and may be summoned back to help and advise the living. In the conjuration of the dead, the lamenting pack re-forms, as it were. But its aim now is the opposite of its original one. In some form or other, the dead man, previously banished, will be recalled to his people.

The successful increase pack becomes a feast of distribution. The buffalo dance of the Mandan ends with the arrival of the buffaloes. It is thus clear that each type of pack is linked with an opposite into which it changes. But, in addition to this change into its opposite, which seems natural, there is also an entirely different kind of movement: the transmutation into one another of quite distinct types of pack. This is exemplified in the Aranda legend quoted above. A strong kangaroo is trampled to death by a number of men together. During the struggle, the foremost hunter falls victim to his comrades and is solemnly buried by them. The hunting pack is transmuted into a lamenting pack.

The meaning of communion has already been discussed at length; there the hunting pack changes into an increase pack. At the beginning of wars stands yet another transmutation. A man is killed, and the members of his tribe lament him. Then they form into a troop and set out to avenge his death on the enemy; the lamenting pack changes into a war pack. The transmutation of packs is an extraordinary process. It occurs everywhere and can be investigated in the most diverse spheres of human activity. Without precise knowledge of it, no social event whatever, of any kind, can be understood at all. CROWDS AND POWER Some of these transmutations have been taken out of their wider context and fixed. They have acquired a special significance and have become rituals. They are reproduced over and over again in exactly the same way. They have become the very substance, the core, of every important faith. The dynamics of packs, and the particular kind of interplay between them, explain the rise of the world religions. It is not possible to give an exhaustive interpretation of religions here; that will be the subject of a separate work. But, in the following pages, I propose to examine a few social and religious structures with reference to the nature of the packs prevailing in them. It will be shown that there are religions of hunting and of war, of increase and of lament.

Among the Lele in the former Belgian Congo, the hunt, in spite of its meagre productivity, stands at the centre of social life. The Jivaros in Ecuador live exclusively for war. The Pueblo tribes in the South of the United States are distinguished by the atrophy of war and hunting, and by an amazing suppression of lament; they live entirely for peaceful increase. For an understanding of the religions of lament which, in historical times, have spread over the whole earth and have unified it, we shall turn to Christianity and to one of the derivatives of Islam. Description of the Muhurram festival of the Shiites will confirm the centrality of lament in this type of religion. A final chapter is devoted to the descent at Easter of the Holy Fire in the Church of the Sepulchre in Jerusalem. It is the Feast of the Resurrection, into which the Christian lament is taken up; its meaning and its justification.

Hunting and the Forest among the Lele of Kasai

In a recent study, the English anthropologist Mary Douglas has succeeded in establishing the unity of life and religion in an African people. This work is characterized by a remarkable clarity of observation and open-mindedness and absence of prejudice. The best tribute, however, is to summarize and quote from it.

The Lele, a tribe of about 20,000 people, live in the Belgian Congo, in a region near the Kasai river. Their villages, compact squares containing from 20 to 100 huts, are always set in the grassland, but never far from the forest. Their staple food is maize, which they cultivate in the forest. Fresh clearings are made each year and only one crop of maize is expected from each. In these clearings, raffia palms also grow, all of whose products are used. The young leaves provide the material from which the Lele weave their raffia cloth. Unlike their neighbours, all the Lele men can weave; woven squares of this material are used as a kind of currency. The palm also provides an unfermented wine which is highly prized. Though palms and bananas grow best in the forest, they are also planted round the village; groundnuts are planted only there. All other good things come out of the forest: water, firewood, salt, maize, manioc, oil, fish, and animal flesh. Both sexes, the women equally with the men, spend the greater part of their time working in the forest, yet the Lele regard the forest as almost exclusively a male sphere. On every third day, the women are excluded from it and must lay in their supplies of food, firewood, and water the day before. The prestige of the forest is immense. The Lele speak of it with almost poetic enthusiasm. They often contrast the forest with the village. In the heat of the day, when the dusty village is unpleasantly hot, they like to escape to the cool and dark of the forest. Work there is full of interest and pleasure; work elsewhere is drudgery. They say, "Time goes slowly in the village, quickly in the forest." Men boast that in the forest they can work all day without feeling hunger, but in the village they are always thinking about food.

The forest is also a place of danger. No mourner may enter it, nor any one who has had a nightmare. A bad dream is interpreted as a warning not to enter the forest on the next day. All kinds of natural dangers may hurt the man who disregards it. A tree may fall on his head, he may cut himself with a knife or fall from a palm tree. The danger for a man is one of personal mishap, but a woman who breaks the injunction against entering the forest may endanger the whole village.

"There seem to be three distinct reasons for the great prestige of the forest: it is the source of all good and necessary things, food, drink, huts, clothes; it is the source of the sacred medicines; and, thirdly, it is the scene of the hunt, which in Lele eyes is the supremely important activity."

The Lele have a craving for meat. To offer a vegetable meal to a guest is regarded as a grave insult. Much of their conversation about social events dwells on the amount and kind of the meat provided. Nevertheless, unlike their southern neighbors, they breed neither goats nor pigs. The notion of eating animals reared in the village revolts them. Good food, they say, should come out of the forest, clean and wholesome like antelope and wild pig. Rats and dogs are unclean and designated by the same word, hama, which they use for pus and excreta. Goats and pigs are also unclean, just because they are reared in the village. The Lele's craving for meat has never led them to eat anything which is not the product of the forest or of hunting, though they keep dogs and poultry successfully and, if they wished, could make a success of goat herding too.

"The separation of women from men, of forest from village, the dependence of village on forest, and the exclusion of women from the forest are the principal recurring themes of their ritual."

The grassland has no prestige. It is dry and barren, a neutral sphere between forest and village, and it is left exclusively to the women.

The Lele believe in a God who created men and animals, rivers, and all things. They believe also in spirits whom they fear and speak of cautiously and reluctantly. The spirits have never been men, and have never been seen by men. If a man were to set eyes on a spirit, he would be struck blind and die of sores. The spirits inhabit the deep forest, especially the sources of streams. They sleep in the day, but roam about at night. They suffer no death or illness. They control the fertility of women and prosper men's hunting. They can strike a village with sickness.

Water pigs are regarded as the animals most highly charged with spiritual power, because they spend their days wallowing in the sources of the streams, which are the favorites haunt of the spirits. The pig is a sort of dog, owned by a spirit; he lives with him and obeys him like a hunter's dog. If an animal is disobedient, the spirit punishes him by allowing him to be killed by a hunter; by the same act, the hunter is rewarded. The spirits exact all kinds of requirements from men; in particular, they require all persons living in a village to be at peace with each other. Good hunting is the clearest sign that all is well with the village. The small amount of meat which each man, woman and child may receive when a wild pig is killed cannot explain the joy which is shown in talking about it for weeks afterwards. The hunt is a kind of spiritual barometer whose rise and fall is eagerly watched by the entire village.

It is a striking fact that child-bearing and hunting are coupled together, as if they were equivalent male and female functions. 'The village is spoilt' say the Lele, 'hunting has failed, women are barren, everyone is dying'. If, on the other hand, things are going well, they say, 'Our village is soft and good now. We have killed three wild pigs and many antelopes, four women have conceived, we are all healthy and strong! The activity which has the highest prestige is the communal hunt, not the private hunter's or trapper's success.

The method is to get a cordon of men armed with bows and arrows around a section of the forest, which is then combed by beaters and their dogs. Young boys and old men who can hardly walk try to join the hunt, but the most valued members are the dog owners, who have the heavy work of scrambling through the undergrowth, shouting to control and encourage their dogs. The game startled by them rushes out on to the arrows of the waiting hunters. This is probably the most effective method of hunting in dense forest. It depends on surprising the game and on quick shooting at very short range.

What is strange in a people proud of their hunting is the general lack of individual skills. A man going into the forest for any purpose carries his bow and a few arrows, but these are intended for birds or squirrels. He does not expect to take large game by himself. They know none of the specialized techniques of the single hunter. They do not stalk, do not know how to imitate the calls of animals, do not camouflage or use decoys, seldom penetrate into deep forest alone. All their interest is centred on the communal hunt. A man walking in the forest might come on a herd of pig wallowing in a marsh, creep up to them so close as to hear their breathing, then, rather than risk a long shot, he will tiptoe away agog to call out the village.

The Lele hunt the grassland only in the dry season when they fire the grass. On this annual occasion several villages combine to ring around the burning countryside. This is the time when young boys expect to make their first kill, for the slaughter, I am told, is terrific. This is the only occasion when the hunting unit is more than the male population of one village, as it is in all forest hunting. Ultimately the village is a political and a ritual unit because it is a single hunting unit. It is not surprising that the Lele think of theirs as a hunting culture first and foremost.

Of particular significance is the distribution of the game. It is shared out according to strict rules which emphasize the religious meaning of the hunt. There are three cult groups among the Lele, each of which enjoys a food privilege forbidden to outsiders. The first group, the Begetters, consists of men who have begotten a child. They are entitled to the "chest" of game and also to the flesh of all young animals. Within this group there is a sub-division of men who have begotten a male and a female child; from them is selected the second and more exclusive group, that of the Pangolin men, who are so called because only they are allowed to eat the flesh of the pangolin. The third group is that of the Diviners; they receive the head and the intestines of the wild pig. [pg 132]

No large animal can be killed without its death and distribution becoming the object of a religious act. "Of all animals, the wild pig has the most significance; it is shared in the following manner: the head and entrails are reserved to the Diviners, the chest to the Begetters, the shoulders go to the men who carried it home, the throat to the dog-owners, the back, one haunch and one foreleg belong to the man who shot it, the stomach goes to the group of village-smiths who forge the arrows." [pg 132]

The structure of Lele society is, as it were, re-affirmed by each hunt. The excitement of the hunting pack has widened and become the driving emotion of the whole community. Without distorting the author's findings, we can speak here of a hunting religion, in the most literal sense of the words. Such a religion has never before been described in so completely convincing and indubitable a manner. [pg 132]

We are also given a precious insight into the development of the forest as a crowd symbol. The forest contains everything which is valuable, and the things which are most valuable are fetched from it by the whole pack together. The animals which are the object of the hunting pack live in the forest; and also the dreaded spirits by whose sufferance men hunt. [pg 132]

The War Booty of the Jivaros [pg 133]

The Jivaros are the most warlike people in the whole of South America today. A great deal can be learnt from an examination of the part which war and booty play in their customs and ceremonies. There is no question of over-population among them; they do not go to war to conquer new territory. On the contrary, their living-space is too large rather than too small; there are about 20,000 people in an area of over 25,000 square miles. They have no large settlements and dislike even living in villages. Each family, in the widest sense of the word, lives in a house by itself, with the oldest man as its head, and may be separated from the next family by several miles. [pg 133]

They have no political organization; in times of peace the father is the highest authority in each family, answerable to no one. If their hostile intentions did not lead them to seek each other out, one group of Jivaros would scarcely ever encounter another in the vast spaces of their virgin forests. Blood revenge, or rather death, is what cements them. In their eyes there is no such thing as natural death; if a man dies it is because an enemy has bewitched him from a distance. It is the duty of the relatives to find out what sorcerer was responsible for his death, and to revenge it on him. Every death is thus a murder, and every murder can only be avenged by a counter-murder. [pg 133]

But, whilst the fatal witchcraft of the enemy is effective at a distance, the physical, or blood revenge, which is a duty, only becomes possible by actually getting hold of the enemy. The Jivaros seek one another out in order to take vengeance and thus blood revenge can be called the cement of their society. [pg 133]

The family which lives together in one house forms a very compact unit. Everything a man undertakes he undertakes in common with the other men of his household. For larger and more dangerous expeditions the men of several relatively near houses combine, and it is only then, when purposing a serious punitive campaign, that they elect a chief, an experienced and usually elderly man to whom they voluntarily submit themselves for the period of the war. The war pack is the true dynamic unit of the Jivaros, the only important one apart from the static unit of the family. Their feasts are arranged around it. They assemble for a week before going to war and again after it, when they have returned victorious, for a series of big celebrations. The war expeditions are pure destruction. Enemies are killed, and their possessions, domestic animals, cultivation, and houses are destroyed. The Jivaros' true passion is for the enemy's severed head, which they call a Tsantsa. The owner of a Tsantsa gains special prestige. After some time, a great feast is celebrated, centered on the properly prepared head.

The feast is religious in character, and the desire for increase and the means to achieve it are its essence. The details are described in Karsten's paper, "Blood Revenge, War and Victory Feasts among the Jivaro Indians." One important dance during the feast involves conjuring animals and the sexual act of man. This dance is the actual introduction to the great feast. Participants arrange themselves in a circle, holding hands, and move slowly, whistling and enunciating names of animals they like to eat. They then utter a resounding cry, "Hej!" After conjuring animals, they conjure woman, copulation, and mating, asking for increase and prosperity. The Tsantsa, the captured and shrunken head, is the center of the conjurations and acts of the feast. It is dangerous but can be subdued, becoming useful for increasing prosperity. But there is an amazing number of rites and observ-ances for subjugating it, and, by the end of the feast, which lasts for several days, full power will have been acquired over the head and over the spirit which belongs to it. Set beside our own more familiar habits of war, we have to say that the tsantsa takes the place of what we call booty. It is in order to win the heads that the Jivaros go to war; it is their only booty, but, small as this booty finally appears, especially when shrunk to the size of an orange, it comprises all that matters to them. The head procures for them all the increase they desire, that of the animals or plants on which they feed, of the objects they make and, finally, of their own people. It is booty of a gruesome concentration, and its capture alone is not sufficient; lengthy operations have to be undertaken to make it what it should be. These operations culminate in the communal excitement of the feast, and especially in its wealth of conjurations and dances. The tsantsa feast as a whole is sustained by an increase pack. The war pack, when it has been lucky, becomes the increase pack of the feast; the transmutation from one into the other is the true dynamic of Jivaro religion.

The Rain Dances of the Pueblo Indians are increase dances intended to procure rainfall. They, as it were, stamp the rain up out of the ground. The pounding of the dancers' feet is like the fall of rain. They go on dancing through the rain if it begins during the performance. The dance which represents rain finally becomes it. Through rhythmic movement a group of about 40 people transforms itself into rain. Rain is the most important crowd symbol of the Pueblo peoples. It was always important, even for their forebears who may have lived 136 CROWDS AND POWER elsewhere, but, since they settled on their arid plateaux, its importance has increased and has fundamentally determined the character of their religion. The maize they live on, and the rain without which this maize would not grow, stand at the centre of all their ceremonies. All the magical methods used to attract rain are brought together and heightened in their rain dances. Observers have stressed the fact that there is nothing wild about these dances. This is due to the nature of rain itself. Approaching as a cloud, it forms a unit which is high overhead, distant, soft and white; when it is near, it arouses feelings of tenderness in men. When it discharges itself, it must disintegrate; it is as isolated drops that rain reaches men and the soil into which it sinks. The dance which, through transformation into rain, is to allure it thus represents the flight and disintegration of a crowd even more than its formation. The dancers desire the presence of clouds, but these are not intended to remain gathered in the sky, but to pour down as rain. The clouds are friendly crowds, how much so can be seen from the fact that they are equated with the ancestors. "The dead come back in the rain clouds, bringing the universal blessing. People say to their children when the summer afternoon clouds come up the sky "Your grandfathers are coming', and the reference is not to individual dead relatives, but applies impersonally to all forbears. . . . "The priests in their retreat before their altars sit motionless and withdrawn for eight days, summoning the rain. "From wherever you abide permanently You will make your roads come forth, Your little wind-blown clouds, Your thin wisps of clouds Replete with living waters, You will send forth to stay with us." Your fine rain caressing the earth, Here at Itiwana, The abiding place of our fathers, Our mothers, The ones who first had being, With your great pile of waters You will come together." What one desires is "a great pile of waters", but this great pile, gathered in clouds, disintegrates into drops. The stress of the rain-dances is on disintegration. It is a gentle crowd that one desires, not a dangerous animal which has to be captured, or an obnoxious enemy who has to be fought. It is equated with the crowd of the ancestors who, to these people, are peaceful and benevolent. The blessing which the raindrops bring to the soil results in that other crowd on which they live: their maize. Every harvest betokens a bringing together in heaps; rain is the reverse process. The clouds are dispersed as drops, whereas every single corn cob harvested is already a stable collection of grains. Men grow strong and women fertile on this food. The word "children" occurs often in their prayers. The priest speaks of the living members of the tribe as children, but he also speaks of "all the little boys, all the little girls, all those whose roads are ahead". These are what we would call the future of the tribe. The priest, whose image is more precise, sees them as all those whose roads lie ahead. Thus the essential crowds in the life of the Pueblos are those of ancestors and children, rain and maize; or, if we want to range them in a causal sequence: ancestors, rain, maize and children.

Of the four types of pack, two—the hunting and the war pack—are almost atrophied among them. There is still some communal rabbit hunting, and there is a society of warriors, but the function of these is only that of police, and there is little occasion for policing in our sense of the word. The lamenting pack has been suppressed to an astonishing degree. They make very little fuss about death and try to forget the dead as individuals as quickly as possible. Four days after the occurrence of death, the "chief speaks to the people telling them that they shall not remember any more. 'It is now four years he is dead.'" The Pueblos do not hold with lamenting packs; they isolate grief. There remains the increase pack, which is highly developed and active amongst them. They put the whole stress of their communal life on it; it could be said that they live for increase alone, and in a purely positive sense. That Janus head, common to so many peoples—one's own increase on the one hand and the decrease of the enemy on the other—is unknown amongst them; they are not interested in wars. Rain and maize have made them gentle; their life depends entirely on their own ancestors and their own children.

On the Dynamics of War. The First Death. The Triumph Tre INNER, or pack, dynamics of war are basically as follows. From the lamenting pack around a dead man there forms a war pack bent on avenging him; and from the war pack, if it is victorious, a triumphant pack of increase. It is the first death which infects everyone with the fecling of being threatened. It is impossible to overrate the part played by the first dead man in the kindling of wars. Rulers who want to unleash war know very well that they must procure or invent a first victim. It need not be anyone of particular importance, and can even be someone quite unknown. Nothing matters except his death; and it must be believed that the enemy is responsible for this. Every possible cause of his death is suppressed except one: his membership of the group to which one belongs oneself. The quick-forming lamenting pack operates as a crowd crystal; it, as it were, opens out, everyone who feels the same threat attaching himself to it. Its spirit changes into that of a war pack. War is kindled by the death of one man, or, at most, a few; but it leads to the death of tremendous numbers. The lament for these, when victory has been won, is very subdued in comparison with the original lament. Victory is felt to be a decisive decrease of the enemy, if not his annihilation, and it reduces the impetus of the lament for one’s own dead. They have been sent as a vanguard into the land of the dead and have drawn many more of the enemy after them. Thus they have disbuideucd uueix peopie of that fear without which they wouid not have gone to war.

When the enemy has been beaten the threat which united people vanishes and it is each for himself again; the war pack is on the point of scattering for the sake of pillage, in the same way that the hunting pack merges into the stage of distribution of the prey. Where the sense of being threatened has not been universal, it will have been the promise of loot which effectively drove people to war, and, in such a case, they must be allowed their loot. A war-lord of the old kind would scarcely have dared refuse it to them, but the danger of an army dis- integrating completely through pillage is so great that leaders have always been concerned with finding some means of re-establishing a fighting spirit.

The most effective means to this end are victory feasts. The true significance of victory feasts is the confrontation of the decrease of the enemy with one’s own increase. The whole people is assembled, men, women and children. The victors march in the same formations in which they set out to fight. By showing themselves to the people they infect them with the spirit of victory. More and more people come until finally everyone is present who is capable of leaving his dwelling. But the victors do not only show themselves; they also bring things with them. They come as agents of increase, and their booty is exhibited to the people. There is an abundance of everything which men want or value, and everyone will receive some of it. The victorious commander or king may decree large distributions to the people, or he may promise tax reliefs or other benefits.

The booty consists not only of gold and goods; prisoners are led out too, their numbers a visible manifestation of the decrease of the enemy. In societies which pride themselves on being civilized the exhibition of captured enemies suffices. Others, which to us appear barbarous, want more. They want to experience an actual decrease of the enemy, and to experience it together, relieved from the pressure of an immediate threat. This leads to the public executions of prisoners familiar in the victory feasts of many war-like peoples. Such executions reached fantastic proportions in the capital of the kingdom of Dahomey. In the so-called ‘Annual Custom’, which lasted for several days, the king presented his people with a bloody spectacle, hundreds of prisoners being beheaded in the sight of everyone. The king sat on a platform among his dignitaries while the people stood below in a dense throng. At a sign from the king the executioners set to work. The heads of the murdered prisoners were thrown onto a heap; several such heaps were to be seen. There were processions through streets lined with the naked corpses of executed enemies hanging from gallows; to spare the modesty of the king’s innumerable wives, these had been mutilated. On the last day of the feast, the court was reassembled on a platform, and a large presentation of gifts to the people took place. Strings of shell-money were thrown down among them to be scrambled for. Their manacled enemies were hurled down to them; these too were beheaded. People fought for the corpses; it was said that in their frenzy, they ate them. Everyone wanted to get a piece of the enemy dead; it might be called a communion of triumph. Human beings were followed by animals, but the chief thing was the enemy. 140 CROWDS AND POWER

There are eighteenth century reports by European eye-witnesses of these feasts. At this period, the white nations had representatives in trading-stations on the coast. The material of their trade was slaves, and they came to Abomey, the capital, in order to buy slaves from the king. He was accustomed to sell a proportion of his prisoners to the Europeans, and his war expeditions were undertaken for this purpose. At that time, the Europeans did not mind this at all, though they did not like having to witness the terrible mass-executions; their presence, however, was required by court etiquette. They tried to persuade the king to sell them for slaves the victims destined for execution. This made them feel humane and was also good for business. But, to their amazement, the king, in spite of his avarice, refused to renounce his victims. When there was a dearth of slaves and business was bad, this obstinacy annoyed them. They did not understand that power was more important to the king than possessions. His people were used to the spectacle of victims. From the crude and public exhibition of the mass decrease of their enemies, they gained the assurance of their own increase; and this was the direct fount of the king’s power. The spectacle had a twofold effect. It was an infallible way of convincing the people of their increase under the king’s rule, and thus of maintaining them in the state of a religiously devoted crowd. It also, however, kept alive the terror of the king’s command, for he personally decreed the executions.

Among the Romans, the greatest public occasion was the Triumph. The whole city came together for it. But, when the empire reached the height of its power and the need for continuous conquest had lost its urgency, the feeling of being victorious became an institution in its own right, recurring periodically with the dates of the calendar. Fighting now took place before the assembled people in the arena. It had no political consequences, but remained significant as a means of re-awakening and keeping alive the feeling of victory. As spectators, the Romans did not fight themselves, but, as a crowd, they decided who was the victor and acclaimed him as in former times. The feeling of victory was all that mattered; war itself; no longer seeming so necessary, declined in importance. Among historical peoples of this kind, war becomes the actual means of increase. Whether it procures them booty to live on or slaves to work for them, they reject other, more patient means of increase, and think them contemptible. A kind of state religion of war develops, with the speediest possible increase as its aim.

In Islam, more strongly than in any of the other world religions, these are invisible double crowds, standing in opposition to each other. When the trumpet of the Last Judgement sounds, the dead rise from their graves and rush to the Field of Judgement "like men rallying to a Standard". There they take up their station before God, in two mighty crowds separated from each other — the faithful on one side and the unbelieving on the other. Each individual is judged by God.

All the generations of men are thus assembled, and to each man it seems as though he had only been buried the day before. None has any notion of the immeasurable spaces of time he may have lain in his grave; his death has been without dream or remembrance. But the sound of the Trumpet is heard by all.

"On that day men will come in scattered bands." "On that day We will let them come in tumultuous throngs." The "bands" and "throngs" of this great moment recur repeatedly in the Koran; it is the most comprehensive idea of a crowd the Mohammedan can imagine. No one can conceive of a larger number of human beings than that of all those who have ever lived; and here they are pressed closely together on one spot. This is the only crowd which cannot grow, and it is also the densest, for each single man stands face to face with his Judge.

But, notwithstanding its size and density, it remains, from beginning to end, divided into two. Each man knows what he may expect; there is hope for some and terror for the others.

"On that day there shall be beaming faces, smiling and joyful. On that day there shall be faces veiled with darkness, covered with dust. These shall be the faces of the wicked and the unbelieving." Since the justice of the sentence is absolute — for each deed has been recorded and can be proved in writing — no one can escape from that half of the crowd to which he rightfully belongs.

The bi-partition of the crowd in Islam is unconditional. The faithful and the unbelieving are fated to be separate for ever and to fight each other. The War of Religion is a sacred duty and thus, though in a less comprehensive form, the double crowd of the Last Judgement is prefigured in every earthly battle.

The Mohammedan has a very different image in mind when he thinks of another no less sacred duty: the pilgrimage to Mecca. This is a slow crowd, formed gradually by tributaries from many different countries. Depending on the distance of the faithful from Mecca, it can stretch over weeks, months and even years. The obligation to perform this journey at least once in a lifetime colours a man's whole earthly existence. Anyone who has not been on this pilgrimage has not really lived. The experience of it draws together, so to speak, the whole territory over which the Faith has spread, and assembles it in the place where it originated. The crowd of pilgrims is peaceful and wholly devoted to the attainment of its goal. Its task is not to subjugate infidels, but simply to reach the appointed place: to have been there. The miracle of Mecca's capacity to contain pilgrims is impressive. Ibn Jubayr, a Spanish Moor who visited Mecca in the 12th century, marveled at its ability to expand like a womb, according to the size of the fetus it contains. The greatest moment of the pilgrimage is the day on the Plain of Arafat, where 700,000 people are expected to assemble. If the number falls short, it is made up by invisible angels. However, when the days of peace are over, the Holy War resumes.

Mohammed, considered the prophet of fighting and war, leaves a testament for the future of his community: the fight against infidels and the expansion of Allah's sphere of power. The Koran, the book of the prophet inspired by God, leaves no doubt of this.

The Pack and Religion 143

The religions of lament have attained universal validity, but their persistence is due to the legend of a man or god who perishes unjustly. The story often involves a pursuit, hunt, or baiting, and an unjust trial. In the case of a hunt, the wrong creature is struck down, and the foremost hunter is fatally wounded. This animal may have attacked the hunter, as in the story of Adonis and the boar. The grief aroused by this death is immeasurable.

A goddess often loves and laments the victim, such as Aphrodite in the story of Adonis. In her Babylonian shape, the goddess's name is Ishtar, and Tammuz is the beautiful dead youth. Among the Phrygians, it is the mother goddess Cybele who grieves for Attis, her young lover.

Cybele, in her grief, harnesses her lions and drives about Ida with her Corybantes, mad with sorrow. One Corybante slashes his forearms with a sword, another lets down his hair and rushes to and fro over the mountains. Another blows a horn, and another clashes cymbals together. All Ida is noise and madness.

In Egypt, it is Isis who has lost her husband Osiris. She searches for him without wearying, wandering through the land, unable to rest until she finds him. She yearns for him and desires to see him.

Come to your house. . . . I do not see you, yet my heart yearns for you and my eyes desire you. Come to your sister, come to your spouse, to your spouse, you whose heart stands still. Come to your wife. I am your sister, born of the same mother. Do not stay far from me. Gods and men have turned their face towards you, and weep for you together. I call after you and weep till my cries can be heard in heaven, but you do not hear me. Yet I am your sister, whom you loved on earth; you loved none but me, my brother.

But it can also happen—and this is the later and no longer mythical case—that a group of relatives and disciples lament the dead, as they do Jesus, or Husain, the Grandson of the Prophet and the true martyr of the Shiites. The hunt, or pursuit, is pictured in all its details; it is a precise story, very concrete and personal. Blood always flows; even in the most humane of all Passions, that of Christ himself, we find wounds and blood. Each of the things which compose the Passion is felt to be unjust; the further removed from mythical times, the stronger becomes the tendency to prolong the passion and to fill it out with human details.

The hunt, or baiting, is always experienced from the point of view of the victim. Around his end, a lamenting pack forms, but the lament has a particular tone; the dead man has died for the sake of the people who mourn him. Whether he was their great hunter, or had another and higher value for them, he was their savior. His preciousness is stressed in every possible way; it is he, above all, who should not have died. His death is not recognized by the mourners. They want him alive again.

In the description of the archaic lamenting pack, as found among the Australian aborigines, I pointed out that the lament already begins around the dying man. The living try to hold him back and they cover him with their bodies. They take him into the heap they form; they press themselves closely to him on all sides and strive to keep him. Often they call him to come back even after death has occurred, and it is only when they are quite certain that he will not come that the second phase begins, that of pushing him away to the world of the dead.

This is the time when people hurry to be together and all who want to lament are welcome. In such religious cults, the lamenting pack opens out into a continually growing crowd. This happens first at the dead man's own feast, when his passion is represented. Whole towns join in such feasts and sometimes great bands of pilgrims who have come from far away.

But the opening out of the lamenting pack also happens over long periods of time with the gradual increase in the numbers of believers. It begins with the few faithful who stand beneath the cross; they are the kernel of the lament. At the first Whitsuntide, there were possibly 600 Christians; at the time of the Emperor Constantine, about 10 million. But the core of the religion remains the same; it is the lament.

Why is it that so many join the lament? What is its attraction? What does it give people? To all those who join it, the same thing happens: the hunting or baiting pack expiates its guilt by becoming a lamenting pack. Men lived as pursuers and as such, in their own fashion, they continue to live. They seek alien flesh, and cut into it, feeding on the torment of weaker creatures; the glazing eye of the victim is mirrored in their eyes, and that last cry they delight in is indelibly recorded in their soul. Most of them perhaps do not divine that, while they feed their bodies, they also feed the darkness within themselves. But their guilt and fear grow ceaselessly, and, without knowing it, they long for deliverance. Thus they attach themselves to one who will die for them, and in lamenting him, they feel themselves as persecuted. Whatever they have done, however they have raged, for this moment they are aligned with suffering. It is a sudden change of side with far-reaching consequences. It frees them from the accumulated guilt of killing and from the fear that death will strike at them too. All that they have done to others, another now takes on himself; by attaching themselves to him, faithfully and without reserve, they hope to escape vengeance.

The most important of all the religions of lament is Christianity, and something will have to be said about it in its Catholic form. But from among the crucial moments of Christianity, the moments of true mass excitement, I propose to choose for description, not a moment of genuine lament, which has become rare, but another: the Feast of the Resurrection in the Church of the Sepulchre in Jerusalem.

The Muharram Festival of the Shiites

The Muharram Festival of the Shiites exhibits all the unmistakable traits of a religion of war, but it has, nevertheless, branched out into a religion of lament more concentrated and more extreme than any to be found elsewhere: the faith of the Shiites. This is the official religion of Iran and the Yemen, and is strongly represented in India and Iraq.

The Shiites believe in a spiritual and temporal leader whom they call the Imam. His position is more important than the Pope's. He is the bearer of the divine light, and is infallible. Only the believer who adheres to the Imam can be saved. "Whosoever dies without knowing the true Imam of his time dies the death of an unbeliever."

The Imam descends in the direct line from the Prophet. Ali, Mohammed's son-in-law, the husband of his daughter Fatima, is held to have been the first Imam. The Prophet entrusted Ali with special knowledge which he kept from his other adherents, and which is passed on in his family. He explicitly nominated Ali his successor as teacher of his doctrine, and as ruler. By command of the Prophet he is the Chosen One; he alone has the right to the title "Ruler of the Faithful".

Ali's sons, Hasan and Husain, as grandsons of the Prophet, inherited the office from him; Hasan was the second Imam, and Husain the third. Anyone else claiming dominion over the faithful was a usurper. The political history of Islam after the death of Mohammed fostered the formation of a legend around Ali and his sons. Ali was not immediately elected a Khalif. During the twenty-four years following the death of Mohammed three others of the "Companions" held this highest position in succession. It was only after the death of the third that Ali came to power; and his rule was brief. During a Friday Service in the big mosque of Kufa in Iraq, he was murdered by a fanatical enemy with a poisoned sword. His eldest son, Hasan, sold his rights for the sum of several million dirhem and retired to Medina, where he died a few years later from the effects of a dissipated life. The sufferings of his younger brother, Husain, became the very core of the Shiite faith. He was the opposite of Hasan, reserved and serious, and he lived quietly in Medina. Though he had become the head of the Shia on his brother’s death, he refrained from all political activity for a long time. But when the ruling Khalif in Damascus died, and his son wanted to assume the succession, Husain refused to do homage to him. The inhabitants of the turbulent city of Kufa wrote to him and asked him to come to them. They wanted him as Khalif and said that, once he was there, everyone would join his banner. Husain set out with his family, his wives and children, and a small number of adherents, on the long journey through the desert. By the time he arrived in the neighborhood of the town, its inhabitants had already forsaken his cause again. The governor sent a strong troop of horsemen against him, who demanded his surrender. When he refused, they cut off his access to water. He and his small band were surrounded and, on the plain of Kerbela on the tenth day of the month of Muharram, in the year 680 of our era, Husain and his men, defending themselves bravely, were attacked and cut down. Eighty-seven of his people died with him, including several of his own and his brother's family. Thirty-three lance thrusts were counted on his body, and thirty-four gashes from swords. The commander of the hostile troop ordered his men to trample the body of Husain beneath the feet of their horses. The head of the prophet's grandson was cut off and sent to the Khalif in Damascus. The Khalif struck it on the mouth, but an old "companion" of the Prophet, who was present, protested, saying "withdraw your staff, for have I not seen the mouth of the Prophet kiss this mouth?" The "afflictions of the family of the Prophet" are the real theme of Shiite devotional literature. "True members of this group should be recognizable by the emaciation of their bodies through want, their lips being parched with thirst, and their eyes running from incessant weeping. The true Shiite is as persecuted and as wretched as the family whose rights he maintains and suffers for. Soon it becomes regarded as the vocation of the Prophet's family to suffer tribulation and persecution." From the day of mourning at Kerbela onwards, the history of this family is one of continuous suffering and affliction. Stories about them in prose and verse are handed down in a rich literature of martyrology. They are the subject of the assemblies of the Shiites in the first third of the month of Muharram, the tenth day of which—Ashura—is kept as the anniversary of the tragedy of Kerbela. "Our days of remembrance are our mourning assemblies."' Thus a Shiite prince ends a poem in which he remembers the many afflictions of the Prophet's family. Weeping, lamenting, and mourning for the misfortunes of the Alids, for their persecution and martyrdom, is the essential concern of the true faithful. There is an Arab saying, "More moving than the Shiite tear" and, according to a modern Indian belonging to this faith, "To weep for Husain is the prize of our life and our soul; otherwise, we would be the most ungrateful of creatures. Even in Paradise we shall mourn 148 CROWDS AND POWER for Husain . . . grief for Husain is the sign of Islam. For a Shiite it is impossible not to weep. His head is a living grave, the true grave of the decapitated martyr." Emotionally, the contemplation of the personality and fate of Husain stands in the center of the faith; they are the mainspring of the believer's religious experience. His death is interpreted as voluntary self-immolation, and it is through his sufferings that the saints gain paradise. The conception of a mediator was originally alien to Islam, but among the Shia since Husain's death, it has become preponderant. Husain's grave on the plain of Kerbela very early became the most important place of pilgrimage for the Shiites. "4,000 angels surround Husain's grave, angels that are weeping day and night, and whatever pilgrim comes, even from the frontiers, these angels go to meet him."

Whoever visits this shrine gains the following advantage: the roof of his house will never fall in on him; he will never be drowned, or burnt to death, or attacked by wild beasts. On the contrary, he who with faith prays in the shrine will be granted additional years of life. Whoever performs this pilgrimage zealously will have the merit of 1,000 pilgrimages to Mecca, of 1,000 martyrdoms, of 1,000 days of fasting, and of freeing 1,000 slaves. No devils or evil spirits will harm him in any way during the following year; if he should die, he will be buried by angels, and, on the Day of Resurrection, he will rise again with the followers of the Imam Husain, whom he will recognize by the flag he carries in his hand; and the Imam will escort his pilgrims straight to Paradise in triumph.

According to another tradition, all those who are buried in the shrine of the Iman, no matter what sins they may have committed, will be subjected to no examination on the Day of Resurrection, but will be tossed straight into Paradise, as it were from a sheet; and the angels will shake them by the hand in congratulation. Thus many aged Shiites settled in Kerbela to die. Others who lived far from the holy city asked in their will for their bodies to be transported there. For centuries, endless caravans of the dead have been coming into Kerbela from Persia and India, transforming the town into a vast burial ground.

Wherever Shiites live, their great Festival is those days of the month of Muharram on which Husain suffered his passion. During these ten days, the whole of Persia is in mourning. The King, the ministers, and the officials are dressed in black or grey. Mule drivers and soldiers go about with their shirts hanging down and their chests bare, which is regarded as a sign of great grief. On the first of Muharram, which is also the beginning of the year, the festival proper begins. The passion of Husain is recounted from wooden pulpits, with as much detail and elaboration of the incidents as possible. The listeners are deeply affected; their cries of "O, Husain, O Husain!" are accompanied by groans and tears. The recitation continues throughout the day, the mullahs, or preachers, taking turns in the various pulpits. During the first nine days of the month, groups of men wander through the streets, their half-naked bodies painted red or black. They tear out their hair, wound themselves with swords, drag chains behind them and perform wild dances. Fights, resulting in bloodshed and even in death, frequently develop between them and others of a different persuasion. On the tenth of Muharram, the festival culminates in a great procession originally designed as a funerary parade to re-enact the burial of Husain. Its center is the coffin of Husain, carried by eight men and flanked on each side by a banner-bearer. Four horses follow behind the coffin, and some sixty blood-smeared men singing a martial song. Next comes a horse which represents Duldul, the war-horse of Husain. In the rear is usually a group of perhaps fifty men, beating two wooden staves rhythmically against each other.

The frenzy which seizes the mourning crowds during this festival is almost inconceivable. The reader will get some idea of it from the description of events in Teheran which follows later. The real Passion Plays, in which Husain's sufferings are dramatically represented, only became an institution towards the beginning of the 19th century. Gobineau, who spent much time in Persia during the 1850s and later, has left a fascinating description of them. The theatres were founded by rich people; to spend money on them was considered a meritorious work by which the donor "built himself a palace in paradise". The larger theatres held 2-3,000 people; in Isfahan, plays were performed before an audience of 20,000. Admission was free; anyone, beggar or rich man, could walk in.

The performance started at five in the morning and, before the actual Passion Play began, many hours were spent in processions, dances, sermons, and singing. Refreshments were handed round, and the wealthy and respectable accounted it an honour to serve the most ragged of the spectators in person.

Two kinds of fraternities which took part on these occasions are described by Gobineau. "Men and children with torches, following a large black flag, enter the theatre in procession and walk round singing. At night these bands can be seen hurrying through the streets from one theatre to another. A few children run in front shouting shrilly 'Ay, Husain. Ay, Husain!' The brethren take up their positions in front of the pulpits of the preachers, singing and accompanying themselves in a wild and bizarre manner. They form their right hand into a kind of shell and violently and rhythmically beat themselves with it beneath the left shoulder. A hollow sound ensues, produced by many hands simultaneously, which can be heard at a distance, and is very effective. Sometimes the blows are heavy and slow, and produce a dragging rhythm; sometimes they are quick and urgent and excite the audience.

Once the fraternities have started, it rarely happens that they are not imitated by the whole theatre. At a sign from their leader, all the brethren start to sing, to beat themselves, and to leap from the ground, repeating a short, abrupt cry, 'Hasan, Husain!'

A fratemity of a different kind are the Berbers. They bring their music with them, consisting of tambourines of different sizes. The upper part of their body and their feet are bare, and they wear nothing on their heads. There are men of all ages, and also children from 12 to 16 years old. Their skin is very dark. They carry iron chains and long needles; some have a wooden disk in each hand. They enter the theatre in procession and, at first rather slowly, strike up a litany consisting of these two words only 'Hasan, Husain!' "The tambourines accompany them faster and faster; those with wooden disks beat them together in rhythm, and they all start dancing. The audience accompany them by beating their breasts in the manner described. After some time, the brethren start to flagellate themselves with their chains, first gently and with obvious caution; then they become animated and hit harder and harder. Those with needles prick their arms and cheeks; blood flows; the crowd, intoxicated, starts to sob, and the excitement mounts. The leader of the brethren runs to and fro between the rows, rousing the weak and restraining the over-zealous. If the excitement mounts too high, he silences the music and calls a halt. It is difficult not to be moved by such a scene; one feels pity, sympathy, and horror all at the same time.

Sometimes one sees flagellants who, the moment the dance stops, raise their arms with the chains to heaven and cry out "Ya Allah!" ("O God") in a voice so profound and with a look so devout and compelling that one is seized with admiration, so much their whole being is, as it were, transfigured." The fraternity might be described as an orchestra of grief; and their effect is that of a crowd crystal. The pain they inflict on themselves is the pain of Husain, which, by being exhibited, becomes the pain of the whole community. Their beating on their chests, which is taken up by the spectators, gives rise to a rhythmic crowd sustained by the emotion of the lament.

Husain has been torn away from all of them, and belongs to all of them together. But it is not only the fraternities, as crystals, who make the audience into a lamenting crowd. There are also the preachers and others who make their appearance singly, and who produce the same effect. Let us hear what Gobineau experienced as an eye-witness on such an occasion.

"The theatre is brim-full. It is the end of June, and the heat under the immense tent is stifling. The crowd is partaking of refreshments. A dervish mounts the stage and sings a song of praise. The people accompany him by beating their breasts. The man appears to be tired and his voice is not exactly entrancing. He makes no impression and the chanting begins to weary. He seems to feel it himself and stops, descends from the stage and disappears. Everything is quiet again.

Then suddenly a great hefty soldier, a Turk, takes up the chant in a thundering voice, slapping himself resoundingly on the chest with ever increasing violence. A second soldier responds; he too is a Turk, though from another regiment, and is just as ragged as the first. The beating on the breast begins again with great precision. For twenty-five minutes the panting crowd is swept along by these two men, everyone beating themselves black and blue. The monotonous song with its strong rhythm intoxicates them. They beat themselves as hard as they can; the sound is hollow, deep, regular and unceasing, but this is not enough to satisfy all of them.

A young negro, who looks like a porter, stands up in the middle of the crouching crowd. He throws off his cap and begins singing at the top of his voice, simultaneously beating his shaven head with both fists. He was ten paces away from me and I could follow every movement he made. His lips went pale and continued to lose colour the more animated he became. He shouted and beat on his head as if on an anvil. For about ten minutes he continued in this way. But the two soldiers were dripping with sweat and could go on no longer. Lacking their accurate and powerful voices to lead them and carry them forward, the chorus began to falter and become confused. Some of them fell silent and as though he felt the lack of physical support, the negro now closed his eyes and sank down on his neighbour. Everyone seemed to feel pity and respect for him. They put ice on his head and held water to his lips. But he had fainted and it was some time before he came to himself. When he did, he gently and politely thanked all those who had helped him.

As calm returned, a man in a green robe mounted the stage. He appeared to be a grocer from the bazaar. This man preached a sermon on paradise, describing its size with powerful eloquence. It was not sufficient to read the Koran or perform good works; love for Husain was required. The crowd shouted, "O Hasan, O Husain!"

The Passion Play consisted of a loose sequence of forty to fifty scenes. Everything was known to the spectators, with no question of dramatic tension. The sufferings of Husain and his death were depicted in a realistic manner. Imams, Saints, Prophets, and Angels sang, while hated figures were not allowed to sing, only reciting. The spectators wept, groaned, and beat themselves on the head, often trying to lynch the villains of the piece.

Towards the end, the severed head of the martyr was brought to the Khalif's court. Miracle after miracle happened on the way. A lion bowed down before the head, and the abbot of a Christian monastery embraced Islam after seeing Husain's head. The death of Husain was not in vain, as he was given the key to Paradise.

No faith has ever laid greater emphasis on lament. It is the highest religious duty and more meritorious than any other good work. There is ample justification for speaking of a religion of lament. But it is not in the theatres during the performances of the Passion Plays that this crowd undergoes its paroxysm. The "Day of Blood" in the streets of Teheran, involving half a million people, has been described by an eyewitness. His account follows here. It would be hard to find anything more compelling or more frightening.

"500,000 people, seized with madness, cover their heads with ashes and beat their foreheads on the ground. They want to give themselves up to torture, to commit suicide in groups, or to mutilate themselves with a refined cruelty. The guilds follow each other in procession. Composed of men who have retained a glimmer of reason—the human instinct of self-preservation—their members are dressed in ordinary fashion.

"A great silence descends. Men in white shirts advance in hundreds, their faces turned ecstatically to heaven.

"Of these men, several will be dead by evening, and many more mutilated and disfigured; their shirts, red with blood, will be their shrouds. They are beings who have already ceased to belong to this world. Their coarsely made shirts leave only face and hands visible: faces of martyrs, hands of murderers.

"With encouraging shouts, and infecting them with their own madness, others hand them swords. Their excitement becomes murderous; they turn round and round, brandishing over their heads the weapons they have been given. Their shouts dominate the shouts of the crowd. To be able to bear what they are going to suffer, they have to work themselves into a state of catalepsy. With the steps of automata they advance, retreat and move sideways in no apparent order. In time with each step they strike their heads with their jagged swords. Blood flows and their shirts become scarlet. The sight of the blood brings the confusion in their minds to a climax.

"Some of them collapse, striking themselves haphazardly with their swords. In their frenzy they have cut through veins and arteries, and they die where they fall before the police have time to carry them to an ambulance installed behind the closed shutters of a shop.

"The crowd, insensible to the blows of the police, closes over them and drags them to another part of the town where the massacre continues. As they are carried past, the raging crowd rages more and more fiercely. There is not one man who retains the balance of his mind. Those who lack the courage for massacre offer kola to others, inciting them with the drug and with curses.

"The martyrs take off their shirts, which are now regarded as blessed, and give them to those who carry them. Others, who were not at first among the voluntary victims, suddenly, in the general commotion, discover their thirst for blood. They ask for weapons, tear their clothes off, and wound themselves haphazardly.

"Sometimes there is a gap in the procession when one of the participants falls exhausted. But the gap is only momentary. The crowd immediately closes over the wretched man and kicks him and tramples on him. No destiny is accounted more beautiful than to die on the feast-day of Ashura, when the gates of all eight paradises stand wide open for the saints, and everyone seeks to enter there.

"Soldiers on duty, who are supposed to take charge of the wounded and maintain order, are infected with the frenzy of the crowd and tear off their uniforms and join in the bloodshed.

"The madness seizes the children, even very young ones. Beside a fountain, a mother, drunk with pride, hugs a child who has just mutilated himself: Another woman comes running, shouting, 'He has gouged out an eye." In a few minutes, he will put out the other.’ The parents watch it with delight.”’

Catholicism and the Crowd

To the uninitiated spectator, Catholicism displays deliberation, calm, and spaciousness. Its very name contains its chief claim, which is that it has room for everyone. Its expectation is that everyone will turn to it. On certain conditions, which no one can find hard, everyone is received into it. In the theory, though not in the procedure, of this reception, it has preserved a last trace of equality which contrasts strongly with its otherwise strictly hierarchical character.

Catholicism owes the calm which, after its spaciousness, is for many its strongest attraction, to its great age and its aversion to anything The Pack and Religion 155 violently crowd-like. Its suspicion of the crowd is long-standing, dating perhaps from the first heretical activities of the Montanists, who turned against the bishops with what can only be called a decided lack of respect. The threat contained in such sudden outbreaks—the ease and speed with which they spread, the difficulty of controlling them, and, above all, the discharge from the burdens of distance which they procure for their participants (including specifically the distances of ecclesiastical hierarchy)—very easily decided the Church to see the open crowd as its main enemy and to oppose it in every possible way. The whole substance of the faith, as well as all the practical forms of its organization, is colored by this unshakeable conviction. There has never been a state on earth capable of defending itself in so many ways against the crowd. Compared with the Church, all other rulers seem poor amateurs.

First of all, there is the ritual itself; the element in any religion which has the most immediate effect on an assembly of believers, and which, in this case, is of a sustained and unsurpassed deliberation. The movements of the priests in their stiff, heavy canonicals, their measured steps, the drawing-out of their words—all this is like an infinite dilution of lament, spread so evenly over the centuries that scarcely anything remains of the suddenness of death and the violence of grief. It is the temporal lament mummified.

Communication between the worshippers is hindered in several ways. They do not preach to each other; the word of the simple believer has no sanctity whatsoever. Everything he expects, everything which is to free him from the manifold burdens weighing on him, comes to him from a higher authority. He only understands what is explained to him. The sacred word is tendered to him carefully weighed and wrapped up; precisely because of its sanctity it is protected from him. Even his sins belong to the priest to whom he must confess them. Communicating them to other ordinary believers brings him no relief; nor is he allowed to keep them to himself. In all profounder questions of morality he stands alone, confronted by the whole priesthood. In exchange for the moderately contented life which they procure for him, he delivers himself entirely into their hands. Even the way in which the communion is administered separates each believer from the others who receive it with him, instead of there and then uniting them. The communicant receives a precious treasure for himself. It is for himself that he expects it, and for himself that he must guard it. If one observes those waiting for communion, it is impossible not to be struck by the fact that each individual is occupied 156 Crowds and Power exclusively with himself. The person in front of and behind him matters even less to him than a fellow human being in ordinary life; and that is little enough. The communion links the recipient with the vast, invisible church, but it detaches him from those actually present. Among themselves, the communicants feel as little one body as a group of men who have found treasure and have just divided it between them. In the very shape of this process, which is of such cardinal importance for the faith, the church reveals its cautiousness towards anything even remotely resembling a crowd. It weakens and blurs everything which the real people who are present have in common, and replaces it with the distant prospect of something mysteriously communal, something which towers over the faithful and is independent of them, and which never really lifts the barrier between itself and them during their lifetime.

The permitted crowd to which Catholicism always points—that of the angels and the blessed—is not only removed into a far distant world and thus, through its very remoteness, rendered harmless; it is also, in itself, of an exemplary composure and calm. The blessed are not imagined as active; their composure resembles that of a procession. They walk about slowly and sing; they glorify God and feel their happiness. They all act in the same way; there is no mistaking the uniformity of their destinies, and no attempt to mask or disrupt the endless sameness of their existence. They are many, they are close together and they are all filled with the same bliss; but these are their only crowd-like traits. Their numbers grow, but so slowly as to be imperceptible; there is never any mention of them increasing. They have no direction, for their state is final. The heavenly court they form is immutable. There is nowhere else they want to go and nothing they can expect. This is surely the mildest and most harmless kind of crowd imaginable. It is just possible to call it a crowd, but in reality it stands on the border-line: an assembled choir, singing beautiful but not too exciting songs; and, succeeding to the uncertainty of struggle, chosen-ness as a settled state of eternal duration.

If, of all human desires, duration were not the hardest to achieve, it would be difficult to understand what constitutes the attraction of the crowd of the blessed. Life is never quite as serene and ordered on earth as among the blessed, but whatever the church has to show is shown slowly. Processions are impressive examples of this. They are intended to be seen by as many people as possible and their progress is ordered accordingly; their movement resembles a soft shuffle. They bring the faithful together by brushing slowly and gently past them, without tempting them to any decided movement, unless it be to kneel in adoration, or to join the procession in due order—that is, at its end—without thought or wish of a more prominent position in it. The procession always presents a picture of the ecclesiastical hierarchy. Its members walk in the robes of their full dignity and each is recognised and named according to his office. Benediction is expected from those who have the right to bestow it. It is this articulation of the parts in a procession which prevents the spectators from approaching anything like a crowd state. Their gaze is drawn to so many different levels at the same time that any levelling among themselves, any surge towards unity, is precluded. The adult spectator never sees himself as priest or bishop. 

These always remain separate from him and he always ranks them higher than himself. But the more devout he is, the more he will want to prove his veneration of those who are so much higher and holier than he is. This, and no more, is precisely what a procession is for. Its aim is to arouse communal veneration among the faithful. Other communal feelings are positively not wanted, for they might lead to outbursts of emotion and activity which would be uncontrollable. And even the veneration is graduated in that it mounts from level to level along the length of the procession, levels which are all known, expected and permanent. Thus any sting of suddenness is taken out of it. It rises slowly and steadily like the tide until it reaches its height, and then subsides again.

Considering the importance the church attaches to all forms of organization, it is not surprising that it should comprise many crowd crystals. There is nowhere, perhaps, that their function can better be studied, though it should be remembered that these particular crystals are subordinated to the general trend of the church, which is to circumvent, or rather to slow down, the formation of crowds. Among these crowd crystals are monasteries and religious orders. These contain the true Christians, those who live for poverty, chastity and obedience. Their function is to confront the many who call themselves Christians, but who cannot live as such, with the recurring presence of those who truly do. Their garb is the most important single means to this end. It signifies renunciation of, and detachment from, the habitual bonds of family.

Their function changes completely in times of danger. The church cannot always afford its dignified restraint, its dislike of the open crowd and the prohibition it normally lays on its formation. There are times when enemies threaten it from outside and defections increase with such rapidity that they can only be fought by means of a counter-epidemic; times when the church feels driven to oppose hostile crowds with crowds of its own. In such times monks become agitators who wander about preaching, inciting the people to activities of a kind usually shunned. The most spectacular example of such conscious crowd formation on the part of the church is the Crusades.

The Holy Fire in Jerusalem's "Ten Greex Festivat of Easter week in Jerusalem culminates in an extraordinary event. On Easter Eve, the Holy Fire descends from heaven in the Chapel of the Sepulchre. Thousands of pilgrims from all over the world gather to light their candles at the flame as it shoots forth from the grave of the Redeemer. The fire itself is not reckoned dangerous; the faithful are convinced that it will do them no harm. But the struggle to reach the fire has lost many pilgrims their lives. Stanley, who later became Dean of Westminster, was present in the Church of the Sepulchre during the Easter Festival of 1853, and has left a detailed account of it.

"The chapel which contains the Sepulchre stands in the middle of the church, rising from a dense mass of pilgrims who sit or stand wedged round it; whilst round them, and between an equally dense mass which goes round the walls of the church itself, a lane is formed by two lines, or rather circles, of Turkish soldiers stationed to keep order. Above are galleries for the spectators. It is the morning of Easter Saturday and for the first two hours everything is tranquil. Nothing indicates what is coming, except that two or three pilgrims who have got close to the aperture in the wall of the Sepulchre keep their hands fixed in it with a clench never relaxed." "Tt is about noon that the circular lane is suddenly broken through by a tangled group rushing violently round it till they are caught by one of the Turkish soldiers. It seems to be the belief of the Arab Greeks that unless they run round the sepulchre a certain number of times the fire will not come. Accordingly, the night before, and from this time forward for two hours, a succession of mad gambols takes place round and round the Holy Sepulchre. Tangled masses of twenty, thirty, fifty men start in a run, catch hold of each other, lift one of themselves on their shoulders, and rush on with him till he leaps off and someone else succeeds; some of them dressed in sheepskins, some almost naked; one usually preceding the rest as a fugleman, clapping his hands, to which they respond in like manner, adding also wild howls, of which the chief burden is—‘This is the tomb of Jesus Christ—God save the Sultan’—‘Jesus Christ has redeemed us.’ What begins in the lesser groups soon grows in magnitude and extent till at last the whole of the circle between the troops is occupied by a race, a whirl, a torrent of these wild figures, wheeling round the sepulchre. Gradually the frenzy subsides or is checked; the course is cleared, and out of the Greek Church a long procession with embroidered banners begins to defile round the Sepulchre.

"From this moment the excitement, which has before been confined to the runners and dancers, becomes universal. Hedged in by the soldiers, the two huge masses of pilgrims still remain in their places, all joining, however, in a wild succession of yells, through which are caught from time to time strangely, almost affectingly, mingled, the chants of the procession. Thrice the procession paces round; at the third time the two lines of Turkish soldiers join and fall in behind. One great movement sways the multitude from side to side. The crisis of the day is now approaching. The presence of the Turks is believed to prevent the descent of the fire, and at this point it is that they are driven, or consent to be driven, out of the church. In a moment the confusion as of a battle. and a victory, pervades the church. In every direction the raging mob bursts in upon the troops, who pour out of the church at the south-east corner—the procession is broken through, the banners stagger and waver.

"In one small but compact band the Bishop of Petra (who is on this occasion the ‘Bishop of the Fire’, the representative of the Patriarch) is hurried to the Chapel of the Sepulchre, and the door is closed behind him. The whole church is now one heaving sea of heads and resounds with the uproar. One vacant space alone is left: a narrow lane from the aperture on the north side of the chapel to the wall of the church. By the aperture itself stands a priest to catch the fire; on each side of the lane, so far as the eye can reach, hundreds of bare arms are stretched out like the branches of a leafless forest, quivering in some violent tempest.

"In earlier and bolder times the expectation of the Divine presence was at this juncture raised to a still higher pitch by the appearance of a dove hovering above the cupola of the chapel, to indicate the visible descent of the Holy Ghost. This extraordinary act has now been discontinued; but the belief still continues—and it is only from the knowledge of that belief that the full horror of the scene, the intense excitement of the next few moments, can be adequately conceived." At last, 160 CROWDS AND POWER

The moment comes. A bright flame appears inside the hole—a light kindled by the Bishop within, or the descent of God himself upon the Holy Tomb. The excitement envelopes the church as the fire spreads from hand to hand, from taper to taper, through the vast multitude. The whole edifice from gallery to gallery, and through the area below, becomes one wide blaze of thousands of burning candles.

The Bishop, carried out of the chapel in triumph on the shoulders of the people, is believed to come from the immediate presence of the Almighty. The great rush to escape the rolling smoke and suffocating heat leads to violent pressure, which in 1834 lost the lives of hundreds.

For a short time, pilgrims run to and fro, rubbing their faces and breasts against the fire to attest its supposed harmlessness. The wild enthusiasm terminates as the fire is communicated, and the frenzy contrasts with the profound repose of the evening.

The disaster of 1834 was also witnessed by an Englishman, Robert Curzon. His account follows:

At midnight of Good Friday, Curzon went to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre to see the procession of the Greeks. Every space was crammed with people, except the gallery reserved for Ibrahim Pasha and his English guests. Over 17,000 pilgrims came to see the sacred fire.

The next morning, soldiers made a way through the crowd for Ibrahim Pasha, who took his place in the gallery. The people were worn out from standing in the crowd all night and became furious as the time approached for the exhibition of the holy fire. Their excitement increased until a magnificent procession moved out of the Greek chapel. The Patriarch conducted three times around the tomb, then went into the sepulchre, closing the door.

The agitation of the pilgrims reached its peak; they screamed aloud, and the dense mass of people shook to and fro. A light appeared out of the tomb, and the happy pilgrim received the holy fire from the Patriarch within. It consisted of a bundle of thin wax candles, lit, and enclosed in an iron frame to prevent their being torn asunder and put out in the crowd; for a furious battle commenced immediately; everyone being so eager to obtain the holy light, that one man put out the candle of his neighbor in trying to light his own. "This was the whole of the ceremony: no sermon, no prayers, nothing except a little chanting during the processions. Soon you saw the lights increasing in all directions, everyone having lit his candle from the holy flame: the chapels, the galleries and every corner where a candle could possibly be displayed, immediately appeared to be in a blaze. The people in their frenzy put bunches of lighted tapers to their faces, hands, and breasts, to purify themselves from their sins.

In a short time, the smoke of the candles obscured everything in the place, and I could see it rolling in great volumes out of the aperture at the top of the dome. The smell was terrible; and three unhappy people, overcome by heat and bad air, fell from the upper range of galleries, and were dashed to pieces on the heads of the people below. One poor Armenian lady, seventeen years of age, died where she sat, of heat, thirst, and fatigue.

After a while, when he had seen all that was to be seen, Ibrahim Pasha got up and went away, his numerous guards making a line for him by main force through the dense mass of people which filled the body of the church. As the crowd was so immense, we waited for a little while, and then set out all together to return to our convent. I went first and my friends followed me, the soldiers making way for us across the church. I got as far as the place where the Virgin is said to have stood during the Crucifixion, when I saw a number of people lying one on another all about this part of the church, and as far as I could see towards the door. I made my way between them as well as I could, till they were so thick that there was actually a great heap of bodies on which I trod. It then suddenly struck me they were all dead! I had not perceived this at first, for I thought they were only very much fatigued with the ceremonies, and had lain down to rest themselves there; but when I came to so great a heap of bodies I looked down at them, and saw that sharp, hard appearance of the face which is never to be mistaken. Many of them were quite black with suffocation, and further on were others all bloody and covered with the brains and entrails of those who had been trodden to pieces by the crowd.

At this time, there was no crowd in this part of the church; but a little further on, round the corner towards the great door, the people, who were quite panic-struck, continued to press forward, and everyone was doing his utmost to escape. The guards outside, frightened at the tumult from within, thought that the Christians wished to attack them, and the confusion soon grew into a battle. The soldiers with their bayonets killed numbers of fainting wretches, and the walls were spattered with blood and brains of men who had been felled, like oxen, with the butt-ends of the soldiers' muskets. Everyone struggled to defend himself or to get away, and in the mélée all who fell were immediately trampled to death by the rest. So desperate and savage did the fight become, that even the panic-struck and frightened pilgrims appeared at last to have been more intent upon the destruction of each other than desirous to save themselves. For my part, as soon as I perceived the danger, I had cried out to my companions to turn back, which they had done; but I myself was carried on by the press till I came near the door, where all were fighting for their lives. Here, seeing certain destruction before me, I made every effort to get back. An officer of the Pasha, who by his star was a colonel, equally alarmed with myself, was also trying to return; he caught hold of my cloak and pulled me down on the body of an old man who was breathing out his last sigh. As the officer was pressing me to the ground, we wrestled together among the dying and the dead with the energy of despair. I struggled with this man till I pulled him down, and happily got again upon my legs—(I afterwards found that he never rose again).

I stood up for a minute among the press of people, held up on the uncomfortable footing of dead bodies by the dense crowd who were squeezed together in this narrow part of the church. We all stood still for a short time, when of a sudden the crowd swayed, a cry arose, the crowd opened, and I found myself standing in the centre of a line of men, with another line opposite to me, all pale and ghastly with torn and bloody clothes, and there we stood glaring at each other; but in a moment a sudden impulse seized upon us, with a shriek that echoed in the long aisles of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre the two adverse lines dashed at each other, and I was soon engaged tearing and wrestling with a thin, half naked man, whose legs were smeared with blood. The crowd again fell back, and by desperate fighting and hard struggles, I made my way back into the body of the church, where I found my friends, and we succeeded in reaching the sacristy of the Catholics, and thence the room which had been assigned to us by the monks, but not without a fierce conflict at the door of the sacristy with a crowd of frightened pilgrims who tried to press through with us. I thanked God for my escape—I had a narrow chance.

The dead were lying in heaps, even upon the stone of unction; and I saw full four hundred unhappy people, dead and living, heaped promiscuously one upon another, in some places about five feet high. Ibrahim Pasha had left the church only a few minutes before me, and very narrowly escaped with his life; he was so pressed upon by the crowd on all sides, and it was said attacked by several of them, that it was only by the greatest exertions of his suite, several of whom were killed, that he gained the outer court. He fainted more than once in the struggle, and I was told that some of his attendants at last had to cut a way for him with their swords through the dense ranks of the frantic pilgrims. He remained outside, giving orders for the removal of the corpses, and making his men drag out the bodies of those who appeared to be still alive from the heaps of the dead.

After the fearful catastrophe in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, the whole host of pilgrims seemed to have become panic-struck, and everyone was anxious to escape from the city. There was a report, too, that the plague had broken out, and we with the rest made instant preparation for our departure. To understand what happened here one must distinguish between the normal course of the Easter festival and this panic of 1834 which Curzon witnessed. Easter is the Feast of the Resurrection. The lamenting pack which had formed round the Cross and the grave of Christ is transformed into one of triumph, for the Resurrection is a victory and is celebrated as such. Fire works here as a crowd symbol of victory. It should be transmitted to each man, so that his soul may share in the Resurrection. Each man must, so to speak, become that fire which springs from the Holy Ghost, and this is why he must light his candle at it. When he has done so, he carries the precious fire out of the church to his home. The fraud connected with the origin of the fire is irrelevant. The essential fact is the transmutation of the pack, from one of lament to one of triumph. In gathering round the grave of the Saviour, the members of the pack participated in his death; in lighting their candles at the Easter fire, which shoots forth from the grave, they participate in his Resurrection.

Very beautiful and significant, too, is the multiplication of the lights, thousands springing suddenly from the one. This crowd of lights is the crowd of those who shall have life because they believe. It forms and grows with prodigious speed, the speed with which fire spreads, and only fire. Fire is the truest symbol of the suddenness and velocity of crowd growth. But before this stage is reached, before the fire actually appears, it must be fought for. The Turkish soldiers in the church, who are unbelievers, must be driven out, for so long as they are there the fire cannot appear. Their retreat is part of the ritual of the Festival and takes place at its appointed moment after the procession of the Greek dignitaries. The Turks move of their own accord towards the exit, but the pilgrims press after them as though they were driving them out, and the church is suddenly full of a tumult as of fighting and victory.

The ceremony begins with two stagnating crowds, which are separated by the soldiers. Small rhythmical packs of Arab Christians move between them and incite them. These wild, fanatical packs have the function of crowd crystals and infect those waiting for the fire with their own excitement. Then the procession of the image bearers appears. This is a slow crowd, but on this occasion it is the first to attain its goal; the half-swooning Patriarch who is carried round the church after the kindling of the fire is a living testimony to its success.

The panic of 1834, with its fearful consequences, arose out of the elements of contention inherent in the ceremony. In an enclosed space, the danger of panic from fire is always great, but it was increased here by the presence in the church at the beginning of the ceremony of two opposed groups: the infidel Turks and the pilgrims who wanted to expel them. Curzon's description is rich in details which clarify this aspect of the panic. In one of the many apparently totally irrational and disconnected moments of the day, he suddenly finds himself standing in a line of men facing another hostile line. Without even knowing who is on either side, the two lines fall on each other in mortal combat. Curzon speaks of the heaps of corpses on which people trod and clambered in the attempt to save themselves. The Church of the Sepulchre has become a battlefield. The dead and the still living lie piled together. The Resurrection has become its contrary and is now a universal defeat. The idea of plague, of a still larger heap of dead, takes possession of the pilgrims, and they flee from the city of the Holy Sepulchre.

The crowd in history: national crowd symbols most arremprs 70 find out what nations really are have suffered from an intrinsic defect: they have been attempts to define the general concept of nationality. People have said that a nation is this or that, apparently believing that all that mattered was to find the right definition; once found, this would be applicable to all nations equally. They have adduced language or territory, written literature, history, form of government or so-called national feeling; and in every case, the exceptions have proved more important than the rule. It has been like clutching at some adventitious garment, in the belief that the living creature within could be thus grasped. Apart from this seemingly objective approach, there is another, more naive one, which consists in being interested in one nation only—one's own—and indifferent to all the rest. Its components are an unshakeable belief in the superiority of this one nation; prophetic visions of unique greatness, and a peculiar mixture of moral and feral pre-tensions. But it must not be assumed that all these national ideologies have the same content. It is only in their importunate appetite and the claims they make that they are alike. They want the same thing, but in themselves they are different. They want aggrandisement, and substantiate their claim with the fact of their increase. There is no nation, it seems, which has not been promised the whole earth, and none which is not bound to inherit it in the course of nature. All the other nations who hear of this feel threatened, and their fear blinds them to everything except the threat. Thus, people overlook the fact that the concrete contents of these national claims, the real ideologies behind them, are very different from one another. One must take the trouble to find out what is peculiar in each nation; and do it without being infected by its greed. One must stand apart, a devotee of none, but profoundly and honestly interested in all of them. One should allow each to unfold in one's mind as though one were condemned actually to belong to it for a good part of a lifetime. But one must never surrender entirely to one at the cost of all the others. For it is idle to speak of nations as though there were not real differences between them. They wage long wars against one another, and a considerable proportion of each nation takes an active part in these wars. What they are fighting for is proclaimed often enough, but what they fight as is unknown. It is true they have a name for it; they 170 CROWDS AND POWER say they fight as Frenchmen or as Germans, English or Japanese. But what meaning is attached to any of these words by the person using it of himself? In what does he believe himself to be different when, as a Frenchman or a German, a Japanese or an Englishman, he goes to war? The factual differences do not matter so much. An investigation of customs, traditions, politics, and literature, could be thorough and still not touch the distinctive character of a nation, that which, when it goes to war, becomes its faith. Thus, nations are regarded here as though they were religions; and they do in fact tend to turn into something resembling religions from time to time. The germ is always latent in them, becoming active in times of war. We can take it for granted that no member of a nation ever sees himself as alone. As soon as he is named, or names himself, something more comprehensive moves into his consciousness, a larger unit to which he feels himself to be related. The nature of this unit is no more a matter of indifference than his relationship to it. It is not simply the geographical unit of his country, as it is found on a map; the average man is indifferent to this. 

Frontiers may have their tension for him, but not the whole area of a country. Nor does he think of his language, distinctly and recognisably though this may differ from that of others. Words which are familiar to him certainly affect him deeply, and especially in times of excitement. But it is not a vocabulary which stands behind him, and which he is ready to fight for. And the history of his nation means even less to the man in the street. He does not know its true course, nor the fullness of its continuity. He does not know how his nation used to live, and only a few of the names of those who lived before him. The figures and moments of which he is aware are remote from anything the proper historian understands as history.

The large unit to which he feels himself related is always a crowd or a crowd symbol. It always has some of the characteristics of crowds or their symbols: density, growth and infinite openness; surprising, or very striking, cohesion; a common rhythm or a sudden discharge. Many of these symbols have already been treated at length, for example, sea, forest and corn. It is unnecessary to recapitulate here the qualities and functions which have made them crowd symbols. They will recur in the discussion of the conceptions and feelings nations have about themselves.

But it must be stressed that these crowd symbols are never seen as naked or isolated. Every member of a nation always sees himself, or his picture of himself, in a fixed relationship to the particular symbol which has become the most important for his nation. In its periodic reappearance when the moment demands it lies the continuity of national feeling. A nation's consciousness of itself changes when, and only when, its symbol changes. It is less immutable than one supposes, a fact which offers some hope for the continued existence of mankind.

In the following pages, an attempt is made to consider a few nations with reference to their symbols. In order to follow the argument without bias, the reader should imagine himself back about twenty years. And it is essential that he should remember that I am here reducing things to their simplest and most general form and hence shall be saying very little about men as individuals.

The English

It is advisable to begin with a nation which, though it does not make much public parade of its identity, yet undoubtedly retains the most stable national feeling in the world today: with England. Everyone knows what the sea means to an Englishman; what is not sufficiently known is the precise form of the connection between his relationship to the sea and his famous individualism. The Englishman sees himself as a captain on board a ship with a small group of people, the sea around and beneath him. He is almost alone; as captain, he is in many ways isolated even from his crew. The sea is there to be ruled. This conception is decisive. Ships are as much alone on its vast surface as isolated individuals; and each is personified in its captain. His power of command is absolute and undisputed. The course he steers is a command he gives the sea. The fact that it is carried out through the medium of the crew makes people forget that it is actually the sea which has to obey. The captain decides on the goal and the sea, as though it were alive, carries him there, though not without storms and other manifestations of hostility. Considering the immensity of the sea, it is a matter of some importance whom it obeys most frequently. The obedience of the sea comes more easily when the goal is some British territory. When this is so, the sea behaves like a horse that knows the way and its rider. A ship of another nation is like an unpracticed rider on a borrowed horse; the horse behaves much worse when its master is riding it. The sea is so large that the number of ships by which it is controlled is also important. When one comes to consider the character of the sea itself, one must remember how numerous and violent are the changes to which it is subject. It is more varied in its transformations than any of the animal crowds with which men have dealings, and how harmless and stable, compared to the sea, are the hunter's forests and the farmer's fields.

The Englishman's disasters have been experienced at sea; his dead he has often had to imagine lying at the bottom of the sea; and thus the sea has offered him transformation and danger. His life at home is complementary to life at sea: security and monotony are its essential characteristics. Everyone has his place, which, except to go to sea, he is not supposed to leave for the sake of any transformation; everyone is as sure of his habits as of his possessions.

The importance of national crowd symbols can be seen particularly clearly in the contrast between the English and the Dutch. The two peoples come of similar stock, their languages are related, and the religious development of both countries is virtually the same. Both are seafaring nations and founders of maritime empires. The destiny of a Dutch sea captain on a voyage of trade and discovery differed in no way from that of an English captain. The wars they fought with each other were those of closely related rivals. And yet there is a difference between them that may appear insignificant but, in fact, is very important. It concerns their national crowd symbols.

The English conquered their island, but they did not wrest it from the sea. It is through their ships alone that the Englishman subjugates the sea; its ruler is the ship's captain. The Dutchman had to win the land he inhabits from the sea. It is so low-lying that he has to protect it by dykes. The dykes are the beginning and end of his national life. The crowd of men equates itself with the dyke and together they withstand the sea. If the dykes are damaged, the land is endangered. In times of crisis, the dykes are breached, and the Dutch find safety from their enemies on artificial islands. Nowhere else has the feeling of a human wall opposing the sea been so strongly developed.

In peacetime, people rely on the dykes, but when they have to be destroyed in front of an advancing enemy, their strength is transmitted to the men who will erect them again after the war. The dyke maintains itself in their faith until it can become reality again. In a curious and unmistakable way, the Dutch, in time of real danger, carry their barriers against the sea within themselves. Whenever the English were attacked on their island, they relied on the sea; with storms, it came to their aid against their enemies. They were sure of their island and in their ships, each of them felt the same security. The Dutch, on the other hand, always had danger at their back; for them, the sea was never entirely subdued. It is true that they sailed upon it to the ends of the earth, but it might always turn against them at home and in times of extremity, they had to turn the sea even against themselves in order to keep back the enemy who threatened them. The Germans

The crowd symbol of the Germans was the army. But the army was more than just the army; it was the marching forest. In no other modern country has the forest-feeling remained as alive as it has in Germany. The parallel rigidity of the upright trees and their density and number fill the heart of the German with a deep and mysterious delight. To this day he loves to go deep into the forest where his forefathers lived; he feels at one with the trees. Their orderly separation and the stress on the vertical distinguish this forest from the tropical kind where creepers grow in all directions. In tropical forests the eye loses itself in the foreground; there is a chaotic and unarticulated mass of growth, full of colour and life, which effectively precludes any sensation of order, or even of repetition. The forests of the temperate zone, on the other hand, have a conspicuous rhythm. The eye moves along lines of clearly visible trees into a uniform distance. Each individual tree is always taller than a man and goes on growing until it becomes a giant. Its steadfastness has much in common with the same virtue in a warrior. In a single tree, the bark resembles a coat of mail; in a whole forest, where there are many trees of the same kind growing together, it suggests rather the uniforms of an army. For the German, without his being clearly aware of it, army and forest transfused each other in every possible way. What to others might seem the army’s dreariness and barrenness kept for the German the life and glow of the forest. He was never afraid in it; he felt protected, one amongst many others. He took the rigidity and straightness of trees for his own law. The boy who escaped into the forest from the confinement of home, thinking to be alone there and able to dream, actually anticipated his entry into the army. In the forest he found the others waiting for him, true, faithful, and upright as he himself wanted to be; each like every other, for each grows straight, and yet quite different in height and strength. The effect of this early forest romanticism on the German must never be underrated. He absorbed it from countless poems and songs, and the forest which appears in these is often called “German”. The Englishman likes to imagine himself at sea, the German in a forest. It is impossible to express the difference of their national feeling more concisely.

The French

The present crowd symbol of the French is of recent date; it is their revolution. The Feast of Liberty is celebrated once a year and has become the special occasion of national rejoicing. On the 14th July, anyone may dance in the streets with anyone. People who are just as little free, equal and fraternal as in other countries can for once behave as though they were. The Bastille is stormed and the streets are again as full as they were then. The crowd, for centuries the victim of royal justice, takes justice into its own hands. The memory of the executions of the time, a continuous sequence of mass-exaltations of the most stirring kind, contributes more to the feeling of festivity than people may care to admit. Anyone who opposed the crowd, gave it his head. He owed the crowd his head and, by giving it, he helped in his own way to maintain and increase its exaltation. "The Marseillaise" dates from that time, and there is no other national hymn which has its vitality. The outbreak of freedom as a periodic event, recurring annually and expected annually, has great advantages as the crowd symbol of a nation. Like the actual Revolution, it releases forces of defence. The French armies that conquered Europe sprang from the Revolution; it found its Napoleon and reached the summit of military glory. The victories belonged to the Revolution and its general; the final defeat was the Emperor's. Several objections could be made to this use of the Revolution as the national crowd symbol of the French. It seems too vague, having neither the concrete efficiency of the English captain on his ship, nor the wooden order of the German army on the march. But one should not forget that to the Englishman's ship belongs the surging sea, and to the German's army the swaying forest. They are what nourish his feeling and keep it fluid. The crowd feeling of the Revolution is expressed in a movement and an object no less concrete: the storming of the Bastille. Until one or two generations ago, everyone would have added the word "French" to the word "Revolution". Their own most popular memory was also what they were known by in the world; it was their most characteristic production. Thus the Russians with their revolution made a sensible breach in the national consciousness of the French.

THE CROWD IN HISTORY 175

The Swiss Switzerland is a state whose national cohesion is indisputable. The patriotic feeling of the Swiss is greater than that of many peoples who speak only one language. The four languages spoken in Switzerland, the diversity of the cantons, their different social structures, the division into two religious confessions, whose wars are still fresh in memory—none of this seriously weakens the national consciousness of the Swiss; but then the crowd symbol they have in common is their mountains. It is always before their eyes, unshakeable and impregnable to a degree equalled by no other national symbol. The Swiss can see the tops of their mountains from everywhere, but there are points from which the chain appears more complete. The feeling that, from them, all the mountains can be seen together endows such places with an element of sacredness. Sometimes, on evenings which cannot be predicted in advance and over which man has no influence, the mountains begin to glow; this is their highest consecration. The difficulty of access to them and their hardness give the Swiss a feeling of security. The peaks are divided, but below the mountains are linked like the limbs of a single gigantic body. They are one body, and that body is the country itself.

The Swiss plans for defence during the last two wars expressed this equation of the nation and the chain of the Alps in a curious way. In the case of an attack, all the fertile land, all the cities, and all the centres of production were to be left undefended. The army was to retire to the mountains and would only have fought there. People and country would appear to have been sacrificed, but Switzerland would still have been represented by the army in the mountains; the crowd symbol of the nation would have become the country itself. It is a special kind of dyke which the Swiss have. They do not have to erect it themselves like the Dutch. They neither build it nor breach it, and no sea pounds against it. The mountains stand, and all the Swiss have to do is to know them thoroughly. Every section of them is climbed or travelled over. The Alps act like a magnet, attracting from all countries people who emulate the Swiss in admiring and exploring them. From whatever country they come, mountaineers are like devout Swiss; the army of them, scattered through the whole world after brief periodic terms of service in the mountains, keeps the prestige of Switzerland alive. If the Englishman sees himself as a captain, the Spaniard sees himself as a matador. In place of the sea which obeys the captain, the bullfighter has his admiring crowd. The animal which he has to kill in accordance with the noble rules of his art is the vicious old monster of myth. He must show no fear; everything depends on his self-control. His smallest movement is watched and judged by thousands. It is the Roman arena which is preserved here, but the bullfighter has changed since then and become a noble knight. He now fights alone, and his meaning and costume, and especially his prestige, were changed by the Middle Ages. Man's slave, the wild beast he has subjugated, once more rebels against him. But the hero who went out to fight it in antiquity is ready for it again. He takes up his position in the sight of the whole human race; so sure is he of his vocation that he feels able to show his audience every detail of the way he kills the monster. He knows exactly what to do; his steps are calculated and his movements as prescribed as those of a dance. But he really kills. Thousands watch the death and multiply it by their excitement.

The execution of the wild beast which no longer has a right to its wildness, which is goaded into wildness and then condemned to die for it; the execution, the blood and the immaculate knight, are doubly mirrored in the eyes of the admiring. Every man is at once the knight who slays the bull and part of the crowd which acclaims him. Across the bullfighter, who is himself, he sees himself again on the far side of the ring, as crowd. The audience is a ring, a creature closed in on itself. Wherever one looks one meets eyes; there is only one voice to be heard, and that is one's own. Thus the Spaniard, yearning for his matador, early grows accustomed to the sight of a specific crowd. He learns to know it thoroughly, and it is so strongly alive that it precludes many more recent developments and formations which have become indispensable in other countries. The bullfighter in the ring, who represents so much for him, also becomes a national crowd symbol. Whenever he thinks of large numbers of Spaniards together, he will also think of the place where they are most frequently together. Compared with these violent crowd-delights, those of the church are mild and harmless. This was not always so, and the crowd-economy of the Spaniard was differently ordered in the times when the church did not shrink from kindling hell-fire for heretics here in this world.

The Italians
A modern nation's consciousness of itself and its behaviour in war depends largely on its recognition of the national crowd symbol. Many peoples have had a spiteful trick played on them by history long after they have won their fight for unity. Italy may serve as an example of the difficulty a nation has in visualizing itself when all its cities are haunted by greater memories and when these memories are deliberately made use of to confuse its present. Before Italy had won its unity, things were far clearer in the minds of its people. As soon as the parasitic enemy had been driven out, the dismembered body would be pieced together again and would feel and act as a single organism. In cases like this, where the enemy has been in the country for a long time and the sense of oppression is acute, all peoples form similar pictures of their plight. The enemy are numerous, ugly, and hated; they come like a swarm of locusts to live off the good, honest soil of the natives. If they intend to stay, they will divide up this soil and weaken the links between the natives in every possible way. The reaction to this is conspiracy and, if there is a series of propitious moments, the driving out of the enemy. This is what finally happened in Italy and she found the unity so ardently, though for long so vainly, desired by her greatest minds. But, from this moment on, it became clear that there are dangers in allowing a city like Rome to go on existing. The crowd-buildings of ancient times still stood there, empty. The Coliseum was a ruin, all too well preserved; it would be easy to feel poor and outcast there. The second Rome, on the other hand, the Rome of St. Peter, had kept much of its old power of attraction. The Church of St. Peter was continually filled with pilgrims from all over the world. But this second Rome was in no way suited to be the focal point of distinctive nationhood. Its appeal was still indiscriminately to all men, and its organization derived from a period before nations in the modern sense existed. Between these two Romes, the national feeling of modern Italy was, as it were, paralyzed. And there was no escaping this, for Rome and the Romans had once been Italy. Fascism attempted what appeared the simplest solution, which was to dress up in the genuine antique costume. But this did not really fit; it was much too big and the movements it permitted the body inside it were so violent that every bone was broken. The Fora were excavated, but they did not fill with Romans. The Fasces aroused only the hatred of those who were beaten; neither threat nor castigation gave anyone anything to be proud of.

178 CROWDS AND POWER

Fortunately for the Italians, the attempt to impose a false crowd symbol on Italy was a failure. The Jews are a people difficult to understand. Debarred from their country of origin, they have spread over the whole of the inhabited earth. Their talent for adaptation is well known, but the degree of their adaptation is immensely variable. Among them were to be found Spaniards, Indians, and Chinese. They carry languages and cultures with them from one country to another and guard them more tenaciously than their possessions. Fools may tell stories of their sameness everywhere, but anyone who knows them well will be inclined to think that there are more varied types among them than among any other people. The extent of variation between Jews, both in their nature and their appearance, is one of the most extraordinary phenomena there is. The popular saying that both the best and the worst men are to be found amongst them is a naive way of expressing this fact. Jews are different from other people, but, in reality, they are most different from each other. The Jews have been admired for continuing to exist. They are not the only people who are found everywhere; the Armenians are certainly equally far-spread. Nor are they the oldest people; the history of the Chinese goes back much further than theirs. But, of the old peoples, they are the only one which has been wandering for so long. They have had most time in which to disappear without trace, and, in spite of this, they are more here now than they ever were. Until a few years ago, they had no territorial or linguistic unity. Most of them no longer understood Hebrew: they spoke in a hundred tongues. Lo [millions of] them, their old religion had become an empty sack. Even the number of Christians among them was gradually increasing, especially among the intellectuals; and the number of those without any religion at all was far larger still. Speaking superficially, from the point of view of self-preservation in the vulgar sense, they should have done everything possible to let it be forgotten that they were Jews, and to forget it themselves. But they cannot forget it; nor do most of them want to. One is driven to ask in what respect these people remain Jews; what makes them into Jews; what is the ultimate nature of the bond they feel when they say "I am a Jew." This bond has existed from the beginning of their history and has been re-formed over and over again with astounding monotony during [The] Exodus from Egypt. Let us visualize the actual content of this tradition: a whole people, numbered, it is true, but none the less a multitude, wanders for forty years through the desert. Their legendary forefather had been promised progeny numerous as the sand on the shores of the sea. Now this progeny exists and wanders, sand through the sand of the desert. The sea allows them to pass, but it closes over their enemies. Their goal is a promised land, which their swords will conquer for them. The image of this multitude moving year after year through the desert has become the crowd symbol of the Jews. It has remained to this day as distinct and comprehensible as it was then. The people see themselves together before they settled and then dispersed; they see themselves on their migration. In this state of density they received their law. If ever a crowd had a goal, they had. They had many adventures and these were common to all of them. The crowd they formed was a naked crowd; of all the many things which normally enmesh men in their separate lives scarcely any existed in these surroundings. Around them was nothing but sand, the barest of all crowds; nothing is more likely than the image of sand to emphasize the feeling of being alone with itself which this wandering procession must have had. Often its goal was obliterated and the crowd, threatening to disintegrate, had to be roused, gripped and held together by chastisement or exhortation. The number of people in the procession—600-700,000—was enormous, and not only by the modest standards of remote antiquity. The duration of their wanderings is of particular importance. What this crowd sustained for forty years can later be stretched to cover any period of time. This long wandering inflicted as a punishment contains all the torments of later migrations.

In order to clarify as much as possible some of the concepts I have formulated, I propose to add here a few words about the crowd-structure of Germany, the Germany which, in the first third of this century, astonished the world with formations and tendencies of an entirely unprecedented kind, whose deadly seriousness went completely unrealized at the time and which are only now beginning slowly to be understood. The crowd symbol of the united German nation which formed after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71 was, and remained, the army. Every German was proud of the army and it was only a few isolated individuals who were able to remain outside the influence of this symbol. It was the war which supplied even a universal thinker like Nietzsche with the stimulus for his chief work, The Will to Power; the sight he never forgot was that of a cavalry squadron. The point of this reference to Nietzsche is that he proves how general the importance of the army had become in Germany; how this crowd symbol had an effect even on those who haughtily detached themselves from the crowd. Bourgeois and worker, peasant and scholar, Catholic and Protestant, Prussian and Bavarian, they all saw the army as the symbol of the nation. The deeper roots of this symbol, its origin in the forest, have already been uncovered. For a German, forest and army are so intimately connected that either can equally well stand as the crowd symbol of the nation; in this respect they are identical.

Apart from its influence as a symbol, the army did also exist in a concrete form; and this fact was of decisive importance. A symbol lives in the minds and feelings of men, as did that curious entity, the forest-army. The actual army, on the other hand, in which every young German served, functioned as a closed crowd. The belief in universal military service, the conviction of its profound significance and the veneration accorded it, had a wider reach than the traditional religions, for it embraced Catholics and Protestants alike. Anyone who excluded himself was no German.

I said earlier that it was only in a very limited sense that armies could be called crowds. This, however, was not so with a German; the army was by far the most important closed crowd he experienced. It was closed because those belonging to it were either young men of certain age groups only, who served for a limited period, or professional soldiers. But every young man passed through it at some time and remained inwardly linked to it for the rest of his life.

'The Prussian Junker caste which provided the greater part of its officers acted as the crowd crystal of this army. It was like an order of chivalry with strict, though in this case, unwritten laws; or like a hereditary orchestra, thoroughly familiar with the music with which it has to infect its audience.

On the outbreak of the First World War, the whole German people became one open crowd. The enthusiasm of those days has often been described. Many people in other countries had been counting on the internationalism of the Social Democrats and were astounded at their failure to act. They forgot that the Social Democrats, too, bore within them this forest-army symbol of their nation; that they themselves had belonged to the closed crowd of the army and that, whilst in it, they had been under the command and influence of a highly disciplined and immensely effective crowd crystal, the Junker and officer caste. Their membership of a political party carried very little weight in comparison with this.

But those first August days of 1914 were also the days in which National Socialism was begotten. Hitler himself is our authority for this. He later described how, at the outbreak of war, he fell on his knees and thanked God. It was his decisive experience, the one moment at which he himself honestly became part of a crowd. He never forgot it and his whole subsequent career was devoted to the re-creation of this moment, but from outside. Germany was to be again as it was then, conscious of its military striking power and exulting and united in it. But Hitler would never have achieved his purpose had not the Treaty of Versailles disbanded the German army. The prohibition on universal military service robbed the Germans of their most essential closed crowd. The activities they were denied, the exercises, the receiving and passing on of orders, became something which they had to procure for themselves again at all costs. The prohibition on universal military service was the birth of National Socialism. Every closed crowd which is dissolved by force transforms itself into an open crowd to which it imparts all its own characteristics. The party came to the rescue of the army, and the party had no limits set to its recruitment from within the nation. Every single German—man, woman or child, soldier or civilian—could become a National Socialist. He was probably even more anxious to become one if he had not been a soldier before, because, by doing so, he achieved participation in activities hitherto denied him.

Hitler used the slogan "The Diktat of Versailles" with unparalleled and unwearying monotony; and many have marvelled at its effectiveness. Repetition never weakened it; on the contrary, it grew stronger with the years. What was the actual content of this slogan? What was it that Hitler passed on to his audiences by it? To a German, the word "Versailles" did not so much mean the defeat, which he never really acknowledged, as the prohibition of the army; the prohibition of specific and sacrosanct practices without which he could not really imagine life. The prohibition of the army was like the prohibition of a religion. The faith of his fathers had been proscribed, and it was every man's sacred duty to re-establish it. Every time it was used, the word "Versailles" probed this wound and kept it bleeding, so that it never closed. As long as the word "Versailles" was uttered with sufficient force at mass meetings it was impossible for healing to begin.

182 CROWDS AND POWER

In this connection, it is important to notice that what was spoken of was always a diktat and never a treaty. Diktat belongs to the sphere of command. A single alien command, a command coming from the enemy and therefore dubbed diktat, had put an end to the whole virile activity of command amongst Germans themselves, that is within the army. Anyone who heard or read the words "Diktat of Versailles" felt in his depths what had been taken away from him, which was the German army. To reconstitute it seemed the only really important goal; once it was there again, everything would be as it had been before. The army's importance as a national crowd symbol had never been shaken; the forest, which was the older and deeper-rooted part of this symbol, still stood untouched.

The choice of the word "Versailles" as his central slogan was therefore particularly fortunate from Hitler's point of view. Not only did it remind the Germans of the latest painful event in their life as a nation, of the prohibition of general conscription and the suppression of their right to an army in which every man could serve for a few years, but it also summed up other familiar and important moments of German history. It was at Versailles that Bismarck had founded the Second German Empire. The unity of Germany had been proclaimed there in the moment of elation and irresistible strength following a great victory. And the victory had been won over Napoleon III, who regarded himself as the successor of the great Napoleon and the inheritor of his spirit, and who had risen to power through the veneration accorded to his legendary name. But Versailles was also the seat of Louis XIV, and had been built by him. Of all the French rulers before Napoleon, Louis XIV was the one who had most deeply humiliated the Germans. It was he who had incorporated Strasbourg with its cathedral into France and it was his troops who had devastated the castle at Heidelberg. Thus the proclamation of the German Empire at Versailles was a belated victory over both Louis XIV and Napoleon, and it had been won without the help of any ally. The effect of the word "Versailles" on Germans was significant, and it was inevitable that it should echo the triumph of modern German history. Every time Hitler spoke of the "Diktat" of Versailles, the memory of that triumph echoed in the word, transmitting a promise to his audience.

The slogans of National Socialism, such as "The Third Reich" and "Sieg-heil," derive directly from the words "The Diktat of Versailles." The whole content of the movement is concentrated in these slogans: the defeat to be turned into victory, and the prohibited army to be re-created for this purpose.

The symbol of the movement, the Swastika, has a cruel effect. The sign resembles two twisted gallows, threatening the spectator, as if saying "You wait. You will be surprised at what will hang here." The word absorbed the cruel and bloodthirsty elements of the Christian cross, as if it were good to crucify. The first part of the German word, "Haken," recalls "hakenstellen," an expression used by boys for "tripping up." It forebodes the fall of many and conjures up military visions of heel clicking.

Inflation is a crowd phenomenon in the strictest and most concrete sense of the word. The confusion it wreaks on the population of whole countries is not confined to the actual period of the inflation. Money can become a crowd symbol, and, in certain circumstances, the units of which it is composed may accumulate to form a crowd. However, the individuality of its units is always emphatically stressed. Each coin has a clear and firm edge and its own specific weight, and it can be recognized at a glance. It passes freely from hand to hand, continually changing its surroundings. Often, it has the head of a ruler stamped on it, from whom it will take its name, such as Louis d'or and Maria Theresa thalers. People like imagining a coin as an individual. The hand closes round it, feeling its planes and edges as a whole. A tenderness for the coin which can do so much for them is universal amongst men, and part of its “character.” In one respect the coin is superior to a living creature. Being made of metal, its hardness secures “eternal” existence for it; except by fire, it can scarcely be destroyed at all. A coin does not attain its size through growth; it issues ready-made from the mint and should remain as it then is; it should never change. Reliability is perhaps the most important attribute of coins. All the owner has to do is to guard them well from other people; they do not run away of their own accord like animals. They need not be watched; a use can always be found for them; and they have no moods to be considered.

The status of each coin is further consolidated by its relation to other coins of different values. Their strict hierarchy makes them even more like people. One could speak of the social system of coins, the classes here being classes of value. A higher coin can always be exchanged for a lower, but never a lower for a higher. Among most peoples, a heap of coins has always been known as treasure, and treasure, as we saw, is a crowd symbol. It is felt to be a unit; one can come upon it without knowing exactly how much it really contains; one can rummage in it and separate coin from coin; it is always expected to be larger than it is; and it is often hidden away.

iv come suddenly to light. But it is not only the man who cherishes life-long hopes of finding treasure who expects it to be greater than it is. The man who is in process of amassing it imagines it as continually growing and does everything in his power to promote this. It is certainly true that, with many men who live for their money alone, treasure takes the place of the human crowd. This is exemplified in the many stories of lonely misers. They are the successors of the mythical monsters who existed solely to guard, watch and cherish some treasure.

It may be objected that this connection between coins and treasure no longer holds for modern man; that paper money is in use everywhere; that the rich now keep their treasure in banks in an abstract and invisible form. But the importance of a gold reserve for a strong THE CROWD IN HISTORY 185 currency and the fact that there are still actual gold currencies to be found, prove that treasure has by no means entirely lost its old importance. The great majority of men, even in countries which are highly developed technically, are still paid for their work by the hour and, almost everywhere, the size of their wage still comes within the range imagined as covered by coins. Coins are still received as change for paper money, and the old feeling for them, the old attitude, is still familiar to everyone. Getting change is a daily part of the simplest and commonest processes of living, something which every child learns as early as possible.

But it is true that a new relationship to money has developed alongside the old one. In every country, the monetary unit has acquired a more abstract value. This does not mean, however, that it is felt to be less of a unit. If the coins of earlier days had something of the strict hierarchical organization of a closed society, modern paper money is akin to the inhabitants of a great city. The modern treasure is the million. The word has a cosmopolitan ring; it is understood all over the world and can refer to any type of currency. The interesting thing about the million is that it can be reached in leaps and bounds by clever speculation; it dangles before the eyes of all whose ambition is to make money. The millionaire has taken over some of the dazzling qualities of the old fairy-tale king. The connotation of the word million is twofold; it can refer to both money and people. This is particularly striking in political speeches. The lust of seeing numbers mount up is characteristic, for example, of Hitler’s speeches. There the word usually referred to the millions of Germans living outside the Reich and still waiting for their deliverance. After his first bloodless victories and before the outbreak of his war, Hitler had a particular partiality for the mounting numbers of the populations of his empire. He contrasted them with the total numbers of all the Germans in the world. It was his confessed aim to bring all these within his sphere of influence; and in all his threats, self-congratulations and demands he used the word million. Other politicians use it more often of money, but the word has undoubtedly acquired some ambiguity.

Through being used to express populations, and especially the populations of metropolitan cities which are invariably expressed in millions, the abstract number has become filled with a crowd-meaning contained by no other number today. Since it is counted in the same millions, money and the crowd are closer today than they have ever been. What is it that happens in an inflation? The unit of money suddenly loses its identity. The crowd it is part of starts growing and, the larger it becomes, the smaller becomes the worth of each unit. The millions one always wanted are suddenly there in one’s hand, but they are no longer millions in fact, but only in name. It is as though the process of sudden increase had deprived the thing which increases of all value. The movement has the character of a flight and, once it has started within a currency, there is no foreseeable end to it. Just as one can go on counting upwards to any figure, so money can be devalued downwards to any depth. This process contains that urge to rapid and unlimited growth which I have characterized as one of the most important and striking psychological attributes of the crowd. But here the growth negates itself; as the crowd grows, its units become weaker and weaker. What used to be one Mark is first called 10,000, then 100,000, then a million. The identification of the individual with his mark is thus broken, for the latter is no longer fixed and stable, but changes from one moment to the next. It is no longer like a person; it has no continuity and it has less and less value. A man who has been accustomed to rely on it cannot help feeling its degradation as his own. He has identified himself with it for too long and his confidence in it has been like his confidence in himself. Not only is everything visibly shaken during an inflation, nothing remaining certain or unchanged even for an hour, but also each man, as a person, becomes less. Whatever he is or was, like the million he always wanted he becomes nothing. Everyone has a million and everyone is nothing. The process of the formation of treasure has become its opposite, and all the reliability of money is blown away by the wind. No treasure can be added to; each, on the contrary, grows less and less; every accumulation of treasure disappears. An inflation can be called a witches’ sabbath of devaluation where men and the uniis uf their money have the strangest effects on each other. The one stands for the other, men feeling themselves as "bad" as their money; and this becomes worse and worse. Together they are all at its mercy and all feel equally worthless. Thus in an inflation something happens which was certainly never intended and which is so dangerous that anyone with any measure of public responsibility who is capable of foreseeing it must fear it. It is a double devaluation originating in a double identification. The individual feels depreciated because the unit on which he relied, and with which he had equated himself, starts sliding; and the crowd feels depreciated because the million is. It has been shown that the word million is ambiguous, standing for both a large sum of money and a large number of people, particularly the people inhabiting a modern city; and that one meaning passes into the other and feeds on it. All the crowds which form in times of inflation—and they form very frequently—are subject to the pressure of the depreciated million. Together people are worth as little as each is worth alone. As the millions mount up, a whole people, numbered in millions, becomes nothing. The process throws together people whose material interests normally lie far apart. The wage-earner is hit equally with the rentier. Overnight a man can lose a large part, or all, of what he thought safe in his bank. An inflation cancels out distinctions between men which had seemed eternal and brings together in the same inflation crowd people who before would scarcely have nodded to each other in the street. No one ever forgets a sudden depreciation of himself, for it is too painful. Unless he can thrust it on to someone else, he carries it with him for the rest of his life. And the crowd as such never forgets its depreciation. The natural tendency afterwards is to find something which is worth even less than oneself, which one can despise as one was despised oneself. It is not enough to take over an old contempt and to maintain it at the same level. What is wanted is a dynamic process of humiliation. Something must be treated in such a way that it becomes worth less and less, as the unit of money did during the inflation. And this process must be continued until its object is reduced to a state of utter worthlessness. Then one can throw it away like paper, or repulp it. The object Hitler found for this process during the German inflation was the Jews. They seemed made for it: their long-standing connection with money, their traditional understanding of its movements and fluctuations, their skill in speculation, the way they flocked together in money markets, where their behaviour contrasted strikingly with the soldierly conduct which was the German ideal—all this, in a time of doubt, instability and hostility to money, could not but make them appear dubious and hostile. The individual Jew seemed "bad" because he was on good terms with money when others did not know how to manage it and would have preferred to have nothing more to do with it. If the inflation had led only to the depreciation of Germans as individuals, the incitement of hatred against individual Jews would have sufficed. But this was not so, for, when their millions tumbled, the Germans also felt humiliated as a crowd. Hitler saw this clearly and therefore turned his activities against the Jews as a whole. First they were attacked as wicked and dangerous, as enemies; then they were more and more depreciated; then, there not being enough in Germany itself, those in the conquered territories were gathered in; and finally they were treated literally as vermin, to be destroyed with impunity by the million. The world is still horrified and shaken by the fact that the Germans could go so far; that they either participated in a crime of such magnitude, or con- nived at it, or ignored it. It might not have been possible to get them to do so if, a few years before, they had not been through an inflation during which the Mark fell to a billionth of its former value. It was this inflation, as a crowd experience, which they shifted on to the Jews.

The Nature of the Parliamentary System

‘Tue two-party system of modern parliaments uses the psychological structure of opposing armies. In England in the Civil War, these actually existed, although unwillingly. No one likes killing his own countrymen; the feeling of kinship always tends to restrain bloodshed and sometimes even brings civil wars to an early end. But the two factions remain; they fight on, but in a form of warfare which has renounced killing. In real fighting it is assumed that the greater number will win. The chief concern of any commander is to be stronger than his adversary at the point of conflict: to have more men there. The successful commander is the one who succeeds in concentrating superior forces at the greatest number of crucial points, even if his total forces are less.

A parliamentary vote does nothing but ascertain the relative strengths of two groups at a given time and place. Knowing them beforehand is not enough. One party may have 360 members and the other only 240, but the actual vote is decisive, as the moment in which the one is really measured against the other. It is all that is left of the original lethal clash and it is played out in many forms, with threats, abuse, and physical provocation which may lead to blows or missiles. But the counting of the vote ends the battle. It is assumed that 360 men would have defeated 240. The “crowd of the dead” does not come into the question; in a parliament, there are, and can be, no dead. This fact is made clear by the practice of parliamentary immunity. A member’s immunity is twofold: it operates both in relation to the government and its agents and also in relation to other members. This second aspect is usually too little stressed.

Now no one has ever really believed that the majority decision is necessarily the wiser one because it has received the greater number of votes. It is will against will as in war. Each is convinced that right and reason are on his side. Conviction comes easily, and the purpose of a party is, precisely, to keep this will and conviction alive. The member of an outvoted party accepts the majority decision, not because he has ceased to believe in his own case, but simply because he admits defeat. It is easy for him to do this because nothing happens to him: he is not punished in any way for his previous opposition. He would react quite differently if his life was endangered. What he anticipates, however, is future battles, and many of them; in none of them will he be killed. All members of a parliament share in a like immunity. It is this measure of equality which makes them a crowd, and there is no distinction here between the members of either party. The parliamentary system functions only so long as this immunity is preserved. 

It crumbles as soon as it admits anyone who allows himself to reckon on the death of any member whatsoever. Nothing is more dangerous here than to see any of the living as dead. War is war because the dead are included in the final reckoning. Parliament is parliament only so long as the dead are excluded. The instinctive way in which the English Parliament, for example, dissociates itself from its dead, even from those who have died peacefully and outside its walls, is shown in the system of by-elections. The dead man's successor is not settled in advance and no one succeeds automatically to his place. Fresh candidates are put up and a new election is held in all its formality. The dead man has no place in Parliament; he cannot bequeath his membership and he can never know for certain who will succeed him after his death. Death with all its perilous after-effects has been successfully excluded from the English Parliament. This interpretation of the parliamentary system may be disputed on the grounds that all continental parliaments consist of numerous parties which vary greatly in size and only sometimes cohere into two opposing groups. But this fact does not affect the significance of the vote. This, everywhere and always, is the crucial moment which determines events, and the crucial factor in it is two figures, the greater of which binds all who have taken part in the vote. All parliaments everywhere stand or fall by the twofold immunity of their members.

190 CROWDS AND POWER
The popular election of representatives is basically similar to parliamentary procedure. The candidate who has proved himself the strongest, the victor, is reckoned to be the best. And the strongest candidate is the one who obtains the most votes. If the 17,562 who voted for him were to join battle with the 13,204 who voted for his opponent, they would win. But this conflict, too, must stop short of killing. The "immunity" of the voters is, however, less important than the "immunity" of the ballot papers on which they vote. Every method of influencing the voters is permitted up to the moment in which they finally make their choice of candidate and write down or indicate his name. The opposing candidate will be held up to every kind of popular contumely and hatred. The elector can take active part in several electoral contests. If he is politically inclined, he will vastly enjoy the ups and downs of the fight; but the moment in which he casts his vote is almost sacred; the sealed boxes which hold the ballot papers are sacred; and so is the count. The solemnity of all these activities derives from the renunciation of death as an instrument of decision. Every single vote puts death, as it were, on one side. But the effect that killing would have had on the strength of the enemy is scrupulously put down in figures; and anyone who tamper But the number of those amongst whom he votes is relatively much smaller. Intensity and repetition have to supply the excitement that the electors derive from their numbers. Distribution and Increase. Socialism and Production "The prosiem of justice is as old as that of distribution. Whenever men went hunting together the sequel was distribution. As a pack they had been united, but when it came to the distribution of the prey they THE CROWD IN HISTORY 191 had to divide, never having developed the communal stomach which would enable them to feed as one creature. In the communion they found a rite which perhaps came nearest to such a conception. It was an approximation, though an inadequate one, to an ideal state for which they felt a need. The isolation which eating entails is one of the roots of that terrifying growth called power. Anyone who eats alone and in secret, must kill alone. Anyone who kills with others, must share the prey with them. Justice begins with the recognition of the necessity of sharing. The oldest law is that which regulates it, and this is still the most important law today and, as such, has remained the basic concern of all movements which have at heart the community of human activities and of human existence in general. Justice requires that everyone should have enough to eat. But it also requires that everyone should contribute to the production of food. The overwhelming majority of men are engaged in the production of goods of all kinds; something has gone wrong with distribution. This, reduced to the simplest terms, is the content of socialism. But, however they are divided about the way in which goods are distributed in the modern world, the adversaries and the partisans of socialism are at one over the precondition of this problem. This is production. Both sides in the ideological conflict which has split the earth into two almost equal halves instigate and further production in every possible way. Whether goods are produced to be sold or to be shared, the actual process of production is not only not questioned by either side, but is venerated. One might almost say that, in the eyes of most people today, there is something sacred about it. It may well be asked where this veneration derives from. Perhaps some point can be found in human history where production became sacrosanct. But a little reflection will show that there is no such point. The phenomenon is so old that any attempt to fix a historical date for it must be meaningless. The hubris of production goes back to the increase pack. The connection may be overlooked because, in practice, it is no longer packs which devote themselves to procuring increase. These have become the enormous crowds which grow daily larger in every centre of civilization. But if we remember that no end can be seen to this growth, that there are more and more people producing more and more goods, that these goods include live animals and plants, and that the methods used to produce them can now scarcely be distinguished from those used to produce inanimate goods, then we shall have to 192 CROWDS AND POWER admit that the increase pack has been man's most fruitful and successful creation. Increase ceremonies have become machines and techniques. Every factory is a unit serving the same cult. What is new is the acceleration of the process. What in former days was generation and increase of expectancy, directed towards rain or corn, the approach of herds of animals which could be hunted, or the growth of other animals which had been domesticated, has today become production itself. We press a few buttons, connect up various levers, and everything we want, of every possible kind, is there to hand in a few hours, or even less. It is worth pointing out that the strict and exclusive combination of proletariat and production, which has acquired such prestige during the last hundred years, re-establishes in a particularly pure form the old conception which was the core of the increase pack. The proletariat are those who increase fastest, and they do so in two ways. First, they have more children than other people and thus, through their progeny, come to resemble a crowd, and secondly, their numbers are increased by the influx of people from the country to the centers of production. It is exactly the same twofold growth that the readers will remember as characteristic of the primitive increase pack. People flocked to its feasts and ceremonies, and there, many of them gathered together already, they gave themselves up to rites and practices designed to ensure a numerous progeny.

When the concept of a dispossessed proletariat was first advanced and began to take effect, it retained the full optimism of increase. No one supposed for a moment that, because their lives were miserable, there ought perhaps to be fewer of them. People relied on production; through its increase, the proletariat too would increase. Their productivity should serve themselves. Proletariat and production should grow together. This is the very connection that invariably manifests itself in the activities of primitive increase packs. People want to become more numerous themselves, and therefore, all the things on which they live must become more numerous too. The one desire cannot be separated from the other. They are so closely linked that it is often not clear what it is that should increase. I have shown that, through transformations into animals which lived together in large numbers, man strengthened his feeling for his own increase. It might indeed be said that he learned it from such animals. He was confronted with shoals of fish, swarms of insects, great herds of hoofed animals, and, if he acted these creatures so well in his dances that he became them and felt like them, if he succeeded in fixing these transformations as totems and in passing them on to his descendants as a sacred tradition, he also passed on, together with them, his determination to achieve an increase far exceeding that natural to man.

Modern man's relationship to production is exactly the same. Machines today can produce more than anyone would once have dreamed of. Through them, multiplication has grown to monstrous proportions. But since, on the whole, it is objects which are multiplied and not living creatures, man's addiction to sheer numbers increases with the increase of his needs. He can find uses for more and more things and, in using them, he discovers yet further needs. It is production in this sense of unrestricted multiplication in every direction which is the most striking characteristic of "capitalist" countries. In countries where the "proletariat" is accorded a special position, and where large accumulations of capital in the hands of individuals are forbidden, the problems of equitable distribution are at least theoretically ranked equal in importance with those of increase.

The Self-Destruction of the Xosas Onz mornine In May 1856, a young Xosa girl went to fetch water from the little river that ran near her home. When she came back, she described how she had seen strange men by the river, quite different from any she had seen before. 

Her uncle, who was called Umhlakaza, went to the river to see the strangers and found them where she had said. They told him to go back to his house and perform certain ceremonies; when he had done this, he should sacrifice an ox to the spirits of the dead, and, on the fourth day, return to them again. There was in their appearance something which demanded obedience, and Umhlakaza did as they ordered. On the fourth day, he went again to the river. The strange people were again there, and, to his astonishment, he recognized among them his brother who had died many years before. Then, for the first time, he learned who and what they were. They explained that they had come from battlefields beyond the sea to help the Xosas against the white men, their eternal enemies: through their invincible power, the English would be driven from the land. Umhlakaza must act as intermediary between them and the chiefs, to pass on the instructions they would give him. For astonishing things would come to pass, more astonishing than anything that had ever yet happened, if their proffered help was accepted. Above all, he must tell his people to abandon witchcraft against each other, and to kill fat cattle and eat.

The news of this communication from the spirit world spread rapidly among the Xosas. Kreli, the paramount chief of the tribe, greeted the message with joy. In fact, it is said, although it cannot be proved, that he himself was the original author of the whole scheme. Word went round that the command of the spirits must be obeyed; the best cattle must be slaughtered and eaten. Some of the Xosas lived in British territory, and messengers were sent to their Chiefs too, telling them what had happened and asking for their help. Immediately all the Xosa clans were in commotion. Most of the chiefs began slaughtering their cattle. Only one of them, Sandile, hesitated; he was a cautious man. The British High Commissioner informed Kreli that, while he could do as he pleased in his own territory, he would be punished if he went on inciting British subjects to destroy their property. But this threat did not trouble Kreli much. He was convinced that the time was near in which he would be the one to decree punishment.

The revelations communicated through the prophet increased rapidly. Standing in the middle of the river, in the presence of a multitude of deluded people, the girl heard beneath her feet strange unearthly sounds. The prophet, her uncle, declared that they were the voices of the spirits holding council over the affairs of men. The very first command had been to slaughter cattle, but the ghosts were insatiable in their demands. More and more cattle were killed, but still never enough. The delusion continued month after month, spreading wider every day and seizing fresh victims. The cautious Sandile succumbed to it after a while, urged passionately by his brother who, with his own eyes, had seen the spirits of two of their father's dead councillors. He had spoken to them and they had sent word to Sandile, commanding him to kill his cattle unless he wanted to perish with the white man. The final order had already been given through the prophet. Its fulfillment was to be the last act of preparation required of the Xosas before they were thought worthy of the help of the spirit host. Not a goat or an ox or a cow out of all their herds must be left living and every grain of corn in their granaries must be destroyed. A glorious future awaited those who obeyed. On the appointed day, herds of thousands upon thousands of cattle, more beautiful than all they had slaughtered, would rise up out of the earth and cover the pastures far and wide; great fields of millet, ripe and ready to eat, would spring from the ground in an instant. On that day, the ancient heroes of the tribe, the great and the wise of years gone by, would rise again and share in the joys of the faithful. Sickness and sorrow would be no more, nor the infirmities of age; beauty and youth would return to the risen dead, as to the enfeebled living. But terrible would be the fate of those who had set themselves against the will of the spirits, or neglected to fulfill their commands.

That same day, which would bring so much joy to the faithful, would be to them a day of ruin and destruction. The sky would fall on them and crush them, together with the half-breeds and the white men. Missionaries and government officials strove in vain to stem this madness. The Xosas were possessed by a delirious frenzy and would neither listen to argument nor brook opposition. The whites who attempted to interfere were threatened, and their lives were no longer safe. The Xosas were in the grip of a fanatical belief, and many of their leaders, moreover, saw in this a favorable opportunity for war. Their intention throughout was to hurl the full force of the Xosa tribe, well armed and starving, against the British Colony. Their own excitement was too great for them to see the terrible dangers of such an undertaking.

There were some who did not believe either in the predictions of the prophet or in their chance of succeeding in such a war, but who nevertheless destroyed their last particle of food. Among them was one of Kreli's uncles. "It is the Chief's command," he said, and then, when there was nothing left to eat, the old man and his favorite wife sat themselves down in an empty kraal and died.

Kreli's chief councillor was also one of those who opposed the plan until he saw that words were useless. Then, saying that all he had was his chief's, he gave the order for slaughter and destruction and fled from the place, a raving madman. And thus it was with thousands: the chief commanded, and they obeyed.

In the early months of 1857, an unusual activity ruled throughout the land. Great kraals were got ready to hold the cattle which were expected to appear so soon and in such enormous numbers. Huge skin sacks were prepared to contain the milk which was soon to flow like water. Many of the people were already starving even as they worked. East of the River Kei, the prophet's order had been carried out to the letter, but the resurrection day was still postponed. Chief Sandile had been late in beginning the slaughter of the cattle, and in his territory, it was not yet complete. Some of the Xosas, therefore, were already starving, while others were still engaged in destroying their resources.

The government did everything possible to protect the frontiers. Watch posts were strengthened, and every available soldier was despatched there. The colonists, too, prepared to meet the shock. As soon as the defenses had been seen to, provisions were laid in to save the lives of the starving. At last, the long-awaited day came. All through the night, the Xosas had watched in a fever of excitement. They were waiting for two blood-red suns to rise over the eastern hills; then the heavens would fall on their enemies and crush them. The half-dead Xosas spent the night in wild rejoicings. When the sun rose, their hearts sank. They did not despair at once. They hoped for the sun's setting, but it came and everything was over. The warriors meant to burst on the colony had not been gathered together. It was too late to postpone the day of the rising again. The Xosas' fierce excitement turned to deepest despair. They now made their way to the colony as starving beggars. Brother fought against brother and father against son for scraps and shreds of the great milk sacks made carefully in the days of hope. The old, sick, and weak were left to their fate. People hunted for plants to eat, and even for the roots of trees. Those near the sea tried to keep themselves alive on shellfish, but they were not used to this kind of food, got dysentery, and died in hundreds. In many places, whole families sat down together to die. Fifteen or twenty skeletons were found under a single tree: parents who had died with their children. A ceaseless stream of starving creatures poured into the colony. Mostly they were young mach aid wouuen, but there were fathers and mothers among them carrying half-dead children on their backs. They squatted in front of the farmhouses, begging piteously for food. In 1857, the population of British Xosa-land fell from 105,000 to 37,000: 68,000 people died. The power of the Xosa tribe was utterly broken. This story is true and took place in South Africa in the fifties of the last century. Thanks to the reinforcement of the spirits, their power will be invincible. The spirits share the same desires as the living; they like to eat meat, and cattle must be sacrificed for them. Presumably, they also eat the grain that is destroyed. At first, the sacrifices come singly and may be taken as signs of piety and devotion. However, their numbers increase, and the dead demand everything.

Men's passionate desire for increase, normally the increase of their corn and cattle, is transformed into desire for the increase of the dead. It is cattle that have been slaughtered which must increase, and corn that has been destroyed: corn and cattle for the dead. The tendency of all human crowds to become more and more—the blind, reckless, dynamic movement that sacrifices everything to itself—is transferable.

Hunters transfer it to their prey, which can never be numerous enough for them and whose fertility they seek to foster by ritual ceremonies. Pastoral peoples transfer it to their herds; they do everything possible to make them grow and, with skill and practice in breeding, they actually succeed in this. Agricultural peoples transfer it to their produce; their corn bears thirty or one hundredfold, and the granaries in which they store it are made to be seen and admired; they are the outward and visible signs of successful increase.

Men work so hard to achieve it, and their transferred crowd-feeling for their corn and their cattle is so strong that they acquire from it a new sense of human dignity. Sometimes, indeed, they feel as though they had done it all themselves.

During their "self-destruction," all the human desire of the Xosas for increase of men, corn, and cattle became bound up with their idea of the dead. For their revenge on the white men who had gradually stolen their land and for success in war against those they had so often fought unsuccessfully, one thing was necessary: that their dead should rise again. As soon as they were assured of this, as soon as the dead in endless numbers had really risen, then the war could begin. And the dead, when they returned, would restore to them not only the cattle and millet that they themselves had sacrificed, but all that had ever been sacrificed to them.

The slaughtered cattle and the corn which had been destroyed had the function of crowd crystals, attracting to themselves all corn and cattle. (In earlier times, human beings as well would certainly have been sacrificed to the same end.) Then, on the appointed day, the pastures would teem with new herds and the millet stand ripe in the fields. Thus, the whole project turned on the reappearance of the dead, bringing with them the means of life.

For this great end, the living sacrificed everything, strengthened in their purpose by those among the dead whom they knew. The prophet's brother and the two former councillors of the old chief were guarantors of the pact with the dead. Anyone who opposed it or hesitated over it took from the crowd something which belonged to it and destroyed its unity. It would be better if he were openly on the side of the enemy; with them, he would go down to destruction.

If one considers the catastrophic outcome of these events in the light of the Xosas' own beliefs—the fact that on the promised day nothing happened, no fields of millet appeared, no herds, and no army of the dead—then one may say that they had indeed been deceived by their dead. The dead had not meant the agreement seriously; they were not concerned with victory over the white men, but simply with their own aggrandisement. By false pretences, they got hold of, first, the grain and the cattle of the living, and then the living themselves, who died of starvation. Thus the dead were victorious, but in a different manner anda different war. In the end, it was they who were left as the largest crowd.

Also of particular importance in the behaviour of the Xosas is the réle of commands. A command stands alone; there is something isolated about it. The dead from whom it comes need an intermediary to pass it on; and for this they make use throughout of the temporal hierarchy. The prophet must address himself to the chiefs and persuade them to accept the commands of the spirits. As soon as Kreli, the Paramount Chief, has declared his acceptance, everything follows the normal chain of command. Messengers are sent to all the Xosa clans including those under the “false” rule of the British. Even the unbelieving, who for a long time oppose the carrying out of the scheme—among them Kreli’s uncle and his chief councillor—ultimately submit and the reason they give is: It is the chief’s “Command”.

The story becomes more extraordinary still when we consider the content of the command. What it actually refers to is the slaughter of cattle, that is, killing. The more insistently it is repeated, the more comprehensive its application becomes. It becomes a crowd event and anticipates war itself. Seen in its light, the cattle stand for the enemy. They stand for them and for their cattle, as the corn which is destroyed stands for their corn. The war begins in the aggressors’ own country, but is waged as though they were already in the enemy’s; the command meanwhile resumes its original character of death sentence, the instinctive death sentence decreed by one species upon another.

Over all the animals that man keeps captive hangs his death sentence. It is, it is true, suspended, and often for a long time, but it is never remitted. Thus, man with impunity inflicts on his animals the death of which he is always conscious. The span of life he allows them is as set as his own, but in their case he decides when it is over. Their death is easier for him when he has many of them and those to be slaughtered can be chosen out of a whole herd. Then his two aims—the increase of his herds and the killing of the individual beasts which he needs—can easily be combined. Here, as herdsman, he has more power than any hunter. His animals are all in one place and do not flee from him. The duration of their lives is in his hands. He does not have to kill them when and where he finds them.

The force of the hunter has become the power of the herdsman. Thus the command laid on the Xosas is the command in its essence. The carrying out of the death sentence on their cattle must precede the slaughter of their enemies, as though the two killings were at bottom one: they are one.

It should be noticed that the command to kill comes from the dead themselves, as though they were the final authority. And in the end, in fact, they compel everything and everyone to come over to their side. Among them are generations of chiefs, all those who gave orders in life. Their united authority is great, and would still be great even if they appeared among the living as men like themselves, not as the dead. But one cannot escape the impression that death has increased their power. The fact that, through the prophet, they can make themselves heard, that they appear at all, and speak to him, adds to their former natural authority a supernatural one; they have cheated death and are still impressively active. To circumvent death, to evade it, is one of the oldest and strongest desires of rulers. In this connection it is worth adding that Kreli survived by many years his people’s death from starvation.

The entrails of power: Seizing and Incorporation
"The psychology of seizing and incorporating, like that of eating in general, is still completely unexplored. We tend to take the whole process for granted and never reflect on the mysteriousness of much that occurs in the course of it. There is nothing about us which is more strongly primitive. It is something we share with animals, but even this strange fact has not so far made us pay more attention to it.

The approach, with hostile intent, of one creature to another falls into several distinct acts, each of which has its particular traditional significance. First there is the lying in wait for prey; the prey is marked down long before it is aware of our designs on it. With feelings of pleasure and approval it is contemplated, observed and kept watch over; it is seen as meat whilst it is still alive, and so intensely and irrevocably seen as meat that nothing can deflect the watcher’s determination to get hold of it. Already while he is prowling round it he feels that it belongs to him. From the moment he selects it as his prey, he thinks of it as incorporated into himself. This watching and lying in wait for prey is a state of such peculiar tension that it can acquire a significance of its own independent of circumstances. It is a state which one tends to prolong.

Later it may be induced for its own sake, without reference to any immediate prospect of prey. But man does not lie in ambush and turn{persecutor with impunity. Anything of this kind which he actively undertakes, he also experiences passively in himself, in exactly the same form, only more strongly, for his greater intelligence is aware of more dangers and doubles the torment of being persecuted.

Man is not always strong enough to obtain his prey directly. The skill and experience in pursuit which he has acquired have resulted in his developing all kinds of complicated traps. Often he makes use of the power of transformation which is his specific gift and appears disguised as the animal he is after. He acts it so well that it believes him. This manner of trapping an animal may be termed flattery. The animal is told “I am like you. I am you. You can safely let me come near you.”

After the stealthy approach and the leap—treated in another context —the next thing is the first touching of the prey. This is perhaps what is feared most. The fingers of the attacker feel what will soon belong to 204 CROWDS AND POWER his whole body. Contact through the other senses, sight, hearing and smell, is not nearly so dangerous. With them there can be space between the attacker and the victim and, as long as this space exists, nothing is finally decided and there is still some chance of escape. The sensation of touch, on the other hand, is the forerunner of tasting. The fairy-tale witch asks her victim to stretch out a finger so that she can feel whether he is fat enough to eat. The design of one body on the other becomes concrete from the moment of touching. Even at the lowest levels of life this moment has something decisive about it. 

It contains the oldest terrors; we dream of it, we imagine it, and civilized life is nothing but a sustained effort to avoid it. Whether resistance is continued after this moment, or is given up completely, depends on the ratio of power between the toucher and the touched, or rather on what the latter imagines this ratio to be. Usually he will fight on to try and save his skin and only if the power confronting him appears overwhelming will he abandon the attempt. The touch to which one resigns oneself because all resistance appears hopeless—and particularly so as regards the future—has, in our society, become the arrest. The feel of the hand of authority on his shoulder is usually enough to make a man give himself up without having to be actually seized. He cowers and goes quietly. He maintains an appearance of composure, even though it is not always justified by what is likely to happen to him subsequently.

The next stage of approach is the act of seizure. The fingers of the hand form a hollow into which they try to compress part of the creature they touch. They do this without regard to the shape and organic cohesion of the prey. Whether they injure it or not at this stage is irrelevant; it is simply that some part of its body has to be got into the space thus formed as a pledge for the whole. This space within the grasping hand is the anteroom of the mouth and the stomach by which the prey is finally incorporated. With many animals, it is the armed mouth itself that does the seizing, instead of hand or claw. Among men, the hand which never lets go has become the very emblem of power: “He was delivered into his hands”, “He was in their hands”, “It is in God’s hands”. Similar expressions are common in all languages.

For the actual process of seizing, what is really important is the pressure exerted by the human hand. The fingers close round the object seized; the hollow space into which this has been forced narrows. The aim is to be able to feel it with the whole inner surface of the hand, and to feel it more firmly. The original lightness and delicacy of touch are first extended to a wider area, then strengthened, and finally concentrated until that part of the body which is touched is as firmly compressed as possible. Pressure of this kind came to supersede the habit of using claws to rend the victim. It is true that in some archaic cults the victim was still clawed, but the actors were disguised as animals and what they did was deliberately bestial. For the real job, men came to rely on their teeth.

Pressure can increase until it crushes. Whether it actually reaches this point or not depends on how dangerous the prey is. If the attacker has had a hard fight to overcome it, if he has been seriously threatened by it, or enraged or injured, he will want to make it pay for this and will press harder than is necessary to make sure of it. But even more than fear or rage, it is contempt which urges him on to crush it. An insect, something so small that it scarcely counts, is crushed because one would not otherwise know what had happened to it; no human hand can form a hollow small enough for it. But, in addition to the desire to get rid of a pest and to be sure it is really disposed of, our behaviour to a gnat or a flea betrays the contempt we feel for a being which is utterly defenceless, which exists in a completely different order of size and power from us, with which we have nothing in common, into which we never transform ourselves and which we never fear except when it suddenly appears in crowds. The destruction of these tiny creatures is the only act of violence that remains unpunished, even within us. Their blood does not stain our hands, for it does not remind us of our own. We never look into their glazing eyes. We do not eat them. They have never—at least not amongst us in the West—had the benefit of our growing, if not yet very effective, concern for life. In brief, they are outlaws. If I say to someone, “I could crush you with one hand,” I am expressing the greatest possible contempt. It is as though I were saying "You are an insect. You mean nothing to me. I can do what I like with you, and that won't mean anything to me either. You mean nothing to anyone. You can be destroyed with impunity without anyone noticing. It would make no difference to anyone. Certainly not to me."

The most extreme form of destruction through pressure, that is, grinding, cannot be achieved by the hand, for it is too soft. Grinding requires a great preponderance of weight and hard objects above and below, between which something is ground. If he wants to do this himself, man has to use his teeth. In general, we do not think of something living when we speak of grinding; the process is relegated to inorganic nature, the word being most frequently used in connection with natural catastrophes such as the fall of large rocks which grind or pulverize living creatures. The word is used in a figurative sense, but is never taken quite literally. It conveys the idea of a destructive power not really proper to man himself. There is something impersonal about it. The body as such is not capable of grinding and therefore magnanimously renounces it.

The most it is capable of is "an iron grip". It is remarkable what respect this is accorded. The functions of the hand are so manifold that it is not surprising that there should be a large number of expressions connected with them. But the hand's real glory derives from the grip, that central and most often celebrated act of power. The moment of seizing, which is decisive amongst animals as well as amongst men, has always created the strongest impression on men, and their superstitious awe of the great cats of prey, the tiger and the lion, is based upon it. These are the great seizers and they do their seizing alone. With them, the lying in wait and watching, the sudden leap, the thrusting in of the claws and the mauling are all still one. The momentum of the action, its pitilessness, the assurance with which it is carried out, the never questioned superiority of the killer, the fact that he can choose whatever he wants as his prey—all this has contributed to his enormous prestige. However we look at it, this is the highest concentration of power and, as such, has made an ineradicable impression on man; all kings have wanted to be lions. It is the very act of seizing and its success which has been admired and praised. The simple exercise of superior strength has been universally regarded as courage and greatness. The lion does not have to transform himself in order to catch his prey; he remains himself throughout. Before he goes hunting, he makes himself known by his roar; he alone can afford to announce his intention loudly and audibly to every creature. This rev 3 an indestructible arrogance which can never be deflected and which, for this very reason, spreads even greater terror. Power at its core and its apex despises transformation. It is sufficient unto itself and wills only itself. In this form, it has always seemed remarkable to man; free and absolute, it exists for nothing and no one except itself. This is the peak of its glory, and to this very day, it seems as though there were nothing which could prevent its reappearance in the same form. There is, however, a second act of power which is not quite so glorious but no less essential. Dazzled by the grandeur of the act of seizing, we tend to forget that there is something equally important which runs parallel to it, namely, to avoid being seized. All the empty space which a man who holds power creates round himself serves this second purpose. Every man, even the least, seeks to prevent anyone else coming too close to him. Every form of social life established amongst men expresses itself in distances which allay the ceaseless fear of being seized and caught. Symmetry, which is so striking a feature of many ancient civilizations, derives in part from man's attempt to create uniform distances all round himself. Within these civilizations, safety is based on distances and is also emblematically expressed by them. The ruler, on whose existence that of everyone else depends, stands furthest and most clearly apart; in this, and not only in his splendour, he is equated with the sun, or, as among the Chinese, with the sky itself; which is even more spacious. Access to him is made difficult, palaces with more and more rooms being built round him. Each gate and each door is heavily guarded so that it is impossible to intrude on him against his will. He, from his remote security, can have anyone seized wherever he may be. But how is anyone to seize him, protected as he is by his hundredfold separation?

The actual incorporation of the prey begins in the mouth. From hand to mouth is the route followed by everything which can be eaten. Among the many creatures which have no arms for grasping, the process is initiated by the mouth itself, by the teeth or by a beak protruding from it. The most striking natural instrument of power in man and in many animals is the teeth. The way they are arranged in rows and their shining smoothness are quite different from anything else belonging to the body. One feels tempted to call them the very first manifestation of order and one so striking that it almost shouts for recognition. It is an order which operates as a threat to the world outside, not always visible, but visible whenever the mouth opens, which is often.

The substance of the teeth differs from that of all the other visible parts of the body and would be impressive even if people only had two teeth. They are smooth, hard and unyielding and can be clenched without any change of shape; they make the same effect as well polished and firmly set stones. From a very early stage, man used all kinds of stones as weapons and tools, but it was a long time before he learnt to polish them to the smoothness of teeth. It is probable that his teeth served him as a model for the improvement of his tools. The teeth of all kinds of large animals had always been useful to him; he might have captured them at the risk of his life and some of the power of the animal which had threatened him still seemed to him to be contained in them. He wore them as trophies and talismans to pass on to others the terror they had once caused. He proudly displayed on his body the scars they had caused; these ranked as badges of honour and were so much desired that they were often artificially produced. Thus both his own teeth and those of alien and stronger animals affected man in a wide variety of ways. By their very nature, they occupied a position midway between an actual part of the body and a tool. The fact that they could fall out or be knocked out made them even more like a tool. Smoothness and order, the manifest attributes of the teeth, have entered into the very nature of power. They are inseparable from it, and in every manifestation of power, they are the first things to be established.

The conjunction began with primitive tools, but as power grew, these early attributes became more pronounced. The leap from stone to metal was perhaps the most striking move in the direction of increased smoothness. However much stone was polished, the sword, made first of bronze and then of iron, was smoother. The real attraction of metal lies in the fact that it is smoother than anything else. In the machines and vehicles of the contemporary world, smoothness has increased and has also become smoothness of performance. Language expresses this very simply; we say "everything is going smoothly" or "functions smoothly," and we mean by this that some process is completely and undisturbedly within our power.

In modern life, the bias towards smoothness has spread to fields where it formerly tended to be avoided. Houses and furniture used to be decorated, as were the limbs and bodies of men. Modes of decoration changed, but decoration always existed and was obstinately preserved even after it had lost its symbolical meaning. Today, smoothness has conquered our houses, their walls, and all the objects we put into them; ornament and decoration are despised and regarded as a sign of bad taste. We speak of function, clarity of line, and utility, but what has really triumphed is smoothness, and the prestige of the power it conceals.

The example of modern architecture shows how difficult it is to separate smoothness from order. Their common history is old, as old as the teeth. The uniformity of the whole row of front teeth and the regular spaces between them stood as models for many different kinds of arrangements. Many of those which we take for granted today may originally have derived from them. The order of military formations, which is artificially created by man himself, is in myth connected with teeth: the soldiers of Cadmus, who sprang from the soil, were sown as dragon's teeth. There are certainly other instances of order to be seen in nature, such as the order of various grasses, for example, and the more rigid one of trees. But man did not find these in himself as he did teeth; they were not so directly and uninterruptedly linked with his intake of food, and it was not so easy to make use of them.

It was the fact that the teeth are used for biting that so emphatically drew man's attention to their order, and the fact that they fall out with unpleasant consequences that made him conscious of the importance of this order. The teeth are the armed guardians of the mouth, and the mouth is indeed a strait place, the prototype of all prisons. Whatever goes in there is lost, and much goes in while still alive. Large numbers of animals first kill their prey only in the mouth, and some not even then. The readiness with which the mouth opens in anticipation of prey, the ease with which, once shut, it remains shut, recall the most feared attributes of a prison. It can scarcely be wrong to assume that the mouth did in fact exert a hidden influence on prisons. Primitive man certainly knew other creatures besides whales in whose mouth there was room for him. In this terrible place, nothing could thrive, even if there were time to settle there. It is barren and nothing can take root in it. When the gaping maws of dragons had been virtually extirpated, man found a symbolic substitute for them in prisons. In times when these used to be torture chambers, they resembled a hostile mouth in many respects. Hell still presents the same appearance today. Prisons, on the other hand, have become puritanical. The smoothness of teeth has conquered the world; the walls of cells are all smooth and even the window opening is small. For the prisoner, freedom is the space beyond the clenched teeth, and these are now represented by the bare walls of his cell. The narrow gorge through which everything has to pass is, for the few who live so long, the ultimate terror.

Man's imagination has been continually occupied by the several stages of incorporation. The gaping jaws of the large beasts which threatened him have pursued him even into his dreams and myths. Voyages of discovery down these jaws were no less important to him than those over the sea, and certainly as dangerous. Some who had given up all hope were pulled living out of the maw of these beasts and bore the marks of their teeth on them for the rest of their lives. The road that the prey travels through the body is a long one, and on the way, all its substance is sucked out of it; everything useful is abstracted from it till all that remains is refuse and stench. This process, which stands at the end of every act of seizing, gives us a clue to the nature of power in general.

210 CROWDS AND POWER
Anyone who wants to rule men first tries to humiliate them, to trick them out of their rights and their capacity for resistance, until they are as powerless before him as animals. He uses them like animals and, even if he does not tell them so, in himself he always knows quite clearly that they mean just as little to him; when he speaks to his intimates he will call them sheep or cattle. His ultimate aim is to incorporate them into himself and to suck the substance out of them. What remains of them afterwards does not matter to him. The worse he has treated them, the more he despises them. When they are no more use at all, he disposes of them as he does of his excrement, simply seeing to it that they do not poison the air of his house. He will not dare to identify all the individual stages of this process even to himself. If he is a braggart, he may admit to his familiars that he degrades to the status of animals the men he procures for himself. But, since he does not have his subjects slaughtered in slaughter-houses nor actually use them to feed his body, he will deny that he sucks them dry and digests them; on the contrary, it is he who feeds them. Thus it is easy to overlook the real nature of these processes, particularly as man has learned to keep animals which he does not kill, or not immediately, since they are of more use to him in other ways. But, quite apart from the person who wields power and knows how to concentrate so much in his two hands, the relation of each and every man to his own excrement belongs to the sphere of power. Nothing has been so much part of one as that which turns into excrement. The constant pressure which, during the whole of its long progress through the body, is applied to the prey which has become food; its dissolution and intimate union with the creature digesting it; the complete and final annihilation, first of all functions and then of everything which once constituted its individuality; its assimilation to something already existing, that is, in the body of the eater—all this may very well be seen as the central, if most hidden, process of power. "It is so much a matter of course, so automatic and so far beyond consciousness, that one underrates its importance. One tends to see only the thousand tricks of power which are enacted above ground; but these are the least part of it. Underneath, day in, day out, is digestion and again digestion. Something alien is seized, cut up into small bits, incorporated into oneself, and assimilated. By this process alone man lives; if it ceases, he dies. So much he has always known. But it is clear that all the phases of this process, and not only the external and half-conscious ones, must have their correspondence in the psyche. It is not altogether easy to find these correspondences. We shall, however, come on clear traces of them in the course of our enquiry, and shall, follow them up. As will be seen, the symptoms of melancholia are especially illuminating in this context.

The excrement, which is what remains of all this, is loaded with our whole blood guilt. By it we know what we have murdered. It is the compressed sum of all the evidence against us. It is our daily and continuing sin and, as such, it stinks and cries to heaven. It is remarkable how we isolate ourselves with it; in special rooms, set aside for the purpose, we get rid of it; our most private moment is when we withdraw there; we are alone only with our excrement. It is clear that we are ashamed of it. It is the age-old seal of that power-process of digestion, which is enacted in darkness and which, without this, would remain hidden for ever.

The hand's origin is traced to life in trees. Its primary characteristic is the separation of the thumb. It is the thumb's powerful development, and the gap between it and the other fingers, which make it possible to use what was once a claw to grasp whole branches and thus make it easy and natural to move about in trees: we see from the monkeys how useful hands are in this respect. As is now generally recognized, this is the oldest function of the hand. There is, however, a tendency to overlook the fact that the two hands have different functions in climbing; they do not do the same thing at the same time. While the one hand is reaching for a new branch, the other holds fast to the old one. This holding fast is of cardinal importance, for in rapid movement it alone prevents a fall. In no circumstances must the hand from which the weight of the body is suspended loosen its hold, and this teaches the hand a tenacity of grip which is quite different from the older grip on prey.

In addition, as soon as the second hand has grasped the new branch, the first hand must loosen its grip on the old one. Unless this is done quickly the climbing creature cannot proceed. The hand thus acquires a new faculty: the ability to let go of something instantly. Prey was never relinquished except under extreme pressure and against all the habits and desires of the holder. For each hand, therefore, the act of climbing consists of two consecutive stages: grasping, letting go; grasping, letting go. It is true that one hand does the same as the other, but a stage later. At any given moment each is doing the opposite of the other. What distinguishes monkeys from other animals is the quick succession of these two movements; grasping and letting go follow immediately on each other, and it is to this that they owe part of the marvelous nimbleness we admire in them.

The higher monkeys or apes, who have abandoned the trees for the ground, have retained this essential faculty by which the two hands, as it were, partner each other; and there is a widespread human occupation which, in the whole manner of its pursuit, clearly recalls it: this is trading." The essence of trading is the giving of one object in exchange for another. The one hand tenaciously holds on to the object with which it seeks to tempt the stranger. The other hand is stretched out in demand towards the second object, which it seeks to have in exchange for its own. As soon as it touches this, the first hand lets go of its object; but not before, or it may lose both. The crudest form of cheating, when something is taken from someone without any return being made, corresponds, translated into the context of climbing, to falling from the tree. To prevent this, the trader remains on his guard during the whole transaction and scrutinizes every movement of his opposite number.

The profound and universal pleasure men take in trading is thus partly explained by the fact that trade is a translation into non-physical terms of one of the oldest movement patterns. In nothing else today is man so near the apes. After this sortie into a much later time let us return to the hand itself and its origins. Among the branches of trees, the hand learned a mode of grasp which was no longer solely concerned with immediate food. The route from hand to mouth, which is short and scarcely susceptible of variation, was thus interrupted. A branch which broke off in the hand was the origin of the stick. Enemies could be fended off with a stick and space made for the primitive creature who perhaps no more than resembled man. Seen from a tree, the stick was the weapon which lay nearest to hand. Man put his trust in it and has never abandoned it. It was a cudgel; sharpened, it became a spear; bent and the ends tied together, a bow; skilfully cut, it made arrows. But through all these transformations, it remained what it had been originally: an instrument to create distance, something which kept away from men the touch and the grasp that they feared.

In the same way that the upright human stance still retains a measure of grandeur, so, through all its transformations, the stick has never wholly lost its magical quality; as sceptre and as sorcerer's wand, it has remained the attribute of two important forms of power.

The Patience of the Hand

It is the violent activities of the hands which are thought of as the oldest. We not only think of the act of seizing with hostile intent, which is expected to be cruel and sudden, but automatically, and in spite of their technical complexity and the remoteness of their derivation, we add to the group many movements which in fact only developed later: hitting, stabbing, thrusting, throwing, shooting. The speed and precision of these movements may be greater, but in substance and in intent they have remained the same. They are important for hunters and soldiers, but they have added nothing to the special glory of the human hand.

The hand has found other ways to perfect itself, and these, in all cases, are ways which renounce predatory violence. Its true greatness lies in its patience. It is the quiet, prolonged activities of the hand which have created the only world in which we care to live. The potter whose hands are skilled in shaping clay stands as creator at the beginning of the Bible. But how did the hands learn patience? How did the fingers of the hand become sensitive? One of the earliest occupations we know of is the picking over of the fur of a friend which monkeys delight in. We imagine that they are searching for something and, as they often do undoubtedly find something, we have ascribed a purely practical and far too narrow purpose to this activity. In reality, they do it principally for the agreeable sensation that the individual fingers receive from the hairs of the skin. It constitutes the most primitive "finger exercises" that we know. It was through them that the hand became the delicate instrument we marvel at today.

The Finger Exercises of Monkeys
Everyone who observes monkeys is struck by their solicitous mutual examination of each other's coats. The meticulous way in which they separate and observe each individual hair leads one to suppose that they are hunting for vermin. Their posture recalls that of men looking for fleas, and their hands go carefully to their mouths as though they had found something—so frequently and productively, in fact, that it seems to prove the necessity of such a search. This, therefore, has always been the popular interpretation of it.

Only recently has the proceeding been more precisely explained by zoologists. A coherent description and analysis of this monkey habit may be found in Zuckerman's book "The Social Life of Monkeys and Apes." It is so revealing that I shall quote from it at length.

"'Flea-catching', regardless of what the sociologists may have to say, is the most fundamental and basal form of social intercourse between Rhesus monkeys. Monkeys, and to a lesser extent apes, spend a great part of the day grooming one another. An animal will carefully examine a fellow's coat with its fingers, eating many of the odds and ends that it finds. These are carried to its mouth either by hand or sometimes, after licking a tuft of hair, by direct nibbling. The performance implies exceedingly well-coordinated movements of the fingers, associated with exact accommodation and convergence of the eyes.

This behavior is commonly misinterpreted as an attempt to remove lice. Actually, vermin are rarely found on either captive or wild monkeys. The fruits of the search generally turn out to be small, loose, scaly fragments of skin, particles of skin secretion, thorns, and other foreign matter. When not engaged in other pursuits, monkeys react immediately to the presence of fur by 'picking'. The stimulus of hair is one to which a monkey responds as soon as it is born, and one which remains powerfully effective in all phases of its growth.

In the lack of a companion, a healthy monkey will pick through its own fur. Two, and sometimes even three, monkeys may, as a group, pick over one of their fellows. Usually the one being cleaned is passive, except for movements which facilitate the investigations carried out by its grooms. Sometimes, however, it may simultaneously be engaged in picking through the coat of yet another animal.

Monkeys do not confine their grooming activities to their own kind. Any hairy object, animate or inanimate, may form the subject of their investigations. They readily pick over the hair of a human 'friend'. They may be seen in captivity, and have been seen in the wild, picking through the fur of animals belonging to different species. The performance seems to have sexual significance, not only because of its gentle stimulation of numerous cutaneous end organs, but also because it is sometimes accompanied by direct sexual activity. For this reason and because of its frequent expression, it is perhaps legitimate to regard the picking reaction and the stimulus of hair as factors involved in the maintenance of a social group of sub-human primates."

The surprising thing in this account is Zuckerman's attribution of sexual significance. He speaks of two or three monkeys together picking over the fur of a companion, and he stresses the significance for them of all kinds of fur. Later in his book he contrasts this "picking" with sexual activity and points out that even in periods of sexual inactivity when they show little sign of such interest, they still come to the bars of their cages to be scratched. He also has a good deal to say about the early significance of fur for the young monkey.

The first external phenomenon of which a monkey has any sensory experience is hair. As soon as a baby monkey or ape is born, it is pulled by its mother to her breast, and its fingers immediately clutch and hold her fur. "Unaided, the young animal finds the nipple by 'trial and error'. For about the first month of its life, it lives entirely on milk, and is carried by its mother wherever she goes. When the mother is sitting, the young animal is generally held close to her body, with its feet clutching at the hair of her belly and its hands buried in the fur of her chest. When she moves, the baby hangs on in the same way, slung, as it were, beneath her. Usually, it holds on by its own unaided efforts, but sometimes the mother clasps it with one 'arm', while she hops along on three 'legs'. When she is sitting, she may embrace her baby with both arms.

The baby manifests a strong interest in fur. It crawls over its mother's fur; within a week, it may scratch its own body. I once observed a monkey, a week old, vaguely exploring with its hands the fur of its father, who was sitting close to its mother. Sometimes the mother monkey behaves as though she were irritated by having her fur clutched." One monkey in the London Gardens persisted in pulling away the hands and feet of her infant wherever they clasped.

The behavior of a nursing monkey does not alter when her baby dies. She continues to press it to her breast and carries it in her arms wherever she goes. "At first, she never puts it down, picking through its fur as she did when it lived. She examines its mouth and its eyes, its nose and its ears. In a few days, one notices a change in her behavior. A slightly decomposing body now droops over her arms. Except when moving, she no longer presses it to her breast, and although she continues to groom the body and to bite at the skin, she begins to lay it on the ground more frequently.

The body becomes yet more decomposed, and mummification sets in, but her investigation of the skin and fur continues. The dried-up body now begins to disintegrate. One notices a leg missing, an arm missing, and it is soon a shriveled bit of skin. The mother is more often seen biting off pieces—it is unknown whether she swallows them. At about this stage, she may abandon of her own accord what is left of the shriveled remains." Monkeys often retain many kinds of furry and feathery objects. Zuckerman observed a year-old baboon who seized a young kitten, killed it and kept it in her arms the whole day, picking through its fur, meanwhile, and protesting vigorously when it was removed in the evening. Monkeys in the London Zoo can be seen picking through the feathers of sparrows they have killed. Also recorded is the case of a captive monkey who mothered the dead body of a rat thrown to her as elaborately as the monkey described above mothered her own dead infant. From the evidence he collected, Zuckerman deduced that there are three factors that contribute to effective maternal behavior. The two primary factors are fundamentally of social significance: first, the mother's attraction to a small furry object, and second, the living baby's strong attraction to its mother's fur. The third factor is the sucking reflex of the young animal, which relieves mammary tension in the mother. The reaction to fur is a basic factor in social behavior, as indicated by the young primate's clinging to its mother's fur even after her death. The attraction is not to the specific body, since it is equally soothed by the carcass of any other dead baboon.

"The fundamental nature of the reaction to fur is perhaps also indicated by its ill-defined character and by the variety of the situations in which it is evoked. Feathers, brooms, mice, kittens are all adequate stimuli. It seems very likely that the social performance of grooming develops from this innate response to fur, and that it always remains one of the fundamental bonds holding monkeys together."

It will be seen from these lengthy extracts that Zuckerman himself does not really believe in the specific sexual significance of the grooming of the coat among primates. He is quite clear that fur, in itself, and in all circumstances, has a peculiar attraction for monkeys. The pleasure which the touch of hair affords them must be of a quite particular kind, and they seek it from any source, the dead as well as the living, and strangers as well as their own kind. The size of the animal they tend does not matter. For this purpose, the baby means as much to the mother as the mother to the baby. Mating couples and friends indulge in it equally, and several animals may occupy themselves simultaneously with the fur of one. The pleasure is a pleasure of the fingers. They can never have enough of hair; they can spend whole hours drawing their fingers through it.

And these are the animals whose liveliness and inconsequent mobility are proverbial. There is an old Chinese tradition according to which monkeys have no stomachs and digest their food by leaping around. Hence the contrast to the endless patience they display in this kind of grooming is all the more striking. Through it, the fingers become more and more sensitive. The feeling of many hair tips simultaneously engenders a particular sense of touch which is entirely different from the crude sensation of snatching or grasping.

One is irresistibly put in mind of all those later occupations of mankind which depend on the delicacy and patience of the fingers. The as yet unknown ancestors of man, like all the apes, had a long period of such finger exercises behind them. Without these, our hands would never have developed as far as they have. Various factors may originally have given rise to this grooming; perhaps the search for parasites and perhaps the early experiences of the baby ape at the hairy breast of its mother. But the process itself, in the developed state in which it can be observed in all monkeys, has a unified significance of its own.

Without it, we should never have learned to shape anything, nor to sew, nor to stroke. The real specific life of the hand begins with it. As a man watched his hands at work, the changing shapes they fashioned must gradually have impressed themselves on his mind. Without this, we should probably never have learned to form symbols for things, nor, therefore, to speak.

The Hands and the Birth of Objects

The hand that scoops up water is the first vessel. The fingers of both hands intertwined are the first basket. The rich development of all kinds of intertwining, from the game of cat’s cradle to weaving, seems to me to have its origin here. One feels that hands live their own life and their own transformations. It is not enough that this or that shape should exist in the surrounding world. Before early man could create it himself, his hands and fingers had to enact it. Empty fruit husks in the shape of cups, like coconut shells, may have existed for a long time, but were thrown away heedlessly. It was the fingers forming a hollow to scoop up water that made the cup real. One could say that objects in our sense, objects which have value because we ourselves have made them, first existed as signs made by hands. There seems to be an immensely important turning point where the nascent sign language for things first comprehends a desire to shape them oneself, long before this is actually attempted. What man, with the help of his hands, enacted, was only made long afterwards, when it had been enacted often enough. Words and objects are accordingly the emanations and products of a single unified experience: representation by means of the hands. Everything that a man can do, everything that represents his culture, he first incorporated into himself by means of transformation. Hands and face were the instruments of these transformations and their significance, compared with the rest of the body, became increasingly great. The specific life of the hands, in this its earliest sense, still retains its pristine force in gesticulation.

Destructiveness in Monkeys and Men

Destructiveness in monkeys and men can plausibly be regarded as "hardening exercises" of the hands and fingers. Life in trees brought the hands of the climbing monkey into constant contact with a material harder than themselves. To make use of the branches of trees he had to hold on to them, but he also had to know how to break them. The testing of his "ground" was a testing of branches and twigs; one that broke easily was a false basis for progress. The exploration of the tree world was a ceaseless confrontation of hardness. It still remained necessary for him to test it even when he had acquired considerable experience of it. The stick, which to him as to men, became the earliest weapon, was the first in the long series of hard instruments. The hardness of the hands was measured against it, as later against stones. Fruit and the flesh of animals was soft; softest of all was fur. The grooming and picking of the coat trained the delicacy of the fingers; the breaking of whatever they held their strength. There is thus a separate destructiveness of the hand, not immediately connected with prey and killing. It is of a purely mechanical nature and mechanical inventions are extensions of it. Precisely because of its innocence it has become particularly dangerous. It knows itself to be without any intention to kill, and thus feels free to embark on anything. What it does appears to be the concern of the hands alone, of their flexibility and skill, their harmless usefulness. It is this mechanical destructiveness of the hands, now grown to a complex system of technology, which, whenever it is linked with a real intention to kill, supplies the automatic element of the resulting process, that empty mindlessness which is so particularly disquieting. No one actually intends anything; it all happens, as it were, of itself. The process in oneself, when fingers thoughtlessly break matches or crumple paper, is closely connected with the development of ones tool-using technique. The hands' faculty of independent life has had tremendous consequences. The extended index finger has acquired a significance of its own, providing the sensation of stabbing. The dagger is a harder and more pointed finger. The arrow is a cross between finger and bird, made more slender to fly better.

The finger that detached itself from the rest of the hand, acting like a thorn, is the psychological origin of this kind of weapon. Not all hand operations are invested with the same degree of power; their prestige varies greatly. Things important for a group's practical existence may be highly valued, but the greatest respect is always accorded to anything that has to do with killing.

The hungry man feels empty space within himself. He overcomes the discomfort by filling himself with food. The fuller he is, the better he feels. The man who can eat more than anyone else is a champion. Some peoples take such a champion eater for their chief. His full belly seems to them a guarantee that they will never go hungry for long.

With other forms of chiefdom, the eating capacity of the ruler becomes less significant. He may not be the largest eater himself but owns the largest store of food. He can still be the champion eater, but transfers the satisfaction of repletion to his court, reserving for himself the right to be offered everything first. But the king in his character of champion eater has never wholly disappeared. Time and again the réle is re-enacted for the benefit of delighted subjects. Ruling groups in general are also prone to gluttony; the feats of the later Romans are proverbial, in this respect, and all families whose power is securely established tend to exhibit themselves in this way and are later imitated and surpassed by those newly arrived. In many societies the capacity and the passion for extravagance have gone as far as formal, ritually ordered orgies of destruction. The most famous of these is the Potlatch of the Indians of north-western America, which consisted of great festal assemblies of the whole community, culminating in contests of destruction among the chiefs. Each chief boasted of the amount of property he was prepared to destroy. The one who destroyed most was the victor and enjoyed the greatest fame. Eating more than anyone else presupposes the destruction of animals which belong to the eater. One has the impression that, in the Potlatch, the destroying of other kinds of property is an extension of the destroying of eatables. Thus the chief was able to boast far more than if he had actually had to eat everything, and in addition was spared the physical consequences of doing so. It may be useful to have a look at eating in general, independent of the eater's position in the social scale. A certain esteem for each other is clearly evident in all who eat together. This is already expressed by the fact of their sharing. The food in the common dish before them belongs to all of them together. Everyone takes some of it and sees that others take some too. Everyone tries to be fair and not to take advantage of anyone else. The bond between the eaters is strongest when it is one animal they partake of, one body which they knew as a living unit, or one loaf of bread. But the touch of solemnity in their attitude cannot be explained by this alone; their mutual esteem also means that they will not eat each other. It is true that membership of the same group always carries a guarantee of this, but only in the moment of eating is it convincingly expressed. People sit together, bare their teeth, and eat, and even in this critical moment, feel no desire to eat each other. They respect themselves for this, and respect their companions for an abstemiousness equal to their own. In a family, the husband contributes food, and the wife prepares it for him. The fact that he habitually eats what she has prepared constitutes the strongest link between them. Family life is closest where its members frequently eat together. When one thinks of it, the picture one forms is that of parents and children sitting round a table. Everything else seems to be a preparation for this moment. The more often and the more regularly it recurs, the more those who thus eat together feel themselves to be a family. To be accepted at the family table amounts almost to being accepted into the family. This may be the most appropriate place to say something about the mother, who is the core and very heart of this institution. A mother is one who gives her own body to be eaten. She first nourishes the child in her womb and then gives it her milk. This activity continues in a less concentrated form throughout many years; her thoughts, in so far as she is a mother, revolve round the food the growing child needs. It does not have to be her own child; a strange child may be substituted for her own, or she may adopt one. Her passion is to give food, watching the child eat and profiting from the food it eats; its growth and increase in weight are her constant aims. Her behavior appears selfless, but she now has two stomachs instead of one, controlling both. At first, she is more interested in the new stomach and the undeveloped body. The concept of digestion as a central process of power holds for the mother, but it's distributed between two bodies, making it clearer and more conscious. The mother's power over a young child is absolute, as her life depends on her, and she feels a strong urge to exercise this power. The concentration of the appetite for domination on a small organism gives rise to a feeling of superiority greater than in any other relationship between human beings.

She is occupied day and night with this domination, and its continuity and the enormous number of details in which it's expressed give it a roundness and perfection that no other kind of power achieves. It's not confined to giving orders, as these couldn't be understood by a very young child. It means that a creature is kept prisoner, even though for its own advantage, and the mother can pass on commands imposed on her decades before. She can enforce growth, something rulers only approximate by conferring promotions in rank.

For the mother, the child combines the qualities of both plants and animals. It allows her the enjoyment of sovereign rights that can otherwise only be exercised separately. Like a plant, she can make it grow in accordance with her wishes, and like an animal, she can keep it prisoner and control its movements. It grows under her hands like corn and, like a domestic animal, it carries out those movements she permits. It removes part of the long-standing burden of commands, and finally, it grows into a man or a woman, a new and complete person, for whose accession the group in which she lives is permanently indebted to her.

The mother's role is not normally seen in this light due to two facts: first, that everyone chiefly remembers the period when this power is decreasing, and second, that the sovereign rights of the father are superficially more striking, though in reality far less important. The family becomes rigid and hard when it excludes others from its meals. The hollowness of this pretext is revealed by families without children that yet make not the slightest move to share their meal with others. The "family" of two is man's most contemptible creation. But, even where there are children, we may often feel that they are used as a mere cover for naked selfishness. People save "for the sake of the children" and allow others to starve. What they are really doing is keeping everything for themselves. Modern man likes eating in restaurants, at separate tables, with his own little group, for which he pays. Since everyone else in the place is doing the same thing, he eats his meal under the pleasing illusion that everyone everywhere has enough to eat. Even sensitive people do not need this illusion afterwards; those who have eaten do not mind stumbling over the hungry. The eater increases in weight; he is and he feels heavier, and there is a boast in this: he cannot grow any more, but there, on the very spot, under everyone’s eyes, he can increase in weight. This is another reason why people like eating with others; it is a contest in repletion.

The satisfaction of repletion, of the moment when nothing more can be absorbed, is part of the goal and pleasure of eating, and originally no-one was ashamed of it; there might be a large quantity of game which had to be eaten up before it went bad, and so everyone ate as much as he could and carried his store of food within him. Anyone who eats alone renounces the prestige which the process would bring him in the eyes of others. He bares his teeth simply for the sake of eating, and this impresses no-one, for there is no-one there to be impressed.

But when people eat together, they can all see each other’s mouths opening. Everyone can watch everyone else’s teeth while his own are in action at the same time. To be without teeth is contemptible, and there is a touch of asceticism in refusing to show those that one has. The natural occasion on which to show off one’s teeth is when eating with others. Contemporary etiquette requires the mouth to be closed while eating, thus reducing to a minimum the slight threat contained in opening it at all. But we are not yet as harmless as this makes us appear; we eat with knife and fork, that is, with two instruments which could easily be used for attack; everyone has these ready in front of him, or he may even carry them around with him. And the bit of food which we cut off and, as elegantly as possible, shove in our mouths is still called a “bite”.

Laughter has been objected to as vulgar because, in laughing, the mouth is opened wide and the teeth are shown. Originally laughter contained a feeling of pleasure in prey or food which seemed certain. A human being who falls down reminds us of an animal we might have hunted and brought down ourselves. Every sudden fall which arouses laughter does so because it suggests helplessness and reminds us that the fallen can, if we want, be treated as prey. If we went further and actually ate it, we would not laugh. We laugh instead of eating it. Laughter is our physical reaction to the escape of potential food.

As Hobbes said, laughter expresses a sudden feeling of superiority, but he did not add that it only occurs when the normal consequences of this superiority do not ensue. His conception contains only half the truth. Perhaps because animals do not laugh, he did not see that our laughter is originally an animal reaction. But neither do animals deny themselves obtainable food if they really want it. Only man has learned to replace the final stage of incorporation with a symbolic act. It is as though the whole interior process of gulping down food could be summed up and replaced by those movements of the diaphragm which are characteristic of laughter. The only animal to make a sound really resembling human laughter is the hyena. This sound can be induced by placing food before a captive hyena and then withdrawing it quickly before the animal has time to snatch it. The Survivor

The Survivor

In freedom, the hyena's food consists of carrion. It is easy to imagine how often food must have been snatched away from under its eyes by other animals after its own appetite had been aroused.

The Survivor

The moment of survival is the moment of power. Horror at the sight of death turns into satisfaction that it is someone else who is dead. The dead man lies on the ground while the survivor stands. It is as though there had been a fight and one had struck down the other. In survival, each man is the enemy of every other, and all grief is insignificant measured against this elemental triumph.

Whether the survivor is confronted by one dead man or by many, the essence of the situation is that he feels unique. He sees himself standing there alone and exults in it; and when we speak of the power which this moment gives him, we should never forget that it derives from his sense of uniqueness and from nothing else. All man's designs on immortality contain something of this desire for survival. He does not only want to exist for always, but to exist when others are no longer there. He wants to live longer than everyone else, and to know it; and when he is no longer there himself, then his name must continue.

The lowest form of survival is killing. As a man kills an animal for food, and cuts bits from it as it lies defenseless on the ground and divides it for himself and his kin to devour, so also, and in the same manner, he seeks to kill anyone who stands in his way, or sets himself up against him as an enemy. He wants to strike him down so that he can feel that he still stands while the other lies prostrate. But this other must not disappear completely; his physical presence as a corpse is indispensable for the feeling of triumph.

Now the victor can do whatever he wants with him, and he cannot retaliate, but must lie there, never to stand upright again. His weapon can be taken away and pieces cut from his body and kept forever as trophies. This moment of confronting the man he has killed fills the survivor with a special kind of strength. There is nothing that can be compared with it, and there is no moment which more demands repetition.

For the survivor knows of many deaths. If he has been in battle he has seen those around him fall. He went into battle with the conscious intention of maintaining his ground against the enemy. His declared aim was to despatch as many of them as possible and he can only conquer if he succeeds. Victory and survival are one and the same to him.

But a victor also has a price to pay. Many of his own people lie among the dead. Friend and foe share the battlefield; their dead are heaped together and often, indeed, can no longer be distinguished; a common grave awaits them. Fortunate and favored, the survivor stands in the midst of the fallen. For him, there is one tremendous fact: while countless others have died, many of them his comrades, he is still alive. The dead lie helpless; he stands upright amongst them, and it is as though the battle had been fought in order for him to survive it. Death has been deflected from him to those others. Not that he has avoided danger; he, with his friends, stood in the path of death. They fell; he stands exulting.

This feeling of superiority to the dead is known to everyone who has fought in a war. It may be masked by grief for comrades, but these are few and the dead are always many. The feeling of strength, of standing alone against the dead, is in the end stronger than any grief. It is a feeling of being chosen from amongst the many who manifestly shared the same fate. Simply because he is still there, the survivor feels that he is better than they are. He has proved himself, for he is alive. He has proved himself among many others, for the fallen are not alive. The man who achieves this often is a hero. He is stronger. There is more life in him. He is the favored of the gods.

Survival and Invulnerability

Man's sopy 1s naked and vulnerable, exposed in its softness to every assault. With care and cunning he may be able to fend off things which come near, but it is easy to reach him from a distance; spears and arrows can transfix him. He has invented shields and armor, and built walls and whole fortresses round himself; what he most desires from all these precautions is a feeling of invulnerability. There are two different ways by which he has sought to acquire this. They are exactly opposite to each other and their results, therefore, are also quite different. At times he has sought to keep danger at a distance. He has set large spaces between danger and himself, which can be watched and guarded. He has as it were, hidden from danger; he has banished it. But the other way is the one on which he has always prided himself. He has sought out danger and confronted it. He has allowed it to approach as closely as possible and staked everything on the issue. Out of all possible situations, he has chosen the one involving risk and then enhanced that risk. He has made an enemy and challenged him—the man may have been his enemy already, or he himself may first have chosen him as one, but here, as always, his movement is towards the greatest danger and an ineluctable decision. This is the way of the hero.

What does the hero really want? What is his true aim? The glory which all peoples accord their heroes—a tough and enduring glory if their deeds offer sufficient variety in quick succession—tends to mask their deeper motives. It is assumed that glory is their sole motive, but it is more likely that they were originally seeking for something different: for the ever-growing sense of invulnerability which can be won in this way.

The concrete situation in which the hero finds himself when he has overcome a danger is that of survivor. His enemy wanted his life as he his enemy's; this was the declared and fixed intent with which they met. The enemy succumbs, but the hero comes through the fighting unhurt and, filled with the consciousness of this prodigious fact, plunges into the next fight. No harm came to him, and no harm will, for each victory, each enemy killed, makes him feel more secure; his invulnerability armours him more and more completely. There is no other way in which this feeling can be won. The man who hides from danger, or who banishes it, simply postpones the moment of decision. The man who faces it, and truly survives it; who then faces the next one; who piles up the moments of survival—he is the man who attains the feeling of invulnerability. Only when he has attained it does he actually become a hero, able to take any risk, for by then there is nothing that he fears. We might perhaps admire him more if he acted in spite of fear, but that is the point of view of a spectator, of someone who stands outside events. The people want their hero invulnerable. A hero's deeds, however, are by no means confined to single combats. He may take on a whole pack of enemies and not only escape alive from the fight, but succeed in killing them, thus, as if at one blow, establishing his conviction of invulnerability. Genghis Khan was once asked by one of his oldest and most faithful companions: "You are the ruler and you are called a hero. What marks of conquest and victory do you carry on you?" Genghis Khan replied: "Once, before I ascended the throne, I was riding along a road and I came upon six men who lay in ambush by a bridge, waiting to attempt my life. When I got near, I drew my sword and attacked them. They showered me with a hail of arrows, but the arrows all went astray and none of them touched me. I killed all the men with my sword and rode on unharmed. On my way back, I passed the place where I had killed the six men. Their horses were straying riderless and I drove them home before me." It was his invulnerability while fighting six enemies at once that Genghis Khan considered the certain mark of victory and conquest.

Survival as a Passion
Tus satisraction in survival, which is a kind of pleasure, can become a dangerous and insatiable passion. It feeds on its occasions. The larger and more frequent the heaps of dead which a survivor confronts, the stronger and more insistent becomes his need for them. The careers of heroes and soldiers suggest that a kind of addiction ensues, which in the end becomes incurable. The usual explanation of this is that such men can only breathe in danger; to them an existence without danger is stale and flat; they find no savour in a peaceful life. The attraction of danger should not be underestimated, but what we tend to forget is that such men do not set out on their adventures alone. There are others with them who succumb to the danger and this affords them the continually repeated pleasure of survival, which is what they really need and what they can no longer do without. In order to satisfy this craving it is not always necessary to expose oneself to danger. No one man can himself kill enough other men. On a battlefield, however, there are thousands all acting in the same way, and, if a man is their commander, if he controls their movements, if the very battle springs from his decision, then he can appropriate to himself all the dead bodies which result from it, for he is responsible for them. It is not for nothing that the commander in the field bears his proud title. He commands; he sends his men against the enemy, and to their death. In victory after victory he survives them all. And this is what he wants; the triumph he celebrates later leaves no doubt of it. The significance of his victories is measured by the number of the dead. A triumph is ludicrous when the enemy has surrendered without a proper fight and there are only a few dead. It is glorious when the enemy has defended himself bravely, when the victory was strongly contested and cost many lives.

"Caesar surpassed all other commanders in the fact that he fought more battles than any of them and killed greater numbers of the enemy. For, though his campaigns in Gaul did not last for as much as ten complete years, in this time he took by storm more than 800 cities, subdued 300 nations and fought pitched battles at various times with three million men, of whom he destroyed one million in the actual fighting and took another million prisoners." This is the opinion of Plutarch, one of the humanest spirits mankind has produced, who cannot be reproached with war-lust or blood-thirstiness. Caesar was fortunate and survived many enemies. It is considered tactless in such circumstances to reckon the victor's own losses. They are known, but one does not reproach the great man with them. In Caesar's case, they were not excessive compared with the number of the enemy fallen. He did, none the less, survive several thousand of his allies and fellow Romans. Here, too, he was not entirely unsuccessful.

These proud balance sheets are handed down from generation to generation, and each generation contains potential warrior-heroes whose passion to survive great crowds of fellow human beings is fanned to fury by them. History seemed to vindicate their purpose even before they had achieved it. Those who are most skilled in this kind of survival have the largest and securest place in it. Their fame depends in the end less on victory or defeat than on the monstrous number of their victims.

Nobody knows what Napoleon's real feelings were during the retreat from Moscow. The Ruler as Survivor

"The paranorac type of ruler may be defined as one who uses every means to keep danger away from his person. Instead of challenging and confronting it and abiding the issue of a fight which might go against him, he seeks by circumspection and cunning to block its approach to him. He creates empty space all round him which he can survey, and he observes and assesses every sign of approaching danger. He does this on all sides, for he knows that he is dealing with many who may simultaneously advance against him, and this keeps awake in him the fear of being surrounded. Danger is everywhere, not only in front of him; it threatens especially from behind, where he might not notice it quickly enough. He has eyes all round him and not the slightest sound must escape his attention, for it might conceal a hostile intent.

The essence of all danger is naturally death and it is important to discover what is his special attitude to this. The first and decisive attribute of the autocrat is his power over life and death. No one may come near him; a messenger, or anyone who has to approach him, is searched for weapons. Death is systematically kept away from him, but he himself may and must decree it. He may decree it as and when he wills and his sentence will always be executed; it is the seal of his power, and his power is only absolute so long as his right to decree death remains uncontested.

For the autocrat's only true subject is the man who will let himself be killed by him. This is the final proof of obedience and it is always the same. His soldiers are trained in a kind of double preparedness: they are sent to kill his enemies and they are ready to die for him. But all his other subjects too, who are not soldiers, know that he can pounce on them at any time. The terror that he spreads around him is part of him; it is his right, and it is for this right that he is most honoured: in extreme cases, he will be worshipped for it. 

God himself has suspended the sentence of death over all living men, and over all who are yet to live. When the sentence is carried out depends on his whim. No one thinks of opposing it, for this would be fruitless. Earthly rulers, however, are less fortunate than God, for they do not live for ever and their subjects know that to their days, too, an end is set; and that this end, like any other, can be hastened by violence. Any man who refuses obedience to his ruler challenges him. No ruler can be permanently certain of the obedience of his subjects. As long as they allow themselves to be killed by him, he can sleep in peace, but as soon as anyone evades his sentence, he is endangered. The sense of this danger is always alert in a ruler. Later, when the nature of command is discussed, it will be shown that his fears must increase the more often his commands are carried out. He can only calm his fears by making an example of someone. He will order an execution for its own sake, the victim’s guilt being almost irrelevant. He needs executions from time to time, and the more his fears increase, the more he needs them. His most dependable, one might say his truest, subjects are those he has sent to their deaths.

For, from every execution for which he is responsible, some strength accrues to him. It is the strength of survival which he gains from it. His victims need not actually have challenged him, but they might have, and his fear transforms them—perhaps only retrospectively—into enemies who have fought against him. He condemns them; they are struck down and he survives them. The right to pronounce sentence of death becomes in his hands a weapon like any other, only far more effective. Many barbarian and oriental rulers have set great store on this heaping up of victims round them, where they can actually see them all the time; but, even where custom has been against such accumulation, the thoughts of rulers have been busy with it. The Emperor Domitian is reported to have contrived a macabre game of this kind. The banquet he arranged, which has certainly never been repeated in the same form, gives a clear picture of the inmost nature of the paranoiac ruler. The description of it by Dio Cassius runs as follows: “On another occasion he entertained the foremost men among the senators and knights in the following fashion. He prepared a room that was pitch black on every side, ceiling, walls and floor, and had made ready bare couches of the same colour resting on the uncovered floor; then he invited in his guests, alone at night, without their attendants. And first he set beside each of them a slab shaped like a grave-stone, bearing the guest’s name, and also a small lamp, such as hangs in tombs. Next comely naked boys, likewise painted black, entered like phantoms, and after encircling the guests in an awe-inspiring dance took up their stations at their feet. After this all the things that are commonly offered at the sacrifices to departed spirits were likewise set before the guests, all of them black and in dishes of similar colour. Consequently, every single one of the guests feared and trembled and was kept in constant expectation of having their throat cut the next moment, the more so as on the part of everybody except Domitian there was dead silence, as if they were already in the realms of the dead, and the emperor himself conversed only upon topics relating to death and slaughter. Finally he dismissed them; but he first removed their slaves, who had stood in the vestibule, and now gave his guests in charge of other slaves whom they did not know, to be conveyed either in carriages or litters; and by this procedure he filled them with far greater fear. And scarcely had each guest reached his home and was beginning to get his breath again, as one might say, when word was brought him that a messenger from the Augustus had come. While they were accordingly expecting to perish this time in any case, 234 CROWDS AND POWER one person brought in the slab, which was of silver, and the others in turn brought in various articles, including the dishes which had been set before them at the dinner, which were constructed of very costly material; and last of all came that particular boy who had been each guest’s familiar spirit, now washed and adorned. Thus, after having passed the entire night in terror, they received the gifts.” Such was the Funeral Banquet of Domitian, as people called it. The continuous state of terror in which Domitian kept his guests rendered them speechless. He alone spoke, and he spoke of death and killing. It was as though they were all dead and he alone lived. He had gathered together at this banquet all his victims—for victims they must have seemed to themselves—and as such, though disguised as guests, he addressed them. He himself was disguised as host, but in reality was the survivor. His situation as survivor was not only re-affirmed in relation to each guest, but was also subtly enhanced. The guests are as if dead, but he is still in a position to kill them. Thus the very process of survival is caught. In releasing them, he pardons them; but they tremble again when he hands them over to unknown slaves. They reach their homes and he again sends messengers of death to them; but these bring gifts and, amongst them, the greatest of all—the gift of life. He is able, as it were, to despatch them from life to death and then to bring them back to life again. It was a game which gave him the most intense sensation of power imaginable and he enjoyed it to the full.

The Escape of Josephus

One of the stories of the war between the Jews and the Romans, which took place during Domitian’s youth, there is an account of an incident which perfectly illustrates the nature of the survivor. The Roman forces were commanded by Vespasian, the father of Domitian, and it was during this war that the Flavii achieved imperial power. The Jews had been chafing under Roman rule for some time. When they finally rose against it in earnest, they appointed commanders in each district of the country, to collect troops and to prepare the defence of the towns so that there would be some chance of their being able to repel the inevitable attack of the Roman legions. Josephus, then barely thirty years old, was appointed commander in Galilee and he set to work zealously to accomplish his task. In his History of the Jewish War he describes the obstacles he had to contend with: dissensions 235 among the townspeople; rivals who intrigued against him and collected troops on their own account; towns which refused to acknowledge his leadership, or later denied it again. But, with astonishing energy, he got together an army—though it was badly equipped—and fortified strongholds against the coming of the Romans. And, in due course, they came. They were under the command of Vespasian, who had with him his son, Titus, a young man the same age as Josephus. (Nero was then still emperor in Rome.) Vespasian had distinguished himself in many theatres of war and was known as a general of long experience. He advanced into Galilee and surrounded Josephus and his army in the town of Jotapata. The Jews defended it stubbornly and bravely. 

Josephus was full of resource and knew how every attack should be met. The siege lasted for forty-seven days and the Romans suffered heavy losses in the course of it. When at last, and then only by treachery and at night, they succeeded in forcing their way in, the defenders were all asleep and did not realize that the Romans were among them until daybreak. Then they fell into terrible despair and many of them killed themselves. Josephus escaped. I shall give in his own words his story of what happened to him after the capture of the town, for, as far as I know, there is in all literature no other comparable account of a survivor. With curious self-awareness and with an insight into the very nature of survival, he describes everything that he did in order to save his life. It was comparatively easy for him to be honest, for he did not write his account until later, when he already stood high in the favour of the Romans.

"After the fall of Jotapata, the Romans searched everywhere for Josephus—among the dead and in all the secret hiding places of the city—partly because the soldiers themselves were incensed against him, and partly because their commander was set on his capture, thinking that it might determine the whole course of the war. Josephus, however, as if helped by divine providence, had managed to slip through the enemy during the fighting and had jumped down into an underground cistern which opened on one side into a large cave, invisible from above. In this cave he found forty men of importance concealed, who had provided themselves with food for several days, and here he lay hid in the daytime, for the enemy were all around, but emerged at night to search for a way of escape and to see where sentries were posted. But the whole neighbourhood was so closely guarded on his account that there was no possibility of escape, and so he retreated into the cave again. For two days he eluded his pursuers in this way, but on the third day a woman who had been among those in the cave was captured, and she betrayed him. Vespasian immediately despatched two Tribunes with instructions to promise Josephus his safety and to persuade him to come out of the cave.

"The Tribunes arrived and spoke courteously to him and guaranteed his life; but to no purpose, for he knew, or thought he knew, what he had to expect in return for all the injuries the Romans had suffered at his hands. The gentle bearing of those who spoke to him in no way altered his estimate of the fate that awaited him. He could not rid himself of the fear that the Romans were only trying to entice him out of the cave in order to execute him. Finally, Vespasian sent a third messenger, the Tribune Nicanor, who was well known to Josephus; in fact, they had formerly been friends. Nicanor described the leniency with which the Romans treated their vanquished foes. He explained, too, that the generals admired Josephus for his courage more than they hated him, and that Vespasian had no intention of having him executed. If he wished, he could kill him without his leaving the cave; but, in fact, what he wanted was to save the life of a brave man. He added that it was unthinkable that Vespasian should maliciously send Josephus's friend to him to trap him, covering a breach of faith with the mask of friendship; nor would he, Nicanor, ever have lent himself to such a betrayal of friendship.

"As even Nicanor, however, failed to bring Josephus to a decision, the soldiers in their fury prepared to set fire to the cave; but Nicanor held them back, for he was determined to take Josephus alive. "Josephus, surrounded by hostile and threatening soldiers, and with Nicanor still urging him to surrender, remembered the terrible dreams that had revealed the impending disasters of the Jewish people and the fates of the Roman Emperors. As a skilled interpreter of dreams, he was familiar with the prophecies of the Holy Scriptures and could expound those that were obscure.

At that moment, he was filled with inspiration, and the terrors of those dreams rose before him. He silently prayed to God, saying: 'Since You are resolved to humble the Jewish people, whom You did create, and since all good fortune has passed to the Romans, I yield myself to the Romans, but You are my witness that I go, not as a traitor, but as Your servant.'

After he prayed, he told Nicanor he would go with him. The Jews who had been with him in hiding crowded around him, reproaching him vehemently. They reminded him of all who, on his persuasion, had died for freedom, and questioned his wisdom in seeking mercy from those he had fought so stubbornly. They accused him of forgetting himself and his care for his own life, which was an outrage to God and to the Laws of their fathers. They urged him to die willingly as the leader of the Jews or be killed unwillingly as a traitor if he refused. They drew their swords and threatened to cut him down if he gave himself up to the Romans.

Josephus was frightened but believed he would be betraying God's commands if he died before proclaiming them. He began to reason with his companions, arguing that it was noble to die in war but it must be according to the custom of war, by the hand of the victor. Suicide was cowardly and an outrage to God the Creator. God gave men life, and to God must men commit their end. Those who turned their hands against themselves were hateful to God, and he would punish both them and their descendants.

Josephus urged his companions not to add sin against their Creator to the sufferings they had endured. If deliverance should come, they should not refuse it. It would not be shameful to accept their lives, as they had sufficiently proven their courage through their deeds. However, if they had to die, they should die at the hands of their conquerors. He had no thought of going over to the Romans and becoming a traitor himself; he hoped for treachery on their part. If they broke their given word and killed him, he would die joyfully, and their broken faith, which God would punish, would be a greater consolation than victory itself.

Josephus tried to dissuade his companions from suicide, but despair had made them deaf to his arguments. They had long dedicated themselves to death, and his words only increased their frenzy. They accused him of cowardice and pressed round him with drawn swords, as if ready to strike him down." In danger of his life, and torn by conflicting emotions, Josephus called one man by name, fixed another with a stare of command, took a third by the arm, pleaded with a fourth, and so, in each case, succeeded in averting 238 CROWDS AND POWER the sword of death. He was like a wild animal at bay, turning to face each successive assailant; and as they still, even in this last extremity, respected him as their commander, their arms were as if paralysed, their daggers slipped from their hands, and many who had drawn their swords against him sheathed them again of their own free will.

"In spite of his desperate position, Josephus's presence of mind did not fail him. On the contrary, putting his trust in God, he staked his life on a gamble and addressed his companions thus: 'Since we are resolved to die, and will not be turned from it, let us draw lots and kill each other accordingly. The first man on whom the lot falls shall be killed by the second, and he, in turn, by the third; and so on, as chance decides. In this way, all shall die, but no-one will have been compelled to take his own life, except the last man. It would be unfair if he, after the death of his companions, changed his mind and did not kill himself.'"

"With this proposal Josephus won their confidence again, and when they had all declared their agreement, he drew lots with the rest and each man on whom the lot fell offered himself to be killed by the next, for each imagined that a moment later his general would die too; and death with Josephus seemed sweeter than life. At last—let us say that it was either by chance or by divine providence—only Josephus was left with one other man. Since he did not want to risk the lot falling on him, nor, supposing he escaped it, to stain his hands with the blood of a fellow Jew, he persuaded this man that they should both give themselves up to the Romans and so save their lives."

"Having thus come safely through two wars—one with the Romans and one with his own people—Josephus was brought by Nicanor before Vespasian. All the Romans crowded to see the commander of the Jews and pressed shouting round him, some exulting in his capture, some threatening him, and others thrusting their way forwards to see him close. Those at the back clamoured for his execution; those nearer him remembered his deeds and marvelled at the change in his fortunes. Among the officers, though, there were none who, in spite of their former hatred, were not moved by the sight of him. Titus, in particular, was impressed by his steadfast bearing in misfortune, and moved by fellow feeling for his youth—he was the same age as Josephus. He wanted to save his life and pleaded strenuously for him with his father. Vespasian, however, put Josephus under strict guard, proposing to send him immediately to Nero."

"When Josephus heard this, he asked to speak to Vespasian alone. THE SURVIVOR, 239 Vespasian ordered everyone to withdraw, except his son, Titus, and two close friends, and Josephus then spoke thus: "You think, Vespasian, that I am simply a prisoner of war who has fallen into your hands. But you are mistaken: I stand before you as harbinger of great events. I, Josephus, am sent by God to declare this message to you. Were this not so, I would not be here, for I know the Jewish law and how a general should die. You want to send me to Nero. Why? He and his successors who will ascend the throne before you will not rule for long. You yourself, Vespasian, shall be Caesar and Emperor, you and your son here." "Fetter me more securely and guard me for yourself till that time comes. For you will be Caesar and master, not only over me, but over land and sea and the whole human race. Let me be closely watched and, if I have taken the Name of God in vain, then kill me as I shall have deserved."

"At first Vespasian did not really trust Josephus; he thought he was lying to save his life. Gradually, however, he began to believe what he said, for God Himself had already awoken in him imperial ambitions, and he had also received other signs of future power. He discovered, too, that Josephus had prophesied truly on other occasions. One of those who had been present at his private interview with Vespasian expressed surprise that he had not predicted either the fall of Jotapata or his own capture, and suggested that what he put forward now was a fable to ingratiate himself with his enemies. But Josephus replied that he had predicted to the people of Jotapata that the town would fall after forty-seven days and that he himself would be taken alive by the Romans. Vespasian had secret enquiries made among the other prisoners, and when they confirmed what Josephus had said, he began to believe the predictions about himself."

"It is true that he still kept Josephus fettered and in prison, but he gave him a splendid robe and other valuable presents and, from then on, thanks to Titus, treated him with kindness and consideration."

"Josephus's struggle falls into three distinct acts. First, he escapes the slaughter after the fall of Jotapata. The defenders of the town either kill themselves or are killed by the Romans; a few are taken prisoner. Josephus escapes by hiding in the cave by the cistern. Here he finds forty men, whom he expressly describes as 'important'. They, like himself, are all survivors. They have provided themselves with food and hope to remain hidden from the Romans until some way of escape offers. But the presence of Josephus, who is the man the Romans are actually searching for, is betrayed to them by a woman. Thereupon, the situation changes radically and the second, and by far the most interesting act, begins; one may say that it is unique in the frankness with which events are described by the chief actor. The Romans promise Josephus his life. As soon as he believes them, they cease to be enemies. It is, in the deepest sense, a question of faith. At precisely the right moment, he remembers a prophetic dream he once had. In it he had been warned that the Jews would be conquered. They are conquered, though at first, it is true, only in the fortress of Jotapata which he had commanded. Fortune is on the side of the Romans. The vision in which this had been revealed to him came from God and God would also help him to find the way to the Romans. He commends himself to God and turns to his new enemies, the Jews who are with him in the cave. They want to commit suicide, so as not to fall into the hands of the Romans. He, their leader, who had spurred them on to fight, should be the first to welcome this form of annihilation. But he is determined to live. He pleads with them and with a hundred arguments seeks to take from them their desire for death. But he does not succeed. Everything he says against death increases their blind passion for it, and also their anger against himself, who shuns it. He sees that he can only escape if they all kill each other and he is the last to remain alive. He therefore makes a show of agreeing with them and hits upon the notion of drawing lots." The reader will have his own ideas about the way in which these lots were drawn; it is difficult not to suspect fraud. It is the one point in his narrative where Josephus is obscure. He ascribes the extraordinary outcome of this gamble on death either to God or to chance, but he also, as it were, leaves it open to the reader to guess the real course of events. For what follows is monstrous: his companions butcher each other before his eyes. But not simultaneously. Each killing follows the other in duel after duel, and between each the lots are drawn again. Each man has with his own hand to kill one of his comrades and then himself be killed by the next on whom the lot falls. The religious scruples that Josephus advanced against self-murder evidently do not apply to murder. As each man falls, his own hope of deliverance grows. Individually and collectively, he wants them all dead. For himself he wants nothing but to live. They die gladly, believing that their commander dies with them. They cannot suppose that he will be the last left alive. It is unlikely that they even envisage the possibility. But since one of them has to be the last, Josephus forearms himself against this thought too. He tells them that it would be very unfair if the last man changed his mind after the death of his companions, and then so saved his life. This, precisely, is what he intends to do. What could least be done after the death of comrades is what he himself wants to do. Pretending in this last hour to be wholly with them, to be one of them, he sends them all to their deaths and, by doing so, saves his own life. They are all caught in the same fate and believe him caught too. But he stands outside it, and destines it only for them. They die so that he may live. The deception is complete. It is the deception of all leaders. They pretend that they will be the first to die, but, in reality, they send their people to death, so that they themselves may stay alive longer. The trick is always the same. The leader wants to survive, for with each survival he grows stronger. If he has enemies, so much the better; he survives them. If not, he has his own people. In any event he uses both, whether successively or together. Enemies he can use openly; that is why he has enemies. His own people must be used secretly. In Josephus’s cave the trick is made manifest. Outside are the enemy, but their former threats have turned to a promise. Inside the cave are his friends. They still hold firmly to their leader’s old convictions, convictions with which he himself had imbued them, and they refuse to take advantage of this new hope. Thus the cave which Josephus had intended as his refuge becomes the place of his greatest danger. He dupes the friends who want to lay violent hands both on him and on themselves, and consigns them to a common death. From the very beginning, he has had no thought of sharing it; nor does he share it when it comes. He is left in the end with one sole companion and since, as he says, he has no wish to stain his hands with the blood of a fellow Jew, he persuades this man to surrender. One man alone he can persuade to live. Forty had been too many for him. The two of them give themselves up to the Romans. Thus he emerges safely from the war against his own people. This is precisely what he brings the Romans: the enhanced sense of his own life, feeding on the deaths of those he had led. The transmission of this newly won power to Vespasian is the third act of the struggle. 

It is embodied in a prophetic promise. The Romans were perfectly familiar with the Jews’ stubborn belief in God. They knew that the last thing a Jew would do was to take the name of God in vain. Josephus had strong reasons for wanting to see Vespasian as emperor in place of Nero. Nero, to whom Vespasian proposed sending him, had not promised him his life; Vespasian had. He knew, too, that Nero despised Vespasian, who was much older than himself, and fell asleep in public when he sang. He had often treated him harshly and had only called upon him again when the insurrection of the Jews had begun to assume dangerous proportions. Vespasian thus had every reason to mistrust Nero. A promise of future power must have been welcome to him. Josephus may himself have believed that the message he gave Vespasian was from God. Prophecy was in his blood; he believed that he was a true prophet and, in prophesying, he brought the Romans something that they themselves lacked. He did not take the gods of the Romans seriously; to him they were superstition. But he knew that he had to convince Vespasian of the importance and authenticity of his message; and Vespasian, like every other Roman, despised the Jews and their religion. He was one man alone among enemies on whom he had inflicted terrible injuries, enemies who but lately had been cursing him, yet he faced them confidently, he expressed himself with force, and he believed in himself more strongly than in anything else. This belief he owed to the fact that he had survived his own people. The power which he had achieved in the underground cave he transmitted to Vespasian, so that the latter survived not only Nero, his junior by thirty years, but also no less than three of Nero’s successors. Each of these died, in effect, by the hand of the other, and Vespasian became Emperor of the Romans.

The Despot's Hostility to Survivors
Rulers and Their Successors
Monammap Tucutiak, the Sultan of Delhi, had various schemes even more grandiose than those of Napoleon and Alexander. Among them was the conquest of China from across the Himalayas. An army of 100,000 horsemen was collected, which set out in the year 1337. Of this whole army, all but ten men perished cruelly in the mountains. These ten returned to Delhi with the news of the disaster and there, at the command of the Sultan, were all executed. This hostility to survivors is common to despotic rulers, all of whom regard survival as their prerogative; it is their real wealth and their most precious possession. Anyone who presumes to make himself conspicuous by surviving great danger, and especially anyone who survives large numbers of other people, trespasses upon their province and their hatred is accordingly directed against him. Wherever government was absolute and unquestioned, as in the Islamic East, for example, the rage that survivors aroused in the ruler could be shown openly. Even if he felt obliged to find pretexts for their destruction, these barely disguised the naked passion which filled him. By secession from Delhi, another Islamic empire arose in the Deccan. One Sultan of the new dynasty, Muhammad Shah, spent his whole reign in fierce wars against the neighbouring Hindu kings. One day the Hindus succeeded in capturing the important town of Mudkal, and all its inhabitants, men, women and children, were put to the sword. One man only escaped and carried the news to the capital of the Sultan. "On hearing the news, the chronicler says that Muhammad Shah was seized with a transport of grief and rage. He commanded the unfortunate messenger to be instantly put to death, exclaiming that he could never bear the sight of the slaughter of so many brave companions. Here, it is still possible to speak of a pretext, and it is probable that the Sultan did not really know why he could not bear the sight of the only survivor.

Hakim, the Khalif of Egypt who ruled around a.p. 1000, was much clearer-headed about the games that could be played with power and enjoyed them in a manner reminiscent of the Emperor Domitian. He liked to wander around at night disguised in various ways. During one of these nocturnal wanderings, on a hill near Cairo, he came across ten well-armed men, who recognized him and begged for money. He told them to divide into two groups and fight each other. The winner would receive money. They obeyed and fought fiercely, resulting in nine of them being killed. To the tenth, the sole survivor, Hakim threw a large number of gold coins that he had in his sleeve. As the man stooped to pick them up, Hakim had him cut to pieces by his guards. In all this, he showed a clear insight into the process of survival and enjoyed it as a kind of performance he had conjured up. He finished by adding to it the pleasure of destroying the survivor.

Strangest of all is the relationship between the despotic ruler and his successor. When succession is hereditary, with the ruler being succeeded by his own son, the relationship is doubly difficult. It is natural for a ruler, like any other man, to be survived by his son, and since the son is a future ruler, it is natural that he too, from an early age, should have a mounting passion for survival. Thus, both father and son have every reason to hate each other. Their rivalry originates in the disparity of their positions and, for this very reason, is particularly acrimonious. The one who has present power knows that he will die before the other. The one who has no power feels certain that he will outlive the other. On the one side is an ardent desire for the death of an older man—one who, of all men, least wants to die, for otherwise he would not be a ruler; on the other side is a determination to delay by all possible means the accession to power of a younger man. It is a conflict for which there is no real solution.

History is full of the rebellions of sons against their fathers. Some succeed in bringing about their fathers' downfall; others are defeated by them and then either pardoned or killed. It is not surprising that, with a dynasty of long-lived absolute rulers, it should become a kind of institution for sons to rebel against their fathers. The history of the Mogul emperors illustrates this point very clearly. Prince Salim, the eldest son of the Emperor Akbar, "impatient to take the reins of government into his hands, and chafing at the long life of his father, which kept him from the enjoyments of the dignities he so much desired, resolved to usurp the same, and on his own authority began to assume the name and exercise the prerogatives of a king". This statement appears in a contemporary chronicle of the Jesuits, who knew both father and son well, since they strove for the favor of both." In his rebellion, which lasted for three years, Salim had a feigned reconciliation. Finally, Akbar threatened to nominate another successor to the throne, and under this pressure, Salim accepted an invitation to his father's court. He was received with apparent cordiality, then his father drew him into an inner chamber, boxed his ears, and locked him in a bathroom. Then he handed him over to a physician and two servants, as though he were mad; and wine, of which he was very fond, was forbidden him. The prince was in his 36th year. After a few days, Akbar released him and reinstated him as his successor. The following year, Akbar died from dysentery. It was said that he had been poisoned by his son, but there is no means of finding out what really happened.

"After the death of his father, which he had so much desired," Salim became Emperor at last, taking the name Jahangir. Akbar ruled for forty-five years; Jahangir for twenty-two. But though the latter's reign was only half as long as his father's, exactly the same experience befell him. His favorite son, Shah Jehan, whom he himself had nominated as his successor, rebelled and fought against him for three years. Finally, he was defeated and sued his father for peace. He was pardoned, but on one hard condition: he had to send his two sons as hostages to the imperial court. He himself waited for his father's death, taking good care never to appear in his presence again. Two years after the conclusion of peace, Jahangir died, and Shah Jehan became emperor. Shah Jehan ruled for thirty years.

What he had done to his father was now done to him, but his son was luckier. Aurangzeb, the younger of the two princes who had been kept as hostages at their grandfather's court, rebelled against his father and his elder brother. The famous "War of Secession" which started then was described by European eye-witnesses. It ended with the victory of Aurangzeb, who had his brother executed and kept his father prisoner for the eight years until his death. Soon after his victory, Aurangzeb made himself Emperor and reigned for half a century. His own favorite son lost patience long before the expiry of that time, and rebelled against his father. The old man, however, was much more cunning than his son and managed to estrange the latter's allies. The son had to flee to Persia and died in exile before his father.

From the dynastic history of the Mogul Empire as a whole, a remarkably uniform picture emerges. Its age of splendour lasted for 150 years and, during this time, only four emperors ruled, each the son of the preceding one and each tenacious, long-lived, and clinging to power with all his might. Their reigns are all strikingly long; Akbar's lasted forty-five years, his son's twenty-two, his grandson's thirty, and his great-grandson's fifty. Beginning with Akbar himself, none of the sons could endure waiting; each who later became emperor rose against his father. Their rebellions ended differently. Jahangir and Shah Jehan were defeated and afterwards pardoned by their fathers; Aurangzeb took his father prisoner and then deposed him; his own son died, a failure, in exile. With Aurangzeb's death, the power of the Mogul Empire came to an end. In this long-lived dynasty, each son rebelled against his father and each father waged war on his son. The intensest feeling for power is that found in a ruler who wants no son. The best known case is that of Shaka, the early nineteenth century founder of the nation and empire of the Zulus in South Africa. He was a great general, who has been compared with Napoleon, and never has there been a more naked despot. He refused to marry, because he did not want a legitimate heir. Even the urgent entreaties of his mother, whom he always greatly honoured, did not move him. She wanted a grandson more than anything else, but he was obdurate. His harem consisted of hundreds of women—ultimately there were 1,200 of them—whose official title was “sisters”. They were forbidden to be with child and were strictly watched. Any "sister" found pregnant was punished with death. With his own hands Shaka killed the child of one of these women which had been concealed from him. He flattered himself on his skill and self-control and therefore believed that no woman could ever become pregnant by him. Thus he avoided being put in the position of having a growing son to fear. He was murdered at the age of forty-one by two of his brothers.

If it is permissible to turn from human to divine rulers, we might remember the God of Mohammed, whose autocracy is the least disputed of any god's. He is there from the very beginning in the plenitude of his power and, unlike the God of the Old Testament, never has serious rivals to contend with. Again and again in the Koran, it is vehemently affirmed that no one begot him, and also that he begot no one. This affirmation, and the disputatious attitude to Christianity, derives from the sense of the unity and indivisibility of God's power.

Contrasted with this, there are cases of oriental rulers with hundreds of sons, all compelled to fight each other for the succession. One can assume that knowledge of the hostility between them does something to lessen the bitterness their father feels about the succession of any one of them. The deeper significance of hereditary succession, its real purpose and advantage, will be discussed in another context. Here I have only wished to show that the hostility between a ruler and his successor is of a particular kind which must increase side by side with the increase of the specific passion of power, the passion for survival.

Forms of Survival

There are many different forms of survival, and it is worthwhile seeing that we leave no important one out of account. The earliest event in every man's life, occurring long before birth, is his conception; and this has never yet been considered in relation to the concept of survival. We already know a great deal, and may soon know everything, about what happens once the spermatozoon has actually penetrated into the egg cell. Scarcely any thought, however, has been given to the fact that there are an overwhelming number of spermatozoa which do not reach their goal, although they play an active part in the process of generation as a whole.

It is not a single spermatozoon which sets out for the egg cell, but about 200 million, all of which are all released together in one ejaculation and then, in a dense mass, move together towards one goal. They are present in enormous numbers and, since they come into existence through partition, they are all equal; their density could not be greater, and they all have the same goal. These four traits, it will be remembered, are what I have described as the essential attributes of the crowd. It is unnecessary to point out that a crowd of spermatozoa cannot be the same as a crowd of people. But there is undoubtedly an analogy between the two phenomena, and perhaps more than an analogy. All the spermatozoa, except one, perish on their way to, or in the immediate vicinity of, the goal. One single seed, the survivor, penetrates the egg cell. It is the leader of all the others, achieving what every leader, either secretly or openly, hopes for: to survive those he leads. The survivor is one out of 200 million.

In the preceding chapters, killing is frequently mentioned. A man confronts an enemy, either alone or with his people. The higher his rank, the more he feels that survival is his sole right. The heap of the dead, consisting of friends and enemies, is a mixed one. Battles are "neutral" like epidemics.

In epidemics and other natural catastrophes, anyone who survives does so among mortal friend and foe alike. All normal ties are dissolved, and dying becomes so universal that no one even knows who is being buried.

Significant in this context are stories of people who come back to life in the midst of a heap of the dead. These people think of themselves as invulnerable, plague-heroes. The satisfaction in individual deaths is more moderate and concealed. The victims may be friends or relatives, and there is no active killing or sense of being attacked.

The young survive the old; sons their fathers. A son finds it natural that his father should die before him. Filial duty hurries him to the deathbed, to close his father's eyes and carry him to his grave. The man who, more than anyone else, could once order him about is now reduced to silence and must endure everything done to his body. The satisfaction in survival results from the relationship between the two protagonists. One who was once all-powerful is now impotent, with his strength extinguished and his lifeless remains at the disposal of the very being who was for many years weak, helpless, and entirely in his power.

Everything the father leaves strengthens the son; the inheritance is the son's booty. He can do the opposite of everything the father would have done. If the father was thrifty, the son can be wasteful, reckless where he was prudent. The breach between the old and the new is immense and irreparable. The breach results from survival and is also the most intimate and personal expression of it. Among people of the same age, survival is different, as it is a question of one's own group, and the urge to survive is concealed by milder forms of rivalry. Young men of the same age are grouped together as a class and then, on the fulfillment of certain rites involving severe and often cruel ordeals, are promoted to the next class. It may happen that some of them perish during these ordeals, but that is the exception. ‘The oid, that is those men who are still alive after the lapse of a certain number of years, enjoy great authority, especially among primitive peoples, who, on the whole, tend to die earlier than we do, for they undergo greater perils and are more vulnerable to disease. For them it is a real achievement to reach a certain age, and one which brings its reward. Not only do the old know more, having gained experience in a great variety of situations, but the fact that they are still alive shows that they have proved themselves. To emerge unscathed from all the dangers of war, hunting and accident they must have been lucky; and with every escape their prestige will have grown. They have trophies proving their victories over their enemies. The group they belong to is of necessity small and therefore very much THE SURVIVOR 249 aware of their long-continued membership in it. They have experienced many occasions for lament, but they are still alive and every death of a contemporary increases their prestige. The group may not be fully conscious of this and may well attach greater importance to victories over enemies, but one thing is certain: the most elementary and obvious form of success is to remain alive. The old are not only alive, but are still alive. Old men can take as many young wives as they want, whilst young men may have to content themselves with old ones. They have the right of deciding where the groups shall migrate, whom it shall make war on and with whom ally itself. In so far as one can speak of government in such conditions, it is the old men together who govern. The desire for a long life which plays such a large part in most cultures really means that most people want to survive their contemporaries. They know that many die early and they want a different fate for themselves. When they pray to the gods for long life they differentiate themselves from their companions. It is true that the latter are not mentioned in the prayer, but what the supplicant visualizes is himself living longer than others. The most wholesome embodiment of longevity is the Patriarch, one who can survey many generations of his descendants, but is always imagined alone in his own generation. It is as though a new race began with him. As long as he has grandsons and great-grandsons alive it does not matter if some of his sons have died before him. Indeed, the fact that his life has proved tougher than theirs increases his authority. Within the class of old men there is always one who in the end is left solitary, the very oldest of them all. The Etruscans fixed the length of the century by the duration of his life. It is worth saying a little more about this. The “century” of the Etruscans varied, being sometimes shorter and sometimes longer, its duration in each case being decided afresh. In every generation there is one man who lives to be older than the rest, The Etruscans believed that when this man died, who was the very oldest of all, the one who had survived all his contemporaries, the gods gave men certain signs, and they then adjusted the length of the century to coincide with the length of his life. If he lived to the age of 110, the century was counted as 110 years; if he died at 105, the century was that much shorter. The survivor's century; the years of his life constituted it. Each city and each people were thought to have a predestined number of such centuries, starting from the foundation of the city. Ten were allotted to the nation of the Etruscans. If the survivor of each generation had an unusually long life, the nation as a whole lived to be so much older. The connection between the two is remarkable and, as a religious institution, unique. Only survival at a distance in time is wholly innocent. A man cannot have killed people who lived long before him and whom he did not know; he cannot have wished for their death, nor even have waited for it. He learns of their existence only when they exist no longer. In fact, by his awareness of their lives, however insubstantial the form of survival it assists them to, he serves them more than they serve him. It can, however, be shown that they do contribute something to his own sense of survival. We survive the ancestors we have not known personally and we also survive preceding humanity as a whole. It is in graveyards and cemeteries that the second of these experiences is brought home to us, and we see then how closely it resembles survival in epidemics. Instead of plague, it is the general epidemic of death which confronts us, whose victims over the years lie gathered together in this one place.

At this point it may be objected that the concept of survival, as I have described it, has long been known under a different name: that of the instinct of self-preservation. But are the two really identical? Do the words express the same thing? It seems to me that they do not, and, if we ask ourselves what kind of activity we imagine when we speak of self-preservation and if we look at the word itself, the reasons for the inadequacy of the concept become apparent. First there is the stress on self: every human being is postulated as solitary and self-sufficient. But the second half of the word is even more important; by "preservation" we actually mean two things: first, that every creature must eat in order to stay alive and, second, that, in some way or other, every creature defends itself against attack. We see it before us rather as if it were a statue, with one hand reaching for food and with the other fending off its enemies. A peaceful creature indeed! Left to itself, it would eat a handful of grass and never do anyone the slightest harm. Is there any conception less appropriate to man, more misleading and more ridiculous? It is true that man does eat, but not the same food as a cow; nor is he led to pasture. His way of procuring his prey is cunning, bloodthirsty and strenuous; there is certainly nothing passive about it. He does not mildly defend himself, but attacks his enemies as soon as he senses them in the distance; and his weapons of attack are far better developed than his weapons of defence. True, he wants to "preserve" himself, but he also simultaneously wants other things which are inseparable from this. He wants to kill so that he can survive others; he wants to stay alive so as not to have others surviving him. If "self-preservation" included these two desires then the concept would have a meaning, but, as it is, there is no reason why we should retain it when another is so much more accurate. All the forms of survival I have enumerated are of great antiquity and, as will be shown, are found even amongst primitive peoples. It is something which is much desired, and an individual can increase his own measure of it. A brave warrior can acquire it to a high degree, but he does not owe it to his skill in fighting or to his bodily strength; it passes into him as the mana of his slain enemy. "In the Marquesas it was through personal prowess that a tribesman became a war chief. The warrior was thought to embody the mana of all those whom he had killed, his own mana increasing in proportion with his prowess. In the mind of the native, the prowess was the result, however, not the cause of his mana. The mana of the warrior's spear was likewise increased with each death he inflicted. As the sign of his assumption of his defeated enemy's power, the victor in a hand-to-hand combat assumed his slain foe's name; with a view to absorbing directly his mana, he ate some of his flesh; and to bind the presence of the empowering influence in battle, to insure his intimate rapport with the captured mana, he wore as a part of his war dress some physical relic of his vanquished foe—a bone, a dried hand, sometimes a whole skull." The effect of victory on the survivor could not be more clearly conceived. By killing his opponent, the survivor becomes stronger, and the addition of mana makes him capable of new victories. It is a kind of blessing which he wrests from his enemy, but he only obtains it if the latter is killed. The physical presence of the enemy, first alive and then dead, is essential. There must have been fighting and killing, and the personal act of killing is crucial. The manageable parts of the corpse which the victor removes and either embodies into himself or wears as trophies serve as continual reminders of the increase of his power.

252 CROWDS AND POWER

They make him feel stronger and he uses them to arouse terror; each new enemy he challenges trembles and sees the same fate threatening him. The Murngin of Armhem Land in Australia believe in a more personal but equally profitable relationship between the killer and the killed. The spirit of the slain man enters the body of the slayer, who then not only acquires double strength, but actually becomes larger. It is easy to imagine how this prospect stimulates young men in war, each of them seeking out an enemy in order to gain his strength. But this will only be achieved if the killing takes place by night, for by day the victim will see his murderer and will then be much too angry to enter his body. This process of "entering" has been precisely described. It is so remarkable that I shall quote a large part of the description. "When a man kills another during a feud, he returns home and does not eat cooked food until the soul of the dead man approaches him. He can hear the dead man's soul coming because the shaft of the spear which hangs from the stone head within the man drags on the ground and hits against the trees and bushes as he walks. When the spirit is very near, the killer can hear sounds coming from the dead man's wound. . . . He takes the spear, removes the spear head, and puts the spear end of the shaft between his own big toe and the toe next to it. The other end of the shaft is placed against his left shoulder. . . . The soul then enters the socket where the spear head was, and pushes its way upward into the leg of the killer, and finally into the body. It walks like an ant. It finally enters the stomach and shuts it up. The man feels sick and his abdomen becomes feverish. He rubs his stomach and calls out the proper name of the man he has killed. This cures him and he becomes normal again, as the spirit enters the heart, having the same effect as if the blood of the dead man had been given to the killer. The slayer acquires the life strength of the dead man, and when he dreams, the soul tells him where to find food. He is told about kangaroo, honeybees, and turtle eggs. The killer sneaks away from camp and meets the soul of the dead man, who comes close and lies down. The slayer is frightened and cries, "Who is that? Somebody is near me." He finds a kangaroo, unusually small, and understands the meaning of its presence. He takes sweat from under his arm and rubs it on his right arm, then picks up his spear and calls out the name of the dead man, spearing the animal. The animal grows larger while dying, but the man is unable to lift it. He returns to camp to tell his friends, saying, "I have just killed the soul of the dead man. Do not let anyone hear of this, as he might get angry again." Friends and relatives go out with him to skin the animal and prepare it for eating. They find fat everywhere, considered a great delicacy. The meat tastes unpleasant at first, but then it is cooked and a feast is made with the parts more appreciated by the natives. The remainder is carried back to the main camp, where the old men ask, "Where did you kill him?" The young man replies, "Up there by the river." The old men know that this is no ordinary kill, as there is fat everywhere. They taste the flesh of the animal, but it has a slightly different flavor, not like a natural kangaroo. They conclude, "You have seen the dead man's soul all right." The survivor procures strength and blood from his enemy, causing himself and his animal prey to grow larger. The gain he derives from the enemy is personal and immediate, directing thoughts towards war. However, the business is conducted stealthily and by night, differing from our traditional conception of the hero.

The hero we know, who fearlessly and alone falls on the enemy, is found in the Fiji Islands. There is a story of a boy who is brought up by his mother, without knowing his father. With threats, he forces her to tell him who his father is, and as soon as he learns that it is the sky-king, he sets out to find him. When he does, his father is disappointed because he is so small. He says he needs men, not boys, for he is fighting a war. The men sitting around the king laugh, but the boy smashes the head of one of the mockers with his club. The king is delighted and asks him to stay.

"And on the morrow, in the early morning, the foe came up to the town, shouting for war, and crying 'Come out to us, O Sky-king, for we are hungry. Come out to us, that we may eat.' Then the boy rose up, saying, 'Let no man follow me. Stay you all in the town'; and, taking in his hand the club which he had made, he rushed out into the midst of the enemy, striking savagely right and left, killing with every blow; till at length they fled before him, and he sat down on a heap of dead bodies, calling to the townfolk—'Come forth and drag the slain away.' So they came out, singing the Death-song, and dragged away the bodies of the slain, forty and two, while the wooden drum sounded the 'Death-roll' in the town.

Four times afterwards did the boy smite his father's enemies, so that their souls grew small, and they came bringing peace-offerings to the Sky-king, saying, 'Pity us my lord, and let us live'; wherefore he was left without an enemy, and his rule stretched over all the sky."

Here the boy takes on all the enemy single-handed, and each of his blows goes home. At the end, he is seen sitting on a heap of dead bodies, and every single man in the heap was killed by him personally. It should not, however, be thought that such things happen only in stories. The Fiji Islanders have four distinct names for heroes. 'The killer of one man is called Koroi; of ten men, Koli; of twenty, Visa; and of thirty, Wangka. A famous chief, whose achievement was even greater, was called Koli-Visa-Wangka; he was the killer of 10 + 20 + 30, that is, of sixty men. The feats of these super-heroes are perhaps even more impressive than the feats of ours, for they not only kill their enemies but eat them afterwards.

A chief who has conceived a special hatred for some man reserves the right to eat him up alone and in this case really does refuse to allow anyone else a bit of him. But a hero, it may be said, does not only fight human enemies. In stories, his chief concern is with dangerous monsters from whom he has to liberate his people. The monster is gradually devouring them, and there is no one able to resist him. The best they are capable of is a regulation of terror: so many victims yearly are delivered up to him. But the hero takes pity on his people, sets out quite alone, and, in face of great dangers, slays the monster with his own hands. His people are grateful to him, and his memory is faithfully cherished. In virtue of the invulnerability through which he manages to save others, he appears as a figure of light.

There are, however, myths in which the connection between this figure of light and heaps of dead bodies—and not only those of enemies—is clearly recognized. The most concentrated of these myths comes from a South American people, the Uitoto. It is to be found in the important and much too little known collection of K. T. Preuss. That part of it which is relevant to our subject follows here in an abridged form.

"Two girls who lived with their father on a river bank saw one day in the water a very pretty, tiny snake and tried to catch it. But it always escaped them, until their father made a very fine sieve for them, in which they caught the creature and brought it home. They put it in a small pot with water and set all kinds of food before it, but it rejected everything. But then, in a dream, the father had the idea of feeding the snake with a special kind of starch, and it then began to eat properly. It grew as thick as a thread and then as a finger-tip, and the girls put it into a larger pot. The creature went on eating the starch and grew as thick as an arm. They put it into a small lake. It continued to eat the starch greedily and was so hungry that, with its food, it seized and swallowed the hand and arm of the girl who was feeding it. Soon it was as big as a tree fallen into the water. It began to go about on land and to eat deer and other animals, but it still came when it was called and swallowed the enormous quantities of starch which the girls prepared for it. It made a cave for itself under the villages and tribes and began to eat the forefathers of men, the first people in the world.

'Darling, come and eat', the girls called and the snake came out of its hole, seized the bowl of starch which one of the girls held, and her arm, right up to her head; and dragged her away and swallowed her. "The other sister went away weeping to tell her father. He decided to take revenge. He licked tobacco, as these people always do when they decide on the death of some creature, became intoxicated and, in a dream, hit on a way of taking revenge. He prepared starch to offer to the snake as food and called the creature which had swallowed his daughter and said to it, 'Swallow me!' He was prepared to suffer anything and drank from the tobacco-box which hung round his neck 256 CROWDS AND POWER in order to kill it. The snake came at his call and seized the bowl of starch which he held out. Then the father jumped into its jaws and sat down. 'I have killed him', thought the snake and dragged and carried the father away.

"Then it ate a whole tribe and there were people rotting on top of the father's body. Then it swallowed another tribe and men rotted on his body. They rotted on top of him whilst he sat there, and he had to endure the stench. The snake swallowed all the tribes on the river and made away with them, so that no-one remained alive. The father had taken a shell with him from home, to cut open the snake's belly. But he cut and slit it only a little, whereupon the snake felt pains. Then. it ate the tribes along another river. People were afraid and did not go out into the plantations, but stayed at home all the time. And indeed it was impossible to go about, for the snake had its hole in the middle of the path and, if anyone came from the fields, it seized him and dragged him away. The people wept and were afraid that the snake would eat them and did not take a step out of doors. When they so much as got out of their hammocks, they feared that the snake had its hole there and would seize and drag them away.

"People stank and rotted on the father's body. He drank tobacco juice from his box and made cuts in the middle of the snake's belly, so that it had great pains. "What is the matter with me? I have swallowed Deihoma, the Cutting One. I feel pains', said the snake, and cried out.

"Then it went to another tribe, came up out of the earth and seized all the people there. They could go nowhere, not even down to the river. If they went to fetch water from the river the snake seized them and dragged them away. 

As soon as their feet touched the floor in the morning, it seized them and dragged them away. Deihoma gashed its belly with his shell and it cried out, ‘How is it that I suffer pains? I have swallowed Deihoma, the Cutting One, and that is what hurts me!’ “And his guardian spirits warned him: ‘Deihoma, this is not yet the creek on the river where you live. Be careful how you cut. Your creek is still far distant.’ At these words Deihoma stopped cutting and the snake went to feed among the people where it had fed before, and immediately seized them. ‘It goes on eating! Where are we to live? It has destroyed our people’, said the inhabitants of the villages. They wasted away. What did they have to eat? “The people perished and rotted on Deihoma’s body. Meanwhile he drank from his tobacco-box and cut into the snake’s belly, and con- tinued to sit inside it as before. For an endless time the wretched man had had nothing to eat and only tobacco-juice to drink. For what THE SURVIVOR 257 should he eat? He drank tobacco-juice and remained calm, in spite of the stench of putrefaction. “The tribes did not exist any more. The snake had eaten the bodies of all those who lived by the river at the foot of heaven, so that now there were no more people. Deihoma’s guardian spirits spoke to him: ‘Deihoma, this is the creek on the river where you live. Go to it now and cut strongly. Two more windings of the river and you are at home. He cut. ‘Cut, Deihoma, cut strongly’, they said. Deihoma cut on, slit the snake’s belly and opened it in the creek and jumped out through the opening. “As soon as he was out he sat down. His head had peeled com- pletely and he was hairless. The snake lay there writhing. Thus Dei- homa returned after an endless time of wretchedness inside the snake. He washed himself thoroughly in the creek, went to his hut and saw his daughters again, who rejoiced over their father.” In the full version of this myth, which has been considerably short- ened here, there are no less than fifteen passages describing how the bodies of the people swallowed by the snake lay rotting on top of the hero. There is something offensive and compelling about this image; next to eating it is what recurs most frequently in the myth. By drink- ing tobacco-juice Deihoma keeps himself alive. His calm and imper- turbability in the midst of putrefaction is characteristic of the hero. All the people in the world could lie rotting on top of him and he would still remain, alone in the midst of universal corruption, upright and intent on his goal. He is, as it were, an innocent hero, for none of the corpses are of his killing. But he is in the midst of the putrefaction and endures it. It does not strike him down; on the contrary, one could say it is this which keeps him upright. The concentration of this myth, where everything really important is enacted within the body of the snake, is completely authoritative; it is truth itself. A hero is a man who survives again and again by means of killing. But the survivor need not always be a hero. He may be simply a man who finds himself in an equivalent position in respect of the crowd of his own people, all except himself having perished. How does a man come to save his life in war, when all those to whom he belongs have been killed, and how does he feel when he is alone? There is an informative passage about this in an Indian myth, taken down by Koch-Griinberg among the Taulipang in South America. “The enemies came and attacked. They came at night to the village, which consisted of five houses, and set fire to it from two sides, so that it should be light and the inhabitants would not be able to escape in the darkness. They killed many of them with their clubs as they were trying to flee from their houses.

"A man named Maitchaule lay down unhurt among a heap of dead and smeared his face and his body with blood to deceive the enemy. These believed that everyone was dead, and left. The man remained there alone. Then he got up, washed, and went to another house not far from there. He thought there were people there, but he found no one. They had all fled. He found only manioc-cake and cold roasted meat, and ate. Then he began to think. He went out of the house and a long way off. He sat down and thought. He thought of his father and his mother, who had been killed by the enemy, and that he now had no one left. He said, 'I want to lie with my companions who are dead.' He returned, full of fear, to the burnt-down village. There were a great many vultures there. Maitchaule was a medicine-man and had dreamt of a beautiful girl. He chased the vultures away and lay down beside his dead companions. He had smeared himself with blood again. He held his hands over his head, so that he was ready to snatch quickly. The vultures returned and fought over the corpses. Then the daughter of the King-vulture came. What did the daughter of the King-vulture do? She settled on Maitchaule's chest. Just as she was about to rend his body he seized her. The vultures flew away. He said to the King-vulture's daughter, 'Change yourself into a woman. I am so lonely here and have no one to help me.' He took her with him to the empty house and kept her there like a tame bird. He said to her, 'I am going fishing now. When I come back I want to find you changed into a woman.'"

First he lies down amongst the dead in order to escape, and makes himself look like one of them so as not to be found. Then he discovers that he is the only man left alive and he feels sad and full of fear. He decides to lie down again amongst his dead companions. At first, he thinks of sharing their fate, but he cannot really be in earnest about this, for he has just dreamt of a beautiful girl. As he sees nothing living around him except vultures, he catches a vulture to be his wife. It should be added that, at his wish, the bird does then change into a woman.

It is remarkable how many tribes all over the world attribute their origin to one couple which alone remains alive after some great catastrophe. In the familiar case of the Biblical deluge, the austerity of the myth is softened by the fact that Noah claims his whole family. He is permitted to take them with him into the ark and also one pair from each living species. But it was he himself who had found mercy in the sight of God; the quality needed for survival, in this case piety, was his, and it was for his sake alone that others were saved.

There are more extreme examples of the same story, tales in which the whole human race perishes except for the single pair of ancestors. These stories are not always linked with the conception of a deluge. Often they are about epidemics, in which everybody dies except for one man who wanders here and there, searching, until at last he finds one single woman, or perhaps two, whom he marries and with whom he founds a new race. It is part of the strength and glory of this ancestor that he was once left as the only human being alive. He did not perish with everyone else, and this is considered a kind of merit in him. The prestige he enjoys as the ancestor of all those who come after him is amplified by the respect for the strength and good fortune shown in his survival. While he lived amongst his fellows, he was just one man like many others. However, he suddenly found himself alone. The period of his solitary wanderings is described in detail, with most space devoted to his search for people who may still be alive, instead of whom he finds corpses everywhere. The growing certainty that there is no one except himself fills him with despair, but there is also a second element: his courage. Humanity begins again with him, and is built on him alone. If he had not had the courage to start again by himself, it would not exist at all.

One of the purest versions of this tradition is the story of the origin of the Kutenai, which I shall now quote verbatim.

"The people were living there, and at once they had an epidemic. They died. All died. Then they went about. They told one another the news. Among all the Kutenai, there was sickness. They arrived at one town, and told the news to one another. It was everywhere the same. At one town, they did not see anybody. They were all dead. Only one person was left. One day the one that 'was left' was cured. He was a man. He was alone. He thought: 'Well, let me go around the world to see if there is any place where there is any one. If there is no one left, I won't see it again. There is nobody. Nobody ever comes on a visit.' Then he started in his canoe. He went about in it. He started in his canoe, and came to the last camp of the Kutenai. When he arrived by the water where the people used to be, there was nobody; and when he went about, he saw only dead ones, no signs. He knew that nobody was left. There were no signs. After the one who was alive had left, not having seen anything, he went along in his canoe. He arrived where there had been a town. He went out, and there were only dead ones. There was nobody in the town. He started to go back. Then he came to the last place where Kutenai lived. He went to the town, and dead bodies were all piled up inside the tents. He always went about, and he knew that all the people were gone. He was crying as he went along. He thought: 'I am the only one left in this country, for the dogs also are dead.' When he came to the farthest village, he went about, and he saw some footprints of people. They had a tent. There were no dead bodies. Farther away there was the village site. He knew there must be two or three (alive). He even saw footprints, large ones and smaller ones. He did not know if there were three. He knew some one was saved. He went on in his canoe, and thought: 'I'll paddle that way. Those who lived here used to go that way. If it is a man, he might have moved.' Then he started in his canoe.

He went along in his canoe and saw above there two black bears eating berries. He thought: 'I'll go and shoot them. If I shoot them, I'll eat them. I'll dry them. Then I'll see if anyone is left. After I have dried the meat, I'll look for them. I have seen footprints of people. They might be hungry men or women. They shall eat.' Then he started, and went there where the bears were. He arrived, and saw that they were not bears, but women. He saw one older one, and the other one a girl. He thought: "I am glad to see people. Let me take that woman to be my wife." Then he went and took hold of the girl. The girl spoke and said to her mother, "Mother, I see a man." Her mother looked and saw that her daughter was telling the truth. She saw a man taking her daughter. Then the woman and the girl and the youth cried because they saw that all the Kutenai were dead. When they saw each other, they all cried together.

The older woman said, "Don't take my daughter. She is still small. Take me. You shall be my husband. Later on, when this my daughter is large, she shall be your wife. Then you shall have children." Then the youth married the older woman.

It was not long before the woman said, "Now I see that my daughter is grown up. Now she may be your wife. It is good if you have children. Her body is strong now." Then the youth took the girl for his wife.

The Kutenai increased from there.

A third kind of catastrophe, one which sometimes follows epidemics and wars, is mass suicide; it, too, has its survivors. The Ba-ila, a Bantu people living in Rhodesia, have a legend which illustrates this point. It refers to a quarrel between two of their clans, the "Goats" and the "Hornets".

Once upon a time, the "Goats" had a dispute with another clan, the "Hornets", over a question of chieftainship; the "Goats" having got the worst of it and being ousted from the premier position, planned to destroy themselves in the lake. They set to work to twist a very long rope—men, women, and children. Then they gathered on the lakeside and tied the rope in turn around their necks, and all plunged into the unfathomable depths.

A man of another clan, the "Lions", had married a woman of the "Goats", and after failing to induce her to refrain from suicide, determined to die with her. They happened to be the last to be tied to the rope; they were pulled in and on the point of drowning when the man, repenting, cut the rope, and so freed himself and his wife. She struggled to escape from him, screaming, "Let me go! let me go!" but he persevered and brought her to land. This is why to this day the "Lions" say to the "Goats", "It is we who saved you from extinction."

Finally, I want to draw attention to the deliberate use of survivors, especially to one historical and well-attested case. In a war of extermination between two South American Indian tribes, a single man of the defeated side was left alive by the enemy and sent back to his own people. He was to tell them what he had seen and so deprive them of the courage for further fighting. Humboldt recounts the story of this messenger of horror.

"The long resistance which the Cabres, united under a brave leader, offered to the Caraibs, had ended by the year 1720 in the annihilation of the former. The Cabres had defeated their enemies at the mouth of the river; a large number of Caraibs were killed while fleeing between the cataracts and an island. The prisoners were eaten, but, with the refined cruelty and cunning typical of the peoples of South and North America, one Caraib was left alive. He was forced to climb a tree and witness all the barbarities and then was immediately sent off to recount them to the defeated. But the victorious jubilation of the Cabres' chief did not last long. The Caraibs returned in such numbers that, apart from a few miserable specimens, all the man-eating Cabres were exterminated." This one man, left alive out of mockery, is forced to climb a tree and watch his own people being eaten. All the warriors with whom he went into battle have died fighting or, taken prisoner, have found their way into their enemies’ bellies. As an enforced survivor, the horrors he has witnessed are printed on his eyeballs. He is sent back to his own people. The message he brings, as his enemies imagine it, is: “Only one of you remains. You see how powerful we are. 262 CROWDS AND POWER Never dare to fight us again.” But the impact of what this one man saw is so great and his enforced uniqueness so impressive that, on the contrary, he rouses his people to revenge. All the Caraibs everywhere mass together and make an end of the Cabres for ever. This story, which is not the only one of its kind, proves the clarity with which primitive peoples see the survivor. They are perfectly aware of the singularity of his position and take it into account and try to make use of it for their own ends. The Caraib who was forced to climb the tree served both sides, friend and enemy alike. If we have the courage, there is an immense amount we can learn from his dual rôle.

The Resentment of the Dead
No one who studies the original documents of any religion can fail to be amazed at the power of the dead. There are peoples whose existence is almost wholly dominated by rites connected with them. The first thing that strikes one is the universal fear of the dead. They are discontented and full of envy for those they have left behind. They try to take revenge on them, sometimes for injuries done them during their lifetime, but often simply because they themselves are no longer alive. It is the jealousy of the dead that the living fear most, and they try to propitiate them by flattery and by offerings of food. They provide them with everything they need for their journey to the land of the dead, so that they may go far off and never return to harm and torment the living. The spirits of the dead send disease, or bring it with them; they have power over the increase of game and of crops, and a hundred ways of meddling with life. Passionately and continually they seek to get hold of the living. Since the dead envy the living all the objects of daily life which they themselves have had to leave behind, it was originally customary for the living to keep nothing, or as little as possible, of what had belonged to the dead. Everything was put in the grave, or burnt with them. The huts they had lived in were abandoned and never used again; or they were buried in their houses with all their property, to prove that no-one wanted to keep any of it. But even this did not wholly assuage their wrath, for the deeper envy of the dead was not directed towards objects, which could be made or acquired afresh, but to life itself. It is certainly remarkable that the same feeling should be attributed to the dead everywhere and under the most varied conditions. The dead of all peoples, it seems, are dominated by the same emotions.

THE SURVIVOR 263 In the eyes of those who are still alive, everyone who is dead has suffered a defeat, which consists in having been survived. The dead cannot resign themselves to this injury which was inflicted on them, and so it is natural that they should want to inflict it on others. Thus every dead man is someone who has been survived. Only in those vast and infrequent catastrophes where everyone, or nearly everyone, perishes together does the situation alter. In the individual, isolated death which we are considering it is one man who is torn from his family and his group. There are large numbers of survivors, all of whom have a right to mourn the dead man. They feel weakened by his death, and their love for him is still present. They lament him passionately, and there is no doubt that their mourning is genuine. However, the situation is complex and equivocal, as the same people who have cause to lament are also survivors. They lament their loss but feel a kind of satisfaction in their own survival. They won't admit this, but they are always aware of the dead man's feelings. He must hate them, as they still have life, which he has lost. They call on his soul to return to convince him that they didn't want his death. They remind him of how good they were to him while he was among them, and they carry out his last wishes, which in many places have the force of law.

In a case involving an Indian child who died after eating sand, the child's grandmother, mother, and father all loved him. They protest their innocence in his death, showing tender emotions mixed with fear. The grandmother provides the child with a bow and arrows, while the father buys an expensive coffin and puts sand in the grave for the child to eat, knowing how fond he is of it. The simple tenderness they show the child is moving, yet there is something disquieting about it, as it is permeated with fear. With some people's belief in the continued existence of the dead, this has developed into an ancestor cult. Wherever this has assumed a rigid form, it is as though people had learned a way of taming the dead, or, at any rate, those who matter to them. Regular offerings of what they desire, namely, praise and food, keep them contented. Looked after according to traditional rules, they become allies. Whatever they were in this life, they remain in the hereafter, continuing to occupy their former positions. A swan who was a powerful chieftain on earth will still be one in the grave. During sacrifices and invocations, he is the first to be named. His sensibilities are treated with consideration, for if they are hurt, he can become very dangerous. He takes an interest in the welfare of his descendants and it is essential that he should be well disposed to them, for much depends on him. He likes to be near them, and nothing must be done which might drive him away.

Among the Zulus in South Africa, the relationship between the living and their ancestors was particularly intimate. The reports which the British missionary Callaway collected about a hundred years ago, and later published, provide the most authentic account of their ancestor cult. He lets his authorities speak for themselves, taking down their words in their own language. His book, The Religious System of the Amazulu, is rare and, for that reason, too little known. It is among the essential documents of mankind.

The ancestors of the Zulus turn into snakes and go into the ground, but they are not, as one might suppose, mythical snakes, which no one ever sees. They are familiar species which play near the huts and often enter them. Some of these snakes resemble specific ancestors in their physical peculiarities and are recognized as such by the living. But they are not only snakes, for they appear to the living in dreams in their human shape, and talk to them. People wait for these dreams and grow uneasy if they do not have them. They want to talk to their dead and to see them "bright and clear" in their dreams. Sometimes the image of the ancestors is obscured and grows dark, and then certain rites must be carried out so that it becomes clear again.

From time to time, but especially on important occasions, sacrifices are offered to them; goats and oxen are slaughtered, and they are solemnly invited to partake of them. They are addressed in a loud voice by their "laud-giving names," on which they set great store. They love to be honored and are insulted if these names are forgotten or passed over in silence. The cries of the sacrificial animal must be loud, so that they can hear them. The ancestors love these cries. Sheep, who die silently, are no use as victims. The sacrifice is regarded as a meal which the dead share with the living; it is a kind of communion of the living and the dead.

If people live as their ancestors used to, if they follow the old usages and customs and keep them unchanged, and if the dead are offered their regular sacrifices, they are content, and will further the well-being of their descendants. When someone falls ill, he knows that one of his ancestors is displeased, and he will do his utmost to find out why. For the dead are by no means always just. They were human beings whom one knew, and their faults and weaknesses are equally well remembered. When they appear in dreams, it is in a way which corresponds to their character. One case, which Callaway recorded at some length, shows how, even when honored and well-fed, the dead can on occasion be seized with rancour against their survivors, solely because they are still alive.

Transposed into our own terms, the history of a grudge of this kind corresponds to the course of a dangerous illness. An elder brother has died. His possessions and particularly his cattle, which are the wealth of these people, have passed to his younger brother. This is the normal succession and so the younger brother, 266 CROWDS AND POWER having duly made the customary sacrifices, enters on his inheritance unaware of any offence against the dead man. But suddenly he falls seriously ill and his elder brother appears to him in a dream. “I dreamed that he was beating me, and saying, ‘How is it that you no longer know that I am?’ I answered him, ‘What can I do that you may see I know you? I know that you are my brother.’ He asked, ‘When you sacrifice a bullock, why do you not call upon me?’ I replied, ‘I do call on you, and laud you by your laud-giving names. Just tell me the bullock which I have killed without calling on you.’ He answered, saying, ‘I wish for meat.’ I refused him, saying, ‘No, my brother, I have no bullock; do you see any in the cattle-pen?’ Though there be but one’, he said, ‘I demand it’. When I awoke, I had a pain in my side; when I tried to breathe, I could not; my breath was short. “The man was obstinate, and would not agree to kill a bullock. He said, ‘I am really ill, and I know the disease with which I am affected.’ The people said to him, ‘If you know it, why do you not get rid of it? Can a man purposely cause the disease which affects him? When he knows what it is, does he wish to die? For when the spirit is angry with a man, it destroys him.’ “He replied, ‘Not so, Sirs; I have been made ill by a man. I see him in sleep, when I am lying down; because he wishes for meat, he has acted towards me with tricks, and says that, when I kill cattle, I do not call on him. So I am much surprised for my part, for I have killed so many cattle, and there is not one that I killed without calling on him. If he wished for meat, he could just tell me, ‘My brother, I wish for meat.’ But he says to me that I never laud him. I am angry, and say he just wants to kill me.’ “The people said, ‘Do you mean to say that the spirit still understands how to speak? Where is he, that we too may take him to task? For we were present at all times when you slaughtered cattle; and you lauded him, and called upon him by the laud-giving names which he received for his bravery; and we heard. And if it could really be that that brother of yours, or any other man who is already dead, should rise again, we could take him to task, and ask, ‘Why do you say such things?’ “The sick man replied, ‘Eh! My brother acts in this boastful way because he is oldest, for I am younger than he. I wonder when he tells me just to destroy all the cattle. Did he die and leave none behind?’ “The people said, ‘The man is dead. But we are really speaking with you, and your eyes are still really looking upon us. So we say, as regards that man, you should just speak quietly with him; and if you have a goat only, worship him with it. It is a shame in him to come and kill you. Why do you constantly see your brother in your sleep, and become ill? It were well that a man should dream of his brother, and awake with his body in health.’ “He said, ‘Eh, Sirs, I will now give him the flesh he loves. He demands flesh; he kills me. He wrongs me; daily I dream of him, and then awake in suffering. I say, he is not a man; he was a wretch, who liked to fight with people. He was a man of a word and a blow. If a man spoke to him, he wished to fight with him; and then a dispute might arise. It was caused by him, and then he would fight. And he did not see it nor say, “The fault was committed by me; I ought not to fight with these people.” His spirit is like him; it is wicked; it is constantly angry. But I will give him his flesh which he demands of me. If I see that he leaves me and I am well, I will kill some cattle in the morning. If it is he, let me get well and breathe, and my breath no longer cut me, as it cuts me at the present time.”

“The people assented, “Yes, yes, if in the morning you are well, then we shall see that it is indeed the spirit of your brother. But if in the morning you are still ill, we will not say it is your brother; then we will know it is only a simple disease.”

When the sun went down he was still complaining of pain. But at the time of milking the cows, he said, “Give me some food, that I may eat.” The food was fluid, not thick, and he was able to swallow a little. Then he said, “Just give me some beer, I am thirsty.” His wives gave him beer, and had confidence in their hearts. They rejoiced, for they had been fearful, saying, “Is it then that the disease is great, since he does not eat?” They did not speak out their joy, but looked at each other only. He drank the beer and said, “Give me some snuff too, my children, let me just take a little.” They gave him some, he took it, and lay down; and sleep came.

“And in the middle of the night his brother came and said, ‘So then have you pointed out the cattle? Will you kill them in the morning?”

“The sleeper assented, “Yes, yes, I will kill one. Why do you, my brother, say to me I never call on you, whilst whenever I kill cattle I call on you by your laud-giving names; for you were a brave, and stabbed in the conflict?”

“He replied, ‘I say it with reason, when I wish for flesh. I indeed died and left you with a village. You had a large village.’

“Yes, yes, my brother, you left me with a village. But when you left me with it, and died, had you killed all the cattle?”

“No, I do not tell you to destroy them all. But I tell you to kill, that your village may be great.”

He awoke and felt that he was now well, the pain in his side being no longer there. He sat up and nudged his wife. “Awake and light a fire.” His wife awoke and blew up the fire. She asked him how he was. He replied, “Oh! just be quiet; on awaking my body was feeling light. I have been speaking with my brother; on awaking I was quite well.” He took some snuff, and went to sleep. The spirit of his brother came again. He said, “See, I have cured you now. Kill the cattle in the morning.”

In the morning he arose and went into the cattle-pen. He had some younger brothers; he called them, and they went in with him. “I just call you, for I am now well. My brother says, he has cured me.” Then he told them to bring an ox. They brought it. “Bring that barren cow.” They brought them both. They came to him to the upper part of the pen, and stood there. He prayed, saying: “Well then, eat, ye people of our house. Let a good spirit be with us, that the very children may be well, and the people be in health! Task, how is it that you, since you are my brother, come to me again and again in my sleep, and I dream of you, and am then sick? That spirit is good which comes to a man and tells him good news. I am always complaining that I am constantly ill. 

What cattle are those which their owner devours, devouring them through being ill? I say, Cease; leave off making me ill. I say, Come to me when I am asleep, and tell me a matter, and say, My brother, I wish so-and-so. You come to me for the purpose of killing me. It is clear that you were a bad fellow when you were a man: are you still a bad fellow under the ground? | used not to think that your spirit would come to me with kindness, and tell me good news. But how is it that you come with evil, you, my eldest brother, who ought to bring good to the village, that no evil might come to it, for I know that you are its owner? “Then he said these words about the cattle, and returned thanks: ‘There are the cattle which I offer you. Here is a red ox, here is a red and white barren cow. Kill them. I say, Tell me a matter kindly, that on awakening my body may be free from pain. I say, let all the spirits of the people of our house come here together to you, you who are fond of meat.’ “And then he said, ‘Stab them.’ One of his brothers takes an assagai, and stabs the barren cow; it falls down. He stabs the ox; both bellow; Well then, child of my father, do you tell me to destroy them THE SURVIVOR 269 he kills them—they die. He tells them to skin them. So they skin them, the hides are taken off; they eat them in the cattle-pen. All the men assemble to ask for food. They take it away joint by joint. They eat and are satisfied, and give thanks, saying, “We thank you, Son of So-and-so. When a spirit makes you ill, we shall know that it is your wretched brother. We did not know, during your very severe illness, that we should eat meat with you again. We now see it is the wretch which is killing you. We are glad because we see you are well.’” “Tam indeed dead”’, says the elder brother, and this sentence con- tains the core of the dispute, the dangerous illness and the whole se- quence of events. Whatever the dead man’s behaviour and demands, he is indeed dead, and this is sufficient reason for bitterness. “I left you a village” he says, and adds quickly, “You have a large village’. This village is the other’s life, and thus he might also have added, “I am dead and you are alive.” This is the reproach that the living man fears and by dreaming of it he acknowledges its justice: he did survive his brother. The magnitude of this wrong, beside which all other wrongs pale, gives the dead man power to transform his own bitterness into serious illness for the other. “He wants to kill me” says the younger brother, and adds to himself, “because he is dead”. Thus he knows very well why he fears him and it is in order to propitiate him that he finally gives way about the sacrifice. Survival, as one sees, carries with it considerable uneasiness for the survivors. Even where regular forms of honouring them have been instituted, the dead can never quite be trusted. The more powerful a man was here on earth, the greater and more dangerous is his rancour afterwards. In the kingdom of Uganda a way was found of keeping the spirit of the dead king among his faithful subjects. He was not sent away nor allowed to vanish, but forced to remain in this world. After his death a medium, or mandwa, was nominated, in whom the spirit of the dead king took up its abode. This medium, who had the function of a priest, reproduced the appearance, gestures and exact language of the dead king, even, as is reliably attested in one case, to the extent of using the obsolete speech of 300 years before, when the king in ques- tion had lived. It might even happen that a medium used words no one, even his colleagues, understood. For, if a mandwa died, the spirit of the king descended on another member of the same clan. One mandwa took over the office from another, and thus the spirit of the king was never without a dwelling place.

It should not be imagined, however, that the medium acted the king continuously. From time to time, as the saying was, "the king took him by the head." He became possessed and embodied the dead man in every detail. In clans responsible for providing mandwas, the characteristics of each king at the time of his death were handed down orally and mimetically. King Kigala had died at a very advanced age; his medium was quite a young man, but when "the king took him by the head," he changed into an old man; his face became wrinkled, and he limped and slavered at the mouth. These seizures were treated with awe. It was regarded as an honor to be present at them; one was in the presence of the dead king and recognized him. He, for his part, being able to manifest himself as he wished in the body of a man whose sole office this was, might be expected to feel less resentment at having been survived than those completely cast out from the world of the living.

It was amongst the Chinese that the most significant development of an ancestor cult took place. In order to make plain what they meant by an ancestor, I must explain briefly their conception of the soul. They believed that every man possessed two souls. One of these, po, originated with the sperm and thus was in existence from the moment of conception. Memory was part of this soul. The other, hun, originated with the air breathed in after birth, and then took form gradually. This soul had the shape of the body it animated, but was invisible. Intelligence belonged to it and grew with it. It was the superior soul. After death, the breath-soul ascended into the sky, while the sperm-soul remained with the corpse in the grave. It was this inferior soul that was most feared; it was malicious and jealous and sought to drag the living with it to death. As the body decayed, the sperm-soul also gradually dissolved and thus ultimately lost its power to harm. The superior breath-soul, on the other hand, continued to exist. It needed food, for it was a long journey to the world of the dead, and if it was not given food by its descendants, it suffered terribly. If it lost its way, it was unhappy and then became as dangerous as the sperm-soul.

Funeral rites had a double purpose. They were intended to protect the living from the activities of the dead and, at the same time, to secure survival for the souls of the dead. Communication with the dead was dangerous if it was they who initiated it, but it was auspicious if it took the form of an ancestor cult, following the demands of tradition and carried out at the proper times. The survival of the soul depended on the physical and moral strength it had gained during life on earth. These were acquired through food and through study. Of special importance was the difference between the soul of a lord, who was a meat-eater and had been well fed all his life, and that of an ordinary, cheaply and badly fed peasant. "Only lords," says Granet, "have a soul in the proper sense of the word. And this soul is not used up with the years, but is enriched by them. A lord prepares for death by filling himself with exquisite dishes and life-giving drinks. In the course of his life, he incorporates into himself a great number of essences, and the larger and more fruitful his estates, the more of these there will be. He increases the rich substance of his ancestors, who themselves had their fill of meat and game. At his death, his soul does not dissolve like a common soul, but escapes, full of strength, out of his body. "The lord has lived according to the rules of his station, his soul after death, still further ennobled and purified by the funerary rites, will possess a sublime and shining power. It has the beneficent strength of a guardian spirit and, at the same time, retains all the traits of an enduring and sacred personality. It has become an ancestor-soul."

A special cult is dedicated to it, in a particular temple. It shares in all the seasonal ceremonies and in the life of the countryside and the people. If game is plentiful, it eats well; if the harvest is bad, it starves. The ancestor-soul feeds on the corn, meat, and game of the manorial lands which are its home. But, rich as the personality of such a soul is so long as it continues to exist in its accumulated and concentrated strength, there comes a moment when it too dissolves and is extinguished.

After four or five generations, the "soul-tablet" with which it was ritually linked loses its claims to a special sanctuary and is put away in a stone chest with the tablets of all the earlier ancestors whose individual memory is already lost. The ancestor it represents and whose name it bears is no longer honored as a lord. His forceful individuality, distinct for so long, vanishes. His course is run, his réle as an ancestor finished. The rites dedicated to him enabled him to escape for a good many years the fate of the common dead. Now his soul joins the crowd of all the other dead and becomes anonymous as they are.

Not all ancestors survive for as long as four or five generations. It depends on their rank whether their tablet is kept in position for so long and their soul called on to accept food. But, however long or short the period, the fact that they continue to exist at all changes in some respects the character of survival. The son no longer feels a secret triumph in being alive when his father is dead, for the latter remains present as an ancestor. The son owes him everything he has and must keep him well-disposed. He must provide food for him even after his death and carefully refrain from behaving arrogantly towards him.

As long as the son is alive, the ancestor-soul of his father will, in every case, exist too and will, as we have seen, retain all the traits of a distinct and recognizable person. The father, on his side, is very much concerned with being fed and venerated. For his new existence as an ancestor, it is of cardinal importance that his son should be alive: without descendants, there would be no one to venerate him. He wants his son and succeeding generations to survive him. He wants them to prosper, for on their prosperity depends his own existence as an ancestor. He wants people to go on living for as long as they are prepared to remember him.

There is thus a close and mutually rewarding link between the modified form of survival enjoyed by ancestors and the pride of the descendants who procure it for them. The fact that ancestors remain separate and distinguishable individuals for some generations is also important. They are known as individuals and venerated as such, only those of the remoter past fusing into a crowd. Between every living man and this crowd stand separate and clearly defined individuals such as his father and grandfather, and the very nature of the relationship between him and them means that any feeling of triumph in his own present existence which comes to tinge his veneration will be of a very mild and moderate kind and carry no temptation to increase the number of the dead. His own death will some day increase it by one, but this he naturally wants to defer for as long as possible. Survival loses its crowd characteristics; as a driving passion it would be absurd and incomprehensible and thus it ceases to be murderous. Piety towards the dead and awareness of self have entered into an alliance. The one merges into the other. but the best of both 1s preserved.

If one reflects on the figure of the ideal ruler as it takes shape in Chinese history and thought one is struck by its humanity. It is probable that the absence of brutality in this image is due to the particular form of ancestor worship.

Epidemics – Description of plague is that given by Thucydides, who suffered from it himself and recovered. Tersely and accurately it covers every essential aspect of the phenomenon. I propose to quote THE SURVIVOR 273 the most important parts of it, though in a slightly different order.

"People died like flies. The bodies of the dying were heaped one on top of the other, and half-dead creatures could be seen staggering about in the streets or flocking round the fountains in their desire for water. The temples in which they took up their quarters were full of the dead bodies of people who had died inside them."

"The members of some households were so overwhelmed by the weight of their calamities that they had actually given up the usual practice of making laments for the dead."

"All the funeral ceremonies which used to be observed were now disorganised, and they buried the dead as best they could. Many people, lacking the necessary means of burial because so many deaths had already occurred in their households, adopted the most shameless methods. They would arrive first at a funeral pyre that had been made by others, put their own dead upon it and set it alight, or, finding another pyre burning, they would throw the corpse that they were carrying on top of the other one and go away."

"No fear of God or law of man had a restraining influence. As for the Gods, it seemed to be the same thing whether one worshipped them or not, when one saw the good and the bad dying indiscriminately. As for offences against human law, no-one expected to live long enough to be brought to trial and punished; instead everyone felt that already a far heavier sentence had been passed on him and was hanging over him, and that before the time for its execution arrived it was only natural to get some pleasure out of life."

"The ones who felt most pity for the sick and the dying were those who had had the plague themselves and had recovered from it. They knew what it was like and at the same time felt themselves to be safe, for no-one caught the disease twice, or, if he did, the second attack was never fatal. Such people were congratulated on all sides, and they themselves were so elated at the time of their recovery that they fondly imagined that they could never die of any other disease in the future.""

Among the misfortunes which have visited mankind, the great epidemics have left a particularly vivid memory. Their onset is as sudden as a catastrophe of nature, but whilst an earthquake, for example, generally exhausts itself in a few short shocks, an epidemic may last for months or a whole year. An earthquake does its worst in one blow, all its victims perishing simultaneously. An epidemic of plague, on the other hand, has a cumulative effect. At first, only a few people are attacked, then the number of cases grows. The dead are visible everywhere, and soon there are more dead than living. The final result of an epidemic may be the same as that of an earthquake, but in an epidemic, people see the advance of death; it takes place under their very eyes. They are like participants in a battle that lasts longer than all known battles. But the enemy is hidden; he is nowhere to be seen and cannot be hit. One can only wait to be hit by him. In this battle, only the enemy is active; he strikes where he likes and strikes down so many that one soon comes to fear that no one will escape. As soon as an epidemic is acknowledged, it is felt that it can have only one end, and that is the death of everyone. Since there is no cure for it, those seized by the contagion constitute a crowd. They are equal in relation to the fate awaiting them; their numbers grow with increasing speed; they are moving towards a common goal which they reach in a few days, and they end in the greatest state of density possible to human bodies, pressed together in a heap of corpses.

There are those who believe that this stagnating crowd of the dead is only temporarily dead and, at a given moment, will rise again and stand in serried ranks before God, awaiting the Last Judgement. But, even if we disregard the subsequent fate of the dead—for not all religions share the same conception of it—one thing remains indisputable: an epidemic results in a crowd of the dying and the dead. "Streets and temples" are full of them. Often it is no longer possible to bury the victims singly in the proper way; in huge mass graves they are heaped one on top of the other, thousands of them together in the same grave.

There are three important and familiar phenomena that result in a heap of corpses. They are closely related and it is therefore par- suicide and epidemic. The aim of a battle is a heap of enemy dead. The number of living enemies is to be reduced so that the number of one's own people becomes comparatively greater. That some of these should also perish in the process is inevitable, but this is not what is desired. The goal is a heap of enemy dead, and each combatant strives for it actively, with the strength of his own arm. In mass suicide, this activity is turned against one's own people. Men, women, and children kill each other, until nothing remains but the heap of their own dead. Fire is used so that destruction shall be complete and nothing left to fall into the hands of the enemy. In an epidemic, the result is the same as in mass suicide, but it is not voluntary and seems to have been imposed from outside by some unknown power. The goal takes longer to reach, and people live in an equality of terrible expectation, all ordinary relationships abrogated. The element of contagion, which plays so large a part in an epidemic, has the effect of making people separate from each other. The safest thing is to keep away from everyone else, for anyone may already have the infection on him. Some flee from the town and disperse to their estates; others shut themselves up in their houses and allow no-one in. Each man shuns every other; his last hope is to keep his distance. The prospect of life, and life itself, is expressed in terms of distance from the sick. Those who catch the infection end by forming a dead mass; those who have so far escaped it keep away from everyone, even their closest relatives, their parents, husbands or wives and children. It is strange to see how the hope of survival isolates them, each becoming a single individual confronting the crowd of victims. But in the midst of universal disaster, when everyone attacked by the disease is given up for lost, the most astounding thing happens: a few, a very few, recover. The feelings of such people can be imagined. Not only have they survived, but they also feel themselves to be invulnerable, and thus they can afford sympathy for the sick and dying by whom they are surrounded. "Such people," says Thucydides, "were so elated at the time of their recovery that they fondly imagined that they could never die of any other disease in the future."

Cemeteries

The attraction of cemeteries and graveyards is so strong that people visit them even if no one belonging to them is buried there. In foreign cities they make a pilgrimage to the cemetery and walk about there as though it were an amenity specially provided for them. It is not always veneration for some famous man which draws them there. Even where this is the original motive, the visit always turns into something more. A cemetery very soon induces a special state of mind. We have a pious habit of deceiving ourselves about this mood. In fact, the awe we feel, and still more the awe we exhibit, covers a secret satisfaction.

What does someone who finds himself in a graveyard actually do? How does he move and what occupies his thoughts? He wanders slowly up and down between the graves, looking at this stone and that, reading the names on them and feeling drawn to some of them. Then he begins to notice what is engraved beneath the names. He finds a couple who lived together for a long time and now lie together for always, as they should; or a child who died quite young; or a girl who just reached her eighteenth birthday. More and more it is periods of time which fascinate the visitor. Increasingly they stand out from the touching inscriptions on the headstones and become simply periods of time as such. Here is a man who lived to be thirty-two; another, over there, died at forty-five. The visitor is older than either of them and yet they are already out of the race. He finds many who did not get as far as he has, but, unless they died particularly young, he feels no sadness for them. But there are also many who surpassed his present age, living for seventy or, now and again, for over eighty years, as he can still do himself. These arouse in him a desire to emulate them. For him everything is still open; his span of life is not yet fixed, and in this lies his superiority; with effort he may even surpass them. He has, anyway, a good chance of equalling them, for one advantage is his in any case: their goal is reached; they are no longer alive. They are there for him to compete with, but all the strength is on his side; they have no strength, but only a stated goal; and even those of them who lived longest are dead now. They cannot look him in the eyes as man to man and he draws from them the strength to become, and to remain for ever, more than they are. The eighty-nine-year-old who lies there acts on him like a spur. What is there to prevent him from living to ninety? But this is not the only kind of calculation which occupies the man who stands between the rows of graves. He begins to notice how long it is that some of the buried have lain there. The time that separates him from their death is somehow reassuring and exhilarating: he has known the world for that much longer. In graveyards which have old memorials going back to the 17th and 18th centuries, the visitor stands patiently before the half-effaced inscriptions, not moving until he has deciphered them. Chronology, which is normally only used for practical purposes, suddenly acquires a vivid and meaningful life for him. All the centuries he knows of are his.

The man in the grave knows nothing of the man who stands beside it, reflecting on the span of the completed life. For him, time ended with the year of his death; for the other, it has continued right up to the present. What would he, long dead, not give still to be able to stand by the side of the visitor? 200 years have passed since he died; the other is, as it were, 200 years older than him. Many of the things which happened during those years are known to him; he has read about them, heard people talk, and experienced some of them himself. He is in a position where it would be difficult not to feel some superiority, and the natural man does feel it. But he feels more than this.

As he walks among the graves, he feels that he is alone. Side by side at his feet lie the unknown dead, and they are many. How many is not known, but the number is very great and there will be more and more of them. They cannot move, but must remain there, crowded together. He alone comes and goes as he wishes; he alone stands upright.

Immortality Consweration of literary or any other private immortality can best start with a man like Stendhal. It would be hard to find a man less sympathetic to religion and more completely unaffected by its promises and obligations. His thoughts and feelings were directed wholly to this life and he experienced it with exactness and depth. He gave himself up to it, enjoying what could give him pleasure; but he did not become shallow or stale in doing so, because he allowed everything that was separate to remain separate, instead of trying to construct spurious unities.

He thought much, but his thoughts were never cold. He was suspicious of everything that did not move him. All that he recorded and all that he shaped remained close to the fiery moment of genesis. He loved many things and believed in some, but all of them remained miraculously concrete for him. They were all there in him and he could find them at once without resort to specious tricks of arrangement.

This man, who took nothing for granted, who wanted to discover everything for himself; who, as far as life is feeling and spirit, was life itself; who was in the heart of every situation and therefore had a right to look at it from outside; with whom word and substance were so intuitively one that it was as though he had taken it on himself to purify language single-handed—this rare and truly free man had, none the less, one article of faith, which he spoke of as simply and naturally as of a mistress. Without pitying himself, he was content to write for a few, but he was certain that in a hundred years he would be read by many. Nowhere in modern times is a belief in literary immortality to be found in a clearer, purer and less pretentious form.

What does a man mean who holds this belief? He means that he will still be here when everyone else who lived at the same time is no longer here. It is not that he feels any animosity towards the living as such; he does not try to get rid of them, nor harm them in any way. He does not even see them as opponents. He despises those who acquire false fame and would despise himself too if he fought them with their own weapons. He bears them no malice, for he knows how completely mistaken they are, but he chooses the company of those to whom he himself will one day belong, men of earlier times whose work still lives, who speak to him and feed him. The gratitude he feels to them is gratitude for life itself. Killing in order to survive is meaningless to such a man, for it is not now that he wants to survive. It is only in a hundred years that he will enter the lists, when he is no longer alive and thus cannot kill. Then it will be a question of work contending against work, with nothing that he himself can do. The true rivalry, the one that matters, begins when the rivals are no longer there. Thus he cannot even watch the fight. But the work must be there and, if it is to be there, it must contain the greatest and purest measure of life. Not only does he abjure killing, but he takes with him into immortality all who were alive with him here, and it is then that all these, the least as well as the greatest, are most truly alive.

He is the exact opposite of those rulers whose whole entourage must die when they die, so that they may find among the dead all they have been used to on earth. In nothing is their ultimate powerlessness more terribly revealed. They kill in death as they have killed in life; a retinue of the slain accompanies them from one world to the other. But whoever opens Stendhal will find him and also everything which surrounded him; and he finds it here, in this life. Thus the dead offer themselves as food to the living; their immortality profits them. It is a reversal of sacrifice to the dead, which profits both dead and living. There is no more rancor between them and the sting has been taken from survival.

ELEMENTS OF POWER
Force and Power
The word "force" suggests something close and immediate in its effect, something more directly compelling than power. The phrase "physical force" is really only a more explicit expression of the same idea, for power in its lower and cruder manifestations is always better described as force; it is by force, for example, that prey is seized and carried to the mouth. When force gives itself time in which to operate it becomes power, but when the moment of crisis arrives, the moment of irrevocable decision, it reverts to being pure force. Power is more general and operates over a wider space than force; it includes much more, but is less dynamic. It is more ceremonious and even has a certain measure of patience.

The distinction between force and power can be illustrated very simply by the relationship between cat and mouse. The cat uses force to catch the mouse, to seize it, hold it in its claws and ultimately kill it. But while it is playing with it, another factor is present. It lets it go, allows it to run about a little and even turn its back; and, during this time, the mouse is no longer subjected to force. But it is still within the cat's sphere of power; it can be caught again. If it gets right away, it escapes from the cat's sphere of power; but, up to the point at which it can no longer be reached, it is still within it. The space the cat dominates, the moments of hope it allows the mouse, while continuing however to watch it closely all the time and never relaxing its interest and intention to destroy it—all this together, space, hope, watchfulness, and destructive intent, can be called the actual body of power, or, more simply, power itself. Inherent in power, therefore, as opposed to force, is a certain extension in space and time. I suggested earlier that the mouth was the prototype of the prison. There is a relationship between the two which serves to illustrate the relationship between force and power. Once inside his enemy’s mouth, the victim has no hope, for he has neither time nor space to maneuver in. In both these respects, a prison is like an extension of the mouth. Like a mouse under the eyes of a cat, the prisoner can walk up and down a little and can turn his back on his warders; he has time before him, in which he can hope to escape or be released. But the whole machinery of the prison, in one cell of which he is confined, seems geared to his destruction, and he is conscious of it all the time, even when it is not actually in operation.

The distinction between force and power can be seen in another quite different sphere, that of the varying degrees of religious submission. Everyone who believes in God believes that he is continuously in His power and, in his own way, has come to terms with it. But there are those for whom this is not enough. They await some sharp intervention, some direct act of divine force, which they can recognize and feel as such. They live in expectation of God’s commands; for them, He has the cruder features of a ruler. His active will and their active and explicit submission in each particular case become the core of their religion.

Religions of this kind incline to the doctrine of predestination; their adherents are always able to feel that everything which happens to them is a direct expression of God’s will. Thus, all their lives, they find fresh occasions to submit. It is as though they were already in God’s mouth, to be crushed in the next instant. But they have to live their whole lives in this terrible place, undaunted by it and still striving to do right. Islam and Calvinism are the religions which exhibit this trend most strongly. Their believers yearn for God’s force; His power alone does not satisfy them; it is too distant and leaves them too free. The state of continuous expectation of command, to which, early in life, they surrender themselves for good and all, marks them deeply and also has a momentous effect on their attitude to other people. It creates a soldierly type of believer, men to whom battle is the truest representation of life and who feel no fear in actual battles because for them the whole of life is a battle. I shall say more about this type of believer in connection with command.

Power and Speed

The speed in pursuit and speed of grasp are relevant to power. For both, man took animals for his models. From wolves and other animals which run their quarry down he learned to pursue and overtake his prey. From the cat tribe, he learned to spring on it; here the masters he admired and envied were the lion, the leopard, and the tiger. Birds of prey combine both movements; an eagle or a falcon which flies alone, visible to all, and swoops down from a height, is a perfect expression of the dual process. They gave man the arrow, whose speed long remained the greatest he possessed. In the form of arrows, men swooped on their prey. Thus, these creatures early became symbols of power. Sometimes men thought of them as gods, sometimes as the ancestors of their rulers: Genghis Khan was descended from a wolf, and Horus, as a falcon, was the God of the Egyptian Pharaohs; in the African kingdoms, lions and leopards were the sacred animals of the royal clan; and from the flames of the pyre on which his body was burnt, the soul of a Roman emperor flew up to heaven as an eagle. But swiftest of all was, and is, lightning. There is no defence against it and the superstitious fear it arouses is universal. The Franciscan monk Rubruck, who was sent by St. Louis on an embassy to the Mongols, reported that they feared thunder and lightning above all things. In a storm they drove any stranger out of their tents, wrapped themselves in black felt and hid inside until it was over. The Persian historian Rashid, who was in the service of the Mongols, tells how they avoided the flesh of all animals killed by lighting, not daring even to go near them. All kinds of prohibitions sprang from their attempt to propitiate lighting; anything which might draw it down on them had to be avoided.

With other peoples lightning is the weapon of the supreme God. Sudden lighting in darkness is like a revelation; it both strikes and illuminates. But it is not always the same and people study each manifestation in the hope of discovering the will of their gods: they ask what kind of lightning it is, which quarter of the sky it is in, where it comes from and where it disappears. Among the Etruscans, its interpretation was the task of a special body of priests, whose office was continued in the Roman fulguratores. "The power of a ruler", says an old Chinese text, "is like the lightning flash, though its force is less." It is remarkable how many stories there are of rulers being struck by lightning. These cannot all be literally true, but the connection is in itself revealing. Such stories are particularly common among the Romans and the Mongols, both of them peoples who believed in a supreme sky-god and had a strongly developed feeling for power. They thought of lightning as a supernatural command and as striking where it was intended to strike. If a king was struck, it was by a ruler even mightier than himself. It stood for the quickest, the most sudden and also the most public form of punishment.

Men imitated lightning with their weapons: the flash and roar of fire-arms, and particularly of artillery, have always terrified peoples who did not possess them; to them they are thunder and lightning. But, even before this, men had sought ways of increasing their own animal speed: the taming of the horse and the perfecting of mounted armies led to the great invasions from the east. In every contemporary account of the Mongols, great stress is laid on their speed: suddenly they were there, only to vanish again and appear somewhere else even more suddenly. They turned even the speed of flight to account; scarcely did their enemies believe them fled than they were again surrounded by them. Since that time, physical speed has become an even more important part of power. It is unnecessary to enlarge here on the rôle it plays in our own machine civilization.

Different from speed in grasping or seizing, though allied to it, is the sudden unmasking of an opponent. Some apparently harmless and submissive creature stands before one; one tears off its mask and reveals an enemy. To make its effect, the unmasking must be sudden and swift. It is pursuit narrowed and concentrated into a small space; speed here has become drama. As we shall see later, the rapid substitution of one mask for another is an age-old method of deception. Each fresh mask is a different manifestation of power and makes its own effect. Where there are opposing protagonists, the dissembling of the one is matched by that of the other. The unmasking of an opponent is the counterpart of this process. In his swift change from one form of behavior to another, a despot must always be conscious of himself and others. Any means to forestall the effects of his actions are seen as permissible and obligatory. The fact that his speed may crush the innocent does not trouble him; in the complex world of masks, there must always be errors. What disturbs him profoundly is to let an enemy escape by failing to move fast enough.

Questioning is a forcible intrusion, like a knife cutting into the flesh of the victim. The questioner knows what there is to find, but he wants to actually touch it and bring it to light. He sets to work on the internal organs with the sureness of a surgeon, but he is a special kind of surgeon, one who keeps his victim alive in order to find out more about him. Questions are intended to be answered, and those that are not answered are like arrows shot into the air.

The most innocuous questions are those that remain isolated and do not lead to others. However, sometimes the questioner is not content with this and will put further questions. The person being questioned soon becomes annoyed, as they are physically detained and forced to reveal more of themselves. The annoyance turns to suspicion, as the questioner enjoys the feeling of power and asks more questions. Personal freedom consists largely in having a defense against questions.

The most blatant tyranny is the one that asks the most blatant questions. It is possible to find answers that prevent further questions. Alternatively, anyone whose position allows it can counter with questions of their own. Anyone to whom this course is not open must either give a full and serious answer to the question or, by cunning, stop the interlocutor from wanting to probe further.

In summary, questioning is a powerful tool that can be used to gain information and control over others. The despot must be conscious of himself and others, and the use of questions can be seen as permissible and obligatory. The questioner's goal is to find and bring to light the information they seek, and the act of questioning can be likened to a surgeon's precision. The power and control that questioning provides can be enhanced by asking more questions, and the questioner enjoys the feeling of power that it provides. Its findings may not all be used at once, but can be put on one side for later, when the particular thing for which it is searching has been found. Behind every real question there is always a deliberate aim; purposeless questions like those of a child or a fool can easily be turned aside. The situation is most dangerous for the person questioned when short, concise answers are demanded; it is difficult, if not impossible, to dissemble convincingly in a few words. The crudest form of defence is to pretend to be deaf or not to have understood; but this only serves between equals. When there is disparity of strength, the question can be translated into other terms or put in writing; and any answer given will then be much more binding, since the questioner can keep it for reference. Anyone who is externally defenceless can retreat and arm himself inwardly. The inner armour against questions is possession of a secret, a secret being like a second body encased within the first, and better defended. Anyone who comes near it is liable to receive an unpleasant surprise. A secret is something denser than the matter surrounding it, not continuous with it and kept in almost impenetrable darkness. Whatever its contents, a secret is always dangerous. The most important thing about it is its density, that is, its effectiveness as a defence against questions. A question met with silence is like a weapon rebounding from shield or armour. Silence is an extreme form of defence, whose advantages and disadvantages are almost equally balanced. It is true that a man who refuses to speak does not give himself away, but on the other hand he may appear more dangerous than he is; his silence is taken to mean that he must have much to hide, more than he may in fact have, and this makes it seem all the more important not to let him go. Persistent silence leads to cross-examination and to torture. But always, even in normal circumstances, an answer restricts the movements of the person who gives it; he has to abide by it; it forces him to take up a fixed position and to remain there, whereas his questioner can shoot at him from anywhere, changing his position as it suits him. He can circle round him, take him by surprise and so throw him into confusion. The ability to change his ground gives him a free- dom which the other is denied. He probes his defences with questions and, when he succeeds in piercing them, that is, in forcing him to answer, he has him pinned down and unable to move. “Who are you?” “I am so and so." From this time on, he must be himself, or his lies will entangle him. He is no longer able to escape by transforming himself. If the questioning continues for any length of time, he ends up in fetters. ELEMENTS OF POWER 287 The first question concerns identity, the second is about place. Since both presuppose speech, one is led to ask whether there was an original situation which preceded this verbal questioning and corresponded to it. If there was, place and identity must have coincided in it, for one without the other would be meaningless. Such a situation existed, and still exists; it is the hesitant examination of prey. “Who are you? Are you good to eat?" An animal, which is continually in search of food, touches and sniffs at everything it finds, and sticks its nose into everything: “What is this? Is it something to eat? What does it taste like?" The answer is a smell and either a movement or a lifeless rigidity. The strange body is simultaneously also a place; by smelling and touching it, the animal makes itself at home with and in it; translated into our terms, it names it. Early childhood is characterized by two different but connected series of events, which follow each other with increasing rapidity. On the one side is the stream of commands which issues from the parents; on the other, the innumerable questions of the child. The first questions of children are like a cry for food, though already in a more developed form. They are harmless, for they never procure for the child the full knowledge possessed by its parents, whose superiority thus remains immense.

What are the questions with which children begin? Among the earliest are those referring to place: “Where is. . . 2” Other early questions are, “What is... 2” “Who is... 2?” The part played by place and identity is already apparent. These are the first things a child asks about. Only later, towards the end of the third year, do its questions begin with “Why?”; and much later still with “When?” and “How long?”, the questions about time. It is a long while before a child has any real conception of time.

The original question, as we have seen, is a hesitant touching, but it soon seeks to penetrate further. It cuts like a knife; and this is why, for example, small children so much dislike disjunctive questions. Asked which they would rather have, an apple or a pear, a child will either not answer, or will say “pear”, simply because that was the last word they heard. A real decision, one which would involve separating apple from pear, is too hard for it, for at heart it wants both.

A question cuts most sharply when only one or other of the two simplest answers is possible: yes or no. Since these are exact contraries, excluding everything intermediate, the separation entailed is felt to be particularly final and significant. Often we do not know what we think until a question is put to us. As long as it is polite it leaves us free to decide for or against, but it forces us to come down on one side or the other.

In Plato's dialogues, Socrates appears as the supreme master of the question. He despised all the ordinary forms of power and sedulously avoided everything resembling them. The wisdom which constituted his superiority was at the service of anyone who wanted it, but his normal method of sharing it was not by giving elaborate lectures, but by asking questions. The Dialogues are full of questions, and most of them come from Socrates, including all the more important ones. He is shown pinning his hearers down and compelling them to make choices of every possible kind. He dominated them exclusively through questions.

Questions are to some extent restricted by the forms of civilization. There are certain things, for instance, which one does not ask a stranger. If one does, it is like coming too close to him; it is an intrusion and he has reason to feel offended. Restraint, on the other hand, is intended to convince him of the respect one feels for him. A stranger is treated as though he were the stronger—a form of flattery he is expected to reciprocate. Only in this way, maintaining a certain distance between each other, free from the threat of questions and behaving as though all were not only strong but equally strong, do men feel secure and able to leave each other in peace.

Perhaps the most important question of all is about the future; certainly it is one charged with tremendous urgency. But the gods to whom it is directed are not obliged to answer and hence, the more urgent the question, the more despairing it is. The gods never commit themselves, never stand to be questioned; no force can penetrate their intentions. Their utterances are ambiguous and defy analysis. Questions asked of them never lead anywhere, for only one answer is ever given. This answer may often only be a sign, and great numbers of such omens have been recorded by the priests of many nations; thousands have come down to us from the Babylonians, for example. But these do not form a system; there is no inner connection between any of them, but each stands isolated by itself: Collected together they form lists, nothing more, and even someone who knew them all would only be able to relate them individually to disconnected fragments of the future.

Cross-examination is the exact opposite of this. It deals with the past, recreating it in the fulness of its actuality, and it is directed at someone weaker than the questioner. But before considering the significance of trials, I want to say something about a procedure which is established in most countries today, that is, the system of police registration. A group of questions has taken shape, which is everywhere the same and whose basic purpose is to serve security and order. The state wants to know as much as possible about each person, so as to be able to deal with him if and when he becomes dangerous.

The first official question a man is asked is his name, the second his address. These, as we have seen, are the two oldest questions, those concerning identity and place. Occupation, which is the next question, reveals the field of his activity and the probable extent of his possessions; from that and from his age, his prestige and influence can be deduced—how he should be treated, in fact. His replies also cover his human possessions: he has to state whether he has a wife and children. Place of birth and nationality indicate his probable beliefs and, in an age of fanatical nationalism, are more revealing than his religion, which is no longer as significant as it used to be. With all this, including photograph and signature, much is already established.

His answers to these questions are accepted; for the time being, they arouse no suspicion. Only in a cross-examination conducted with a particular purpose do questions become loaded with suspicion. Each by itself could be evaded, but together they form a framework which controls the answers. The man on trial stands in a relation of hostility to his examiner, and as he is much the weaker, he will escape only if he succeeds in convincing him that he is not an enemy.

In judicial examinations, the questioning gives the questioner, who is already the more powerful, a retrospective omniscience. The comings and goings of the suspect, the rooms he entered, how he spent this or that hour, all that at the time seemed free and unpersecuted, are suddenly subject to scrutiny. He must come and go again as he did then, re-enter every room and re-live every hour, until as little as possible remains of his former freedom.

Before he can deliver judgment, the judge requires innumerable facts; his power is specifically grounded in omniscience. To this end, he has the right to ask questions: "Where were you?" "When were you there?" "What were you doing?" The suspect establishes an alibi, if he can, by setting place against place, identity against identity: "At that time I was not there, but somewhere else. It was not I who did that, but another man."

"Once upon a time", runs an old Wendish legend, "there was a peasant girl of Dehsa who lay down on the grass at midday and slept. Her betrothed sat by her. He was thinking how he could get rid of his bride. Then the noon-woman came and questioned him. Each time he [290] CROWDS AND POWER answered her, she put fresh questions to him. As the clock struck one, his heart stopped beating. The noon-woman had questioned him to death.

Secrecy [x1es] at the very core of power. The act of lying in wait for prey is essentially secret. Hiding, or taking on the color of its surroundings and betraying itself by no movement, the lurking creature disappears entirely, covering itself with secrecy as with a second skin. This state, which can last for a long time, is characterized by a peculiar blend of patience and impatience, and the longer it lasts, the fiercer becomes the anticipation of the moment of success. But in order to achieve success in the end, the watcher must be capable of endless patience. If this breaks a moment too soon, everything will have been in vain, and he must start again from the beginning.

The final seizing of the prey is open, for terror is part of its intended effect, but from the moment of incorporation onwards, everything happens in the dark again. The mouth is dark and the stomach and bowels still darker. No one knows and no one thinks about what goes on inside him. Of this absolutely fundamental process of incorporation, by far the larger part remains secret. It begins with the active and deliberate secrecy of lying in wait and ends as something unknown and involuntary in the secret recesses of the body. Only the intervening moment of seizure flashes out, like lightning illuminating its own brief passage.

The profoundest secret is that which is enacted within the body. A medicine-man who works from his knowledge of bodily processes has to undergo special operations on his own body before he is allowed to practice his profession. Among the Aranda in Australia, a man who wants to become a medicine-man wanders away to the mouth of the cave where the spirits dwell. Here, first of all, his tongue is perforated by a lance thrown at him by one of the spirits. He is quite alone, and it is part of his initiation that he should feel great fear of the spirits. The courage to endure loneliness, and this in a place of particular danger, is one of the qualifications of his profession.

Later, as he believes, a second spear pierces his head from ear to ear. He falls dead and is carried by the spirits into the cave where they live. As far as our world is concerned, he is unconscious, but in that other world, all his internal organs are removed and replaced with a completely new and presumably better set, either invulnerable or, at any rate, less susceptible to the assaults of magic. In this way, he is strengthened for his rôle, but from within; his new power originates in his intestines. He must have been dead before he can begin to exercise it, for death makes possible the complete penetration and exploration of his body.

His secret is known only to him and to the spirits; it lies within his body. A peculiar feature is that the young medicine-man is provided by the spirits with a supply of small crystals. These are indispensable for his profession, and he is thought to carry them around in his body. The treatment of any sick person involves great play with these crystals. The magician gives them to his patient and then draws them out again from the afflicted parts of the latter's body: hard particles of foreign matter in the patient's body have caused his illness. They are like a peculiar currency of disease, the exchange rate of which is known only to magicians. But except for this close-range treatment of the sick, magic always operates at a distance. All kinds of “pointing-sticks” are secretly prepared and then, from a long way off, trained on the victim, who, all unsuspecting, succumbs to the terrible power of sorcery: this exemplifies the secretiveness of lying in wait. Or small spears are thrown with hostile intent, some appearing in the sky as comets. Here the act itself is quick, though it may be some time before its effect is felt. Any Aranda can use sorcery to harm individuals, but only a medicine-man can ward off evil; through initiation and practice they are better protected than others. Certain very old medicine-men can bring down disease not only on individuals, but on whole groups of men and women. There are thus three degrees of power, the most powerful man being he who can bring disease to many people simultaneously. The magic of strangers who live far off is greatly dreaded. They are probably feared more than one’s own people because the antidotes to their sorcery are not so well known. In addition, the perpetrators will not feel the same sense of responsibility as for evil deeds committed within their own group. In the protection against evil and in the treatment of sickness the power of the medicine-man is regarded as good, but it is also coupled with the perpetration of evil on a large scale. Nothing bad happens of itself; everything is always caused by a malevolent human being or 292 CROWDS AND POWER spirit. What we would call cause is to them guilt. Every death is a murder and must be revenged as murder. All this is astonishingly close to the world of the paranoiac. In the two chapters on the Schreber case at the end of this book we shall see this more clearly. There we find even the attack on the internal organs described in detail. After their complete destruction and after long sufferings they are regenerated and are then invulnerable. Secrecy retains its dual character in all the higher manifestations of power. It is only a step from the primitive medicine-man to the paranoiac, and from both of them to the despot of history. In him secrecy is primarily active. He is thoroughly familiar with it and knows how to assess its value and use it on any given occasion. When he lies in wait he knows what he is watching for and knows, too, which of his creatures he can use to help him. He has many secrets, for he has many desires; and he organizes these secrets so that they guard one another. He reveals one thing to one man and another to a second, and sees to it that they have no chance of combining them. Everyone who knows something is watched by a second person who, however, is never told precisely what he is watching for. He has to record each word and movement, and by full and frequent reports, enable the ruler to assess the loyalty of the suspect. But this watcher is himself watched and his report corrected by that of yet another. Thus the ruler is always currently informed on the capacity and reliability of the vessels to which he has confided his secrets and can judge which of them is likely to crack or overflow. He has a filing system of secrets to which he alone keeps the key. He would feel endangered if he en- trusted it entirely to anyone else. Power is impenetrable. The man who has it sees through cthoz men, but does not allow them to see through him. He must be more reticent than anyone; no-one must know his opinions or intentions. Filippo Maria, the last of the Visconti Dukes of Milan, was a master of disguising his thoughts. He would veil his intentions, praising someone he no longer liked, or bestowing favors differently from what was requested. He would also complain about the conferring of favors or execution of death sentences he himself had imposed. He would test the discretion of men he wanted to use, confiding secrets to them and observing their behavior. If they betrayed the secret, he would degrade them and treat them harshly, while promoting the original suspect.

The Arabic Book of the Crown records traditions of the Sassanid kings of Persia. Chosroes II, the Victorious, would test the discretion of his courtiers by confiding secrets to them and observing their behavior. If they betrayed the secret, he would degrade them and treat them harshly. The highest discretion was reserved for the king's service. "A man who does not know how to serve the king is no use to himself, and a man who is no use to himself is no use to anyone." The power of remaining silent is highly valued. It means resisting provocations to speak, treating questions as if they had never been put, and letting others think that what they say has caused pleasure or the reverse. This voluntary dumbness is not deaf. The stoic virtue of imperturbability, if carried to the extreme, would lead to silence. The man who maintains a deliberate silence knows exactly what should be left unspoken. Since no one can remain silent forever, he has to decide what can be said and what cannot. Silence not only guards what cannot be said but also gives it greater concentration. A man who says very little in any case always appears more concentrated than others; his silence leads one to suppose he has something secret. The secret concealed in silence should never be forgotten. Its possessor is respected for not surrendering it, even though it grows in him and burns him more and more fiercely. Silence isolates. A man who remains silent is more alone than those who talk. Thus, the power of self-sufficiency is attributed to him. He is the guardian of a treasure within himself. Silence inhibits self-transformation. A man who will not speak can dissemble, but only in a rigid way; he can wear a mask, but he has to keep a firm hold of it. The fluidity of transformation is denied him: its result is too uncertain; he cannot know where it would take him if he surrendered to it. People become silent when they fear transformation. Silence prevents them from responding to occasions for transformation. All men's movements are played out in speech; silence is motionless. The taciturn person has the advantage that people wait for his utterances and attach special importance to them. When they come, they are terse and isolated and sound like commands. The man-made distinction between those who give orders and those who have to obey them implies that they have no common language between them. They are supposed to behave as though they could not talk to, nor understand, each other; and, apart from orders, this fiction is maintained in all circumstances. Even within their own sphere, commanders tend to be sparing of words and thus one comes to expect of other taciturn men, when they do speak, utterances that sound like commands. The misgivings people feel about the relatively free forms of government, often mounting to a kind of contempt, as though they could not possibly function properly, are due to their lack of secrecy. Parliamentary debates are conducted in front of hundreds of people; publicity is of their essence. Completely contrary opinions are openly declared and measured against each other. Even so-called secret sessions do not always remain entirely so, since the professional curiosity of the press, or the financial interests of some group, lead to frequent indiscretions. It is assumed that only a single individual, or a very small group of his creatures, is capable of keeping a secret and that deliberation is thus best confined to quite small groups, formed with secrecy in view and with very heavy penalties attached to indiscretion. The decision, it is said, should lie with one person; even he cannot know it before he has taken it and, once taken, it is quickly carried out as a command. A large part of the prestige of dictatorships is due to the fact that they are credited with the concentrated power of secrecy. In democracies, a secret is dispersed among many people, and its power is thus weakened. People say scornfully that everything is talked to pieces; that everyone has their say and can interfere, and that nothing ever happens because everything is known about in advance. Superficially, these complaints refer to a lack of decisiveness, but in reality, to a lack of secrecy. People will endure a great deal as long as it is new and exciting and authoritatively presented to them. If one is nothing oneself, there is a peculiar kind of servile gratification to be got from ending in the belly of power. People do not know what will happen, nor when; others may have precedence with the monster. They wait submissive and trembling and hope to be the chosen victim. This attitude leads to the glorification of the secret. Everything is subordinated to its apotheosis. It does not so much matter what happens, as long as it happens with the fiery suddenness of a volcano, unexpected and irresistible.

But, in the long run, all secrets which are confined to one faction, or, still more, to one man must bring disaster, not only to the possessor, which in itself might not matter, but also to all they concern; and that is of tremendous importance. Every secret is explosive, expanding with its own inner heat. It is only today that we fully realize how dangerous secrecy can become. In different, but only apparently independent spheres, it has become loaded with more and more power. Scarcely was the human dictator dead whom the whole world had united to fight, than the secret turned up again in the shape of the atomic bomb, more dangerous than ever and potentially more dangerous still in its derivatives.

Let us define the concentration of a secret as the ratio between the number of those it concerns and the number of those who possess it. From this definition, it can easily be seen that modern technical secrets are the most concentrated and dangerous that have ever existed. They concern everyone, but only a tiny number of people have real knowledge of them and their actual use depends on a handful of men.

 Judgement and Condemnation

Let us start with something familiar to all of us: the pleasure of pronouncing an unfavourable verdict. “‘A bad book’, someone says, or “a bad picture”; and he appears to be saying something objective. His face, however, betrays his enjoyment of his words. The first version of his statement is misleading and it very soon becomes more personal. “A bad writer” or “‘a bad painter” is what he says next and it sounds as though he were saying “a bad man”. We constantly catch friends, strangers, or ourselves at this business of judgement, and the pleasure in an unfavourable verdict is always unmistakable. It is a cruel pleasure, and one which never allows itself to be cheated of its object. The verdict is only a verdict if pronounced with almost unquestionable assurance. Here is no mercy in it and no caution, and it accords best with its real nature when it is reached without reflection. The passion it conceals is betrayed by its speed. It is quick, unconditional judgements which excite the pleasure visible in the face of their author. In what does this pleasure consist? It consists in relegating something to an inferior group, while presupposing a higher group to which we ourselves belong. We exalt ourselves by abasing others. The existence of two opposing kinds, different in value, is assumed to be natural and inevitable. Whatever the good is, it is there to be contrasted with the bad. We ourselves decide what belongs to each. It is the power of a judge which we arrogate to ourselves here. ELEMENTS OF POWER 207

For it is only in appearance that a judge stands between the two camps, on the borderline dividing good from evil. In fact, he invariably reckons himself among the good; his chief claim to his office is his unshakeable allegiance to the kingdom of the good, as though he had been borne a native of it. His decision is binding. The things he judges are quite definite and factual; his vast knowledge of good and bad derives from long practical experience. But judgement is also continu- ally usurped by those who are not judges, whom no-one has appointed, and no-one in his senses would appoint to such an office. No special knowledge is thought necessary; those who have the capacity to abstain from judgement can be counted on the fingers of one hand. Judgement is a disease and one of the most widespread; hardly anyone is immune from it. Let us try to discover its roots.

Man has a profound need to arrange and re-arrange in groups all the human beings he knows or can imagine; by dividing that loose, amorphous mass into two opposing groups he gives it a kind of density. He draws up these groups as though in battle array; he makes them exclusive and fills them with enmity for each other. As he imagines them and wishes them to be, they can only be hostile. Judgements of good and bad are an age-old instrument of dualistic classification, but one which is never wholly conceptual, nor wholly peaceful. What matters is the tension between the groups, and this is created and con- tinually renewed by the act of judgement. At the root of the process lies the urge to form hostile packs, which, in the end, leads inevitably to actual war packs. Through being applied to many different spheres, the process becomes diluted, but even if this means that it operates peacefully, apparently resulting only in verbal judgements, the urge to push it to its conclusion, to the active and bloody hostility of two packs, is always there in an embryonic form.

Anyone who is enmeshed in the thousand relationships of life belongs to innumerable groups of the “good” which stand opposed to as many groups of the “bad”. It depends entirely on circumstances whether one or the other of these groups engenders enough inner heat to become a pack and attack the opposing group before this does the same. Ostensibly peaceful judgements then become death sentences on enemies. The frontiers of goodness are marked out exactly and woe to any of the bad who cross them. They have no business among the good and must be destroyed.

Mercy is the power of pardoning someone who offends him, which every individual reserves for himself, and one which we all possess. It would be fascinating to construct a whole life from the acts of forgiveness a man had permitted himself. A person of paranoid structure might be described as one who never forgives, or only with great difficulty; who takes a long time considering it; who never forgets where there is something to forgive and who invents hostile acts against himself in order not to forgive them. The strongest inner resistance such people feel is to any kind of forgiveness. If they achieve power and, at times, have to pardon in order to maintain it, this is done merely for show: a despot never really forgives. Each sign of hostility to him is precisely recorded, and hidden and stored up for later. Sometimes this record is, as it were, expunged in return for genuine submission: the apparent magnanimity of despots has no other meaning. They so ardently desire the subjection of everything which opposes them that they often pay a very inflated price for it. A man who himself has no power and to whom the despot appears immensely strong, does not realize how important it is to the latter that literally everyone should submit to him. All he can evaluate—if he has any feeling for it at all—is real increases of power; he can never understand what the obeisance of the lowest and meanest of his subjects means to a king in his glory.

The interest in every single soul evinced by the God of the Bible, the tenacity with which he remembers and cares for each, may be taken as the model of all who wield power. His, too, is the intricate traffic in pardons: the sinner who submits to him receives mercy. But he watches him carefully and, in his omniscience, can easily see if he deceives him. There can be no doubt that many prohibitions exist only to enhance the power of those who can punish or pardon their transgression. An act of mercy is a very high and concentrated expression of power, for it presupposes condemnation. There can be no mercy unless there has first been condemnation. Mercy also entails election: pardons are usually granted only to a limited number of the condemned. The person who imposes punishment will be wary of too much lenience and, even if he manages to give the impression that he shrinks from the severity of execution, he will find a plausible excuse for it in the sacred duty of punishment, and this is what will determine his actions. But he will always leave the door to mercy open, sometimes granting a pardon himself and sometimes recommending it to the higher authority, if such there be, whose prerogative it is. The supreme manifestation of power is the granting of a pardon at the last moment. When the execution of the death sentence is imminent, on the gallows, or in front of the firing squad, a pardon has the appearance of new life. The limitation of power is its inability to bring the dead back to life; in acts of mercy long withheld, the mighty can imagine themselves as having overcome this limitation.

The Command

Flight and Sting
"Aw orper 1s an order?" Commands are by their nature final and categorical, and this may be the reason why so little thought has been given to the subject. They seem to us as natural as they are necessary and we accept them as something which has always existed. From childhood onwards we are accustomed to commands; they make up a good part of what we call education and the whole of our adult life is permeated with them, whether in the sphere of work, of war, or of religion. Thus the question has scarcely ever been raised of what a command actually is: whether it is really as simple as it appears; whether, in spite of the ease and promptness with which it normally achieves its object—that is obedience—it does not in fact mark the person who obeys it, even to the point of arousing feelings of hostility in him. Commands are older than speech. If this were not so, dogs could not understand them. Animals can be trained because they can be taught to understand what is required of them without understanding speech. The trainer makes his will known to them in short, clear commands, no different in essence from those addressed to human beings; and they also obey his prohibitions. There is every reason to seek very ancient roots for the command. At the least, it is clear that, in one form or another, it exists outside human society. The original command results in flight. Flight is dictated to one animal by another stronger animal, by something outside itself. Flight only appears spontaneous; danger always has a shape, and no animal flees unless it discerns it. Disparity of strength between the two animals involved is inherent in the nature of flight. The stronger proclaims its intention to hunt and to eat the other, and thus flight is a matter of life and death. Whether in fact it is pursued or not, the weaker is compelled by the "command" to flee. It flees from the threat alone, from the eyes, the voice, the whole terrifying shape. All command derives from this flight-command, as I propose to call it.

In its original form, the command is something enacted between two animals of different species, one of which threatens the other. The great difference in strength between the two, the fact that one of them is habitually preyed on by the other, the unalterable nature of the relationship, which is felt to have existed for ever—all this makes what happens seem absolute and irrevocable. Flight is the final and only appeal against a death sentence. For the roar of a lion is a death sentence. It is the one sound in its language which all its victims understand; this threat may be the only thing they have in common, widely different as they otherwise are. The oldest command—far older than man—is a death sentence, and it compels the victim to flee. We should remember this when we come to discuss human commands. Beneath all commands glints the harshness of the death sentence. Amongst men, they have become so systematized that death is normally avoided, but the threat and the fear of it are always contained in them; and the continued pronouncement and execution of real death sentences keeps alive the fear of every individual command and of commands in general.

Let us, however, forget for the moment what we have learned about the origin of commands and look at them without preconceptions, as though for the first time. The first thing that strikes one about a command is that it initiates action. An extended finger, pointing in a certain direction, can have the effect of a command: all that seems to be involved is initiation of some definite action, with movement in one given direction. The determination of direction is especially important; reversal or deflection should be felt as equally inadmissible. It is the nature of a command to admit of no contradiction. It should be neither discussed, nor explained, nor questioned. It is terse and clear because it must be instantly understood. Any delay in understanding it detracts from its force, and with every repetition which is not followed by performance, it loses part of its vitality until it finally becomes exhausted and powerless; it is better then not to attempt to revive it. The action initiated by a command is tied to a definite moment. Its duration, or the time of its performance, must be determined, either in so many words, or as an unmistakable part of the substance of the command. An action performed as the result of a command is different from all other actions. It is experienced and remembered as something alien, something not really our own. The speed of execution which an order demands may be part of the reason why we remember our action as alien, but it is not the whole reason. An important aspect of commands is that they come from outside; they are one of the constituents of life which are imposed on us, not something which develops out of ourselves. Even those solitary individuals who appear from time to time and, with a whole arsenal of commands, seek to found new religions and can regenerate old ones, still retain the appearance of men on whom an alien burden has been laid. It is never in their own name that they speak; what they demand of others is what they have been told to demand, and, whatever other lies they may tell, they are honest in this: they believe that they have been sent. The source of a command is thus something alien; but it must also be something recognized as stronger than ourselves. We submit because we see no hope of fighting; it is prospective victors who give commands. The power behind a command must not be open to doubt; if it has fallen into abeyance, it must be ready to prove itself again by force. But it is astonishing how seldom fresh proofs are called for, how long the original proof suffices. Success in conflict is perpetuated by commands; every command obeyed is an old victory won again. The power of those who give commands appears to grow all the time. Every command, however trivial, adds something to it, not only because in practice it generally benefits the person who gives it, but because, by the very nature of commands—their knife-edged precision and the recognition they exact in the whole sphere they traverse—it tends in every way to augment and secure his power. Power discharges commands like a hail of magical arrows; those who are hit must surrender themselves. The command wounds them and also summons and guides them to the seat of power.

But the simplicity and homogeneity of the command, which at first sight seems absolute and unquestionable, is seen on closer inspection to be only apparent. A command can be taken to pieces, and must be if it is to be really understood. Every command consists of momentum and sting. The momentum forces the recipient to act, and to act in accordance with the content of the command; the sting remains behind in him. When a command functions normally and as one expects, there is nothing to be seen of the sting; it is hidden and unsuspected and may only reveal its existence by some faint, scarcely perceptible recalcitrance before the command is obeyed. But the sting sinks deep into the person who has carried out the command and remains in him unchanged. In the whole psychological structure of man there is nothing less subject to change. The content of the command—its force, range and definition—was fixed for ever in that moment in which it was first promulgated, and this, or rather its exact image in miniature, is stored up in the recipient for ever and may remain submerged for years and decades before it comes to light again. But it is never lost, and it is essential to realize this. The fulfillment of a command is not the end; it remains stored up for ever. Those most beset by commands are children. It is a miracle that they ever survive the pressure and do not collapse under the burden of the commands laid on them by their parents and teachers. That they in turn, and in an equally cruel form, should give identical commands to their children is as natural as mastication or speech. What is surprising is the way in which commands are retained intact and unaltered from earliest childhood, ready to be used again as soon as the next generation provides victims.

Not by one iota do they change; it might be only an hour, though in reality it is twenty or thirty years since they were first pronounced. The depth of the impression which commands make on children and the tenacity and fidelity with which they are preserved owe nothing to the qualities of the individual child; intelligence or exceptional gifts have nothing to do with it. No child, not even the most ordinary, forgets or forgives a single one of the commands inflicted on it. A man's appearance, the carriage of his head, the expression of his mouth, the way he looks at one—everything that makes him recognizable—will change sooner than the shape of the command which has lodged in him as a sting and which is preserved unaltered until he himself produces it again. But the occasion must be there; the new situation which releases the command must be the exact replica of the situation in which it was received. This reproduction of earlier situations, but in reverse, is one of the chief sources of energy. What spurs men on to achievement is the deep urge to be rid of the commands once laid on them. Only commands which have been carried out leave their sting lodged in the obeyer. Commands which have been evaded need not be stored; the "free" man is not the man who rids himself of commands after he has received them, but the man who knows how to evade them in the first place. But the man who takes longest to rid himself of them, or who never achieves it, is undoubtedly the least free. No normal man feels less free because he obeys his own impulses. Even when they are strongest and their satisfaction is positively dangerous, he feels that his actions spring from himself. But there is no man who does not turn against a command imposed on him from outside; in this case everyone speaks of pressure and reserves the right to vengeance or rebellion.

The Domestication of the Command

'Tur ruicut-command, which contains a threat of death, presupposes a great difference in power between the protagonists: the one who puts the other to flight could kill him. The basic situation in nature arises from the fact that many animals feed on other animals. Those they feed on belong, however, to species different from their own and thus most animals feel threatened by creatures of a different kind; it is strangers and enemies who command them to flee. What we normally call a command, however, is something which happens between human beings: a master gives commands to his slaves, a mother to her child. The command as we know it, has developed a long way from its biological origins; it has, as it were, been domesticated. It is part of our general social structure and also of all the more intimate human relationships; it is as important to the family as to the state. It usually looks quite different from what we described as the flight-command. A master calls his slave and the latter comes although he knows he will receive an order. A mother calls her child and it does not invariably run away; although she rains orders of all kinds on it, it continues on the whole to trust her; it stays near her and keeps running to her. The same is true of a dog: it stays near its master and comes at once when he whistles. How was this domestication of the command brought about? What made the threat of death seem harmless? The explanation of this development lies in the fact that in the three basic relationships I have cited a kind of bribery is practised: a master feeds his slave or his dog and a mother her child. A creature that is subject to another habitually receives its food only from that other. No one but their master feeds slaves or dogs; no one else is under any obligation to feed them, and actually, no one else ought to feed them. (A child, of course, cannot feed itself and must cling to its mother's breast.) Thus, a close link grows up between commands and the giving of food. This is obvious in the training of animals: when a horse has done what it is supposed to do, its trainer gives it a lump of sugar. Domesticating the command means linking it with a promise of food. Instead of being threatened with death and thus put to flight, some creature is promised what all creatures most want; and this promise is strictly kept. Instead of serving its master as food, it is itself given food to eat.

This adulteration of the original flight-command trains men and animals for all kinds and degrees of voluntary captivity, but it does not entirely change the nature of commands in general. Every command still contains the same threat. It is a modified threat, but there are stated penalties for non-compliance, and these can be very heavy. The heaviest of all is the original penalty, which is death.

A command is like an arrow. It is shot from the bow and hits a target. The man who gives a command takes aim before he shoots; like an arrow, his command is intended for a definite person. An arrow remains sticking in the flesh of the man it hits, and he has to pull it out in order to free himself of the threat it carries. When a command is passed on, it is as though a man pulled out an arrow which had hit him, fitted that same arrow to his bow, and shot it again. The wound in his body heals, but it leaves a scar. Every scar has a story; it is the mark of a particular arrow. The man who gives the command, who shoots the arrow, feels a slight recoil from it. Here the analogy with an arrow ends, for the real recoil is psychological, and the marksman only feels it when he sees that he has hit his target. It is all the more important to find out exactly what happens. The satisfaction which follows a successful command is deceptive and covers a great deal else. There is always some sensation of a recoil behind it, for a command marks not only its victim, but also its giver. An accumulation of such recoils engenders a special kind of anxiety, which I call the anxiety of command. It is slight in the man who only passes on commands, increasing with nearness to the real source of authority.

It is not difficult to understand how this anxiety of command accumulates. A shot which kills an isolated creature leaves no danger behind it: a creature which is dead can do no harm to anyone. A command which threatens death and then does not kill leaves the memory of the threat. Some threats miss their target, but others find it and it is these which are never forgotten; anyone who has fled from a threat, or given in to it, will invariably revenge himself when the moment comes. The man who threatens is always conscious of this and will do everything he can to make such a reversal impossible. He feels that all those to whom he has given commands, all those he THE COMMAND 309 has threatened with death, are still alive and still remember. He is always conscious of the danger he would be in if they all united ‘against him, and this fear, which is both fully justified and yet vague and inherently unlimited—for he never knows when memory will be translated into action, nor by how many—this endless torturing awareness of danger is what I call the anxiety of command. It is strongest in the mightiest. The concentration of anxiety is greatest in one who is a source of commands, who creates orders and receives them from no-one above him. A ruler can keep it hidden, or under control, for a long time, but, in the course of life, it can increase until, as with certain of the Roman emperors, it suddenly manifests itself as madness.

Commands addressed to more than one individual: There is a distinction to be made between commands addressed to single individuals and those addressed to many. This distinction is already apparent in the original biological command. Some animals live singly and react singly to the threat of their enemies; others live in herds, which are collectively threatened. In the first case the animal flees or hides alone; in the second the whole herd does so. An animal which normally lives in a herd, but which is accidentally surprised alone by an enemy, will try to flee to its herd. Individual flight and mass flight are fundamentally different. The collective fear of a herd in flight is the oldest and perhaps the commonest example of a crowd state. It seems very likely that sacrifice originated in this state of crowd fear. A lion pursuing a herd of gazelles, all fleeing together in fear of him, desists from pursuit as soon as he succeeds in seizing one of them. This animal, his victim, is a kind of sacrifice which procures a respite for its companions in the herd. As soon as the other gazelles see that the lion has got what it wants their fear abates. From mass flight they revert to the normal state of a herd, each animal grazing on its own and doing as it pleases. If gazelles had a religion and the lion was their god they could, in order to appease his appetite, voluntarily surrender one of their number to him. This is exactly what happens among men: religious sacrifice springs from a state of crowd fear. It serves to halt the pursuit and, for a while, still the hunger of the hostile power.

When in a state of fear a crowd wants to stay together; its members feel that their only protection in acute danger is the proximity of their fellows. They are a crowd particularly in virtue of the identical direction of their flight. An animal which happens to make a leap in a different direction is in more danger than the others; and it feels in even more danger than it is; because it is alone its fear is greater. One might call the common direction of animals fleeing together their “conviction”. It is this which keeps them together and urges them forwards. They do not panic as long as they do not feel alone, as long as each animal does the same as the next, all executing exactly the same movements. In virtue of the parallel movements of head, neck and legs, this mass flight resembles what, in men, I have called the throbbing or rhythmic crowd. But as soon as the fleeing animals are surrounded the picture changes. A common direction of flight is no longer possible and the mass flight turns into a panic: each animal tries to flee separately and each gets in the way of the rest. The circle around them tightens. During the slaughter that ensues each animal is its fellow’s enemy, blocking its way to safety.

But let us now return to the command. I have said that commands addressed to single individuals are different from those addressed to numbers. Before establishing the general truth of this statement I ought to mention the most important exception to it. An army is an artificial gathering of men and its very nature entails the abrogation of this distinction. In it, the effect of a command is the same, whether it is addressed to one man, to several, or to many. An army can only exist as long as all commands have equal validity. They all come from above and each remains intact and isolated in itself. Thus, an army should never be a crowd. In a crowd, a command spreads horizontally. It may originally strike a single individual from above, but, since others like himself stand near him, he immediately passes it on to them. In his fear, he moves closer to them, and in a second, they are all affected by it. First, a few of them start to move, then more, and finally, all. The instantaneous spread of the same command turns them into a crowd, and soon they are all in flight together. Since the command is immediately diffused, no sting is formed. There is no time for this; what would otherwise have become permanent is instantaneously dissolved. A command to a crowd leaves no sting behind. A threat which initiates a crowd flight is dissolved in that same flight. It is only commands that remain isolated which lead to the formation of stings. The threat contained in such commands cannot be completely dissolved.

Anyone who has carried out an order as an individual keeps his original resistance as a sting, a hard crystal of resentment. This he can only get rid of by himself giving the same order to some one else. The sting is nothing but the hidden replica of the command he once received and could not immediately pass on. Only in this identical form can he free himself from the command. A command addressed to a large number of people has a very special character. It is intended to make a crowd of them, and, in as far as it succeeds in this, it does not arouse fear. The slogan of a demagogue, impelling people in a certain direction, has exactly the same function; it can be regarded as a command addressed to large numbers. From the point of view of the crowd, which wants to come into existence quickly and to maintain itself as a unit, such slogans are useful and indeed indispensable. The art of a speaker consists in compressing all his aims into slogans. By hammering them home, he then engenders a crowd and helps to keep it in existence. He creates the crowd and keeps it alive by a comprehensive command from above. Once he has achieved this, it scarcely matters what he demands. A speaker can insult and threaten an assemblage of people in the most terrible way, and they will still love him if, by doing so, he succeeds in forming them into a crowd.

The Expectation of Commands
A soldier on duty acts only in accordance with commands. He may feel tempted to do various things, but, since he is a soldier, his inclinations do not count, and he must forgo them. He can never stand at a cross-roads, for, even if he did, it is not he who decides which road to take. His activity is completely circumscribed. What he does, he does in common with all his fellow soldiers; and he does what he is ordered to do. The blocking of all the actions which other men perform, as they believe, of their own free will, leaves him hungry for those he has to perform. A sentry standing motionless on guard for hours is the best expression of a soldier's psychic state. He must not go away, nor fall asleep, nor make any movement except such exactly defined ones as may be prescribed to him. His real achievement is to resist all temptations to leave his post, in whatever shape they may appear. This negativism, as one may call it, is the soldier's backbone. He suppresses in himself all the fleeting impulses to activity, such as desire, fear, or restlessness, of which human life mainly consists; and he fights them best by not admitting them even to himself. Every action he performs must be sanctioned by a command, and since it is difficult for a human being to remain inactive, the expectation of what he is allowed to do grows and accumulates in him; his desire for action mounts up continually. But since all his actions are preceded by commands, it is on these that his expectation is focused: a good soldier is always in a state of conscious expectation of commands. This is increased in every possible way by his training and is also clearly expressed in military attitudes and formulae.

The quintessential moment of a soldier's life is when he stands to attention before his superior, awaiting his orders. Whether the situation is put into words, as with the German formula "Zu Befehl," or left unspoken, it is clear what causes his extreme tension and receptiveness.

A soldier's training begins with the prohibition of many things permitted to ordinary people; and heavy penalties are attached to the smallest transgression. Everyone is made aware in early childhood of a sphere of prohibited things, but the soldier's is immensely larger. 'Wall after wall is erected round him; they are illuminated for him, so that he sees them growing. They are as high and strong as they are clearly outlined. They are continually spoken of, so that he cannot pretend not to know them. He begins to move as though he always felt them around him. The angularity of his body is like an echo of their hardness and smoothness; he comes to resemble a stereometric figure.

A soldier is like a prisoner who has adapted himself to the walls enclosing him, one who does not mind being a prisoner and fights against his confinement so little that the prison walls actually affect his shape. While other prisoners have only one thought, which is to climb these walls or somehow break through them, he accepts them as part of nature, natural surroundings to which he adapts himself and which in the end become part of him.

No one can truly be called a soldier until he has intensively incorporated into himself this whole body of prohibitions and, in the full routine of a day, and of many days, has proved that he knows exactly how to avoid everything which is prohibited. For such a person, a command has a special value. It is like a sortie from a fortress where one has lain too long, or like lightning breaching the wall of prohibitions—lightning which only sometimes kills.

In the vast desert of prohibitions surrounding the soldier, a command comes as salvation: the stereometric figure comes to life and starts moving. It is part of a soldier's training to learn to respond to two kinds of commands: to act alone or to act jointly with others. Drill is the means of accustoming him to the latter. Here each soldier has to execute the same movements in exactly the same way and at the same time as the rest. What matters is a kind of precision better learnt by imitation of others than alone. Through it, he becomes like them. An equality is established which can on occasion be used to transform a body of soldiers into a crowd. But what is generally aimed at is the opposite of this, namely a uniformity as complete as possible without the soldiers being a crowd. When they are functioning as a unit, they react jointly to commands given them jointly; but it should also always be possible to split them up, to detach one or two of them, or half, or as many as their superior wishes. That they march or drill together should be only of superficial importance. A military unit is useful largely because it is fissile; a command must be able to strike any desired number of the men composing it, whether it is one, or twenty, or the whole unit. Its effectiveness should be independent of the number of people it is addressed to. It is a constant and remains the same whether it concerns one or all of them. This quality is of the greatest importance. It is what renders a command immune to crowd influence. Anyone who has to give commands in an army must be able to keep himself free of all crowds, whether actual or remembered. It is his training in the expectation of command which teaches him how to do this.

Expectation of Command among the Pilgrims at Arafat
"The most important moment of the pilgrimage to Mecca is the Wukuf, or “standing upon Arafat”, which takes place some hours’ journey from Mecca. An enormous number of pilgrims—sometimes as many as 6-700,000—are gathered there, “standing before Allah’, on this plain surrounded by bare hills; and all of them press towards the ““Mount of Mercy”, which stands in the middle of the plain. From the summit of this hill, where the Prophet himself once stood, a preacher delivers a solemn discourse. The crowd responds with the cry “Labbeika ya Rabbi, labbeika”’: “We wait for your commands, O Lord, we wait for your commands’. This cry is repeated continuously throughout the day, mounting to frenzy. Then, in a kind of sudden crowd-fear, called Ifadha, or torrent, everyone flees as though possessed, until they come to the next place, Mozdalifa, where they spend the night, setting out from there the following morning for Mina. People run headlong, pushing and trampling on each other; generally several lose their lives. At Mina, a large number of animals is slaughtered in sacrifice and their flesh immediately shared and eaten. The ground is drenched with their blood and covered with the scattered remains. This “Standing upon Arafat”’ is the moment when the expectation of command evinced by a religious crowd reaches its greatest intensity.

“We wait for your commands, O Lord. We wait for your commands.” This formula, repeated over and over again by the crowd, and a crowd of such density, expresses the situation clearly. Islam, the “surrender to God’, is here reduced to its simplest form, a state in which people think of nothing but the Lord’s commands and beg for them passionately. For the sudden fear which overcomes them at the given signal, there is a cogent explanation, namely that here the original character of the command—the compulsion to flee—breaks through, although without the faithful being consciously aware of it. The intensity of their collective expectation increases the effect of the divine command to such an extent that it reverts to what all command originally was: a command to flee. God’s command puts men to flight. The fact that the flight is continued on the following day, after the pilgrims have spent the night in Mozdalifa, shows that the effect of the command is still not exhausted. According to Islamic belief, it is by the direct command of God that death comes to men. This death the pilgrims try to escape by passing it on to the animals they slaughter in Mina at the end of their flight. These animals perish instead of men, a substitution familiar from many religions: we remember Abraham and Isaac. Thus the pilgrims escape the slaughter God intended for them. They have surrendered themselves to his command, so much so that they have fled before him, but they have not denied him the blood he wanted: the ground is drenched with the blood of slaughtered animals. There is no other religious usage which so forcefully illustrates the nature of a command as this Wukuf, the “Standing upon Arafat,’ with the ensuing Ifadha, or mass-flight. Islam is in any case a religion whose ordinances retain much of the original immediacy of commands, but in the Wukuf and Ifadha expectation of a command and the command in general find their purest expression. THE COMMAND 315

Discipline and the Sting of Command

Discipline is what makes an army. But there are two kinds of discipline, the open and the secret. The open discipline is that of commands. I have shown how the narrowing down of the source of commands leads to the formation of that most curious creature, or stereometric figure rather, the soldier. The most characteristic thing about a soldier is that he lives in a permanent state of expectation of commands, which is expressed in his bearing and his very shape. When he steps out of it he ceases to be a soldier and his uniform becomes merely a façade. A real soldier is easily recognized; nothing could be more public than his state. But this manifest discipline is not all. There is in addition a secret discipline, which the soldier does not speak of and which is not meant to be seen. Duller men may only occasionally be conscious of it, but, although hidden, it remains awake in most soldiers, particularly those of our own time. It is the discipline of promotion. It may seem odd that something as universally familiar as promotion should be called secret. But promotion is only the public manifestation of something more profound which remains secret, if only because the way it functions is never understood by more than a very few. Promotion is the outward manifestation of the hidden workings of the stings of command.

It is obvious that, in a soldier, these stings must accumulate to a monstrous degree. Everything he does is done in response to a command; he does, and must do, nothing else. This is what the open discipline of the army demands of him. All his spontaneous impulses are suppressed. He swallows order after order and, whatever he feels about it, must go on doing so. Each command he carries out—and they are innumerable—leaves a sting behind in him. These stings accumulate rapidly. If he is a common soldier, on the lowest step of the military hierarchy, all opportunity to get rid of them is denied him, for he himself can give no orders. He can only do what he is told to do. He obeys and, in doing so, grows more and more rigid.

A change in this enforced condition can only come about through promotion. As soon as a soldier is promoted he himself has to give orders and, in doing so, begins to rid himself of some of his stings. His position—though to a very limited degree—has turned into its opposite. He has to demand of others things which were formerly demanded of him. The situation as a whole remains exactly the same; all that has changed is his place in it. His stings come into the open as commands. He now gives to others the commands his immediate superior once gave to him. He is not left to choose how to get rid of his stings, but is put in the one position where it is inevitable: he must give orders. His men stand facing him in his own former attitude. They hear from him the same phrases that he heard, spoken in the same tone and charged with the same force. The duplication of the situation is almost uncanny; it is as though it had been invented for the needs of his stings of command. He strikes others with what formerly struck him. But though he has reached a position where his stings of command not only can but must declare themselves, he continues to receive commands from above. The process now assumes a dual character: in getting rid of the old stings, he accumulates new ones. These are easier to bear than the first, for he knows that fresh promotion will give them wings; he has a justified hope of getting rid of them.

To sum up, we can say that the open discipline of an army manifests itself in the actual giving of commands; the secret discipline operates by using the stored-up stings of command.

The Mongols

The Horse and the Arrow

One of the most striking things about the history of the Mongols is the closeness with which command is linked to the horse and the arrow. One of the main reasons for the sudden and rapid rise of their power is to be found in this combination. It is essential for us to consider it briefly.

Commands, as we have seen, have their biological origin in the flight-command. Like all similar hoofed animals, the horse is built for flight. Flight, one might almost say, was its original mode of being. It lived in herds and these herds were accustomed to fleeing together. The command to flee was given them by the dangerous animals which preyed on their life. Mass flight was one of the commonest experiences of the horse and came to be part of its nature. As soon as the danger was past, or seemed past, it reverted to the care-free state of herd-life, each animal doing again as it pleased.

By taking possession of the horse and taming it, man formed a new unit with it. He trained it by a series of operations which can very well be regarded as commands. A few of these are sounds, but most are movements—of pressure or of pulling—which transmit to the horse the will of its rider. The horse understands the rider's wishes and obeys them.

Among equestrian peoples, the horse is so necessary and so close to its master that a very personal relationship grows up between them; it is subjection, but of an intimacy only possible in these circumstances. In it, the physical distance normal between the giver and the recipient of an order, including, for example, that between master and dog, is obliterated. It is the rider's body which gives directions to the horse's body. The space of command is thus reduced to a minimum. The distant, alien quality which is part of the original character of command disappears. Command is domesticated in a quite special way, and a new actor is introduced into the history of relationships between creatures—the riding-animal, a servant on which one sits, which is exposed to the physical weight of its master and responds to the pressure of his body.

How does this relationship to his horse affect the command-economy of the horseman? The first thing to be said is that a rider can pass on to his horse commands he himself has received from a superior. If a goal is set him, he does not reach it by running himself, but by making his horse run. Since he does this immediately, the order does not leave any sting in him; he avoids this by passing the order on to his horse. He gets rid of the particular constraint which the order would have imposed on him before he has properly felt it. The sooner he carries out his task, the quicker he mounts and the faster he rides, the less the sting remains in him. The real art of horsemen, as soon as they take on a military character, consists in their ability to train another larger crowd of recipients of commands, to whom they can directly pass on everything they receive from their own superiors. The armies of the Mongols were characterized by their very strict discipline. To the peoples they fell upon and conquered, and who were forced to observe them from close quarters, this discipline seemed the most formidable and astonishing thing they had ever encountered. Whether they were Persians, Arabs, Chinese, Russians or the Franciscan monks sent by the Pope, they all found it equally inconceivable that men should be able to obey so absolutely. But the Mongols, or Tartars, as they were generally called, bore this discipline easily, for the reason that the section of their people which carried the main burden of it was the horses. Children of only two or three years old were set on horseback by the Mongols and taught to ride.

As the child of the Mongols learns to ride so early, he enjoys a freedom of a special kind. As soon as he can manage a horse, he can pass on to it everything he himself is ordered to do. He can very early discharge the stings which, although to a much smaller degree, are part of his upbringing too. A horse does the child’s will long before any human being. He grows used to receiving this obedience and his life is easier for it, but he later expects of men he has conquered the same absolute physical submission. This relationship to the horse plays a decisive part in the command-economy of man, but among the Mongols there is another important factor. This is the arrow, the exact image of the original, non-domesticated command.

An arrow is hostile; it is meant to kill. It travels straight through space and can be evaded, but if man does not succeed in this it will lodge in him. It can be pulled out, but, even if it does not break, leaving the head behind, the wound remains. (The Secret History of the Mongols contains many stories of arrow-wounds.) The number of arrows which can be shot is unlimited. It was the Mongols’ main weapon. They killed from a distance, and they also killed while moving, from the backs of their horses. We have seen that every command retains from its biological origin something of the character of a death sentence. Anything which does not flee is caught and anything which is caught is torn to pieces. With the Mongols, commands retained the character of a death sentence in the highest possible degree. They slaughtered men as they slaughtered animals. 

Killing was third nature to them, as riding was second. Their massacres of men were battues; down to the last detail they resembled their massacres of animals. When not going to war, they went hunting; hunts to them were maneuvers. They must have been astonished when, in the course of their wide-ranging expeditions, they came upon Buddhists or Christians whose priests spoke to them of the sanctity of all life. Scarcely ever has there been a greater contrast: the masters of the naked command, instinctive embodiments of it, confronted with those who seek, through their faith, so to weaken or transform it that it loses its deadliness and becomes humane.

Religious Emasculation. The Skoptsy, one of the most extreme cults, celebrated with particular intensity, are described as leading to castrations. In antiquity, the priests of the Great Mother, Cybele, were well known for this. There were thousands who, in a frenzy, had castrated themselves in honor of their goddess. Ten thousand of them served in her famous sanctuary at Comana in Pontus. It was not only men who dedicated themselves in this way. Women who wanted to express their adoration cut off their breasts and served the goddess.

Lucian in his essay On the Syrian Goddess describes the frenzy which broke loose at gatherings of her believers and how one of these, when his turn came to testify, castrated himself. It was a sacrifice offered to the goddess, a proof, once and for all, of devotion to her, excluding every other love for the remainder of life. The same operation is reported of the Russian sect of the Skoptsy, the "White Doves," whose founder, Selivanov, created a sensation in the time of Catherine II with the success of his preaching. Under his influence, hundreds and perhaps thousands of men castrated themselves, and women cut off their breasts for the sake of their faith.

An historical link between these two religious movements is scarcely possible. The latter sect sprang from Russian Christianity, a full 1500 years after the excesses of the Phrygian and Syrian priests had come to an end. The Skoptsy were distinguished by their concentration on a very few commands and prohibitions and also by having only small groups of believers, all of whom knew each other well. All their discipline was directed towards the recognition and adoration of a living Christ among them. They feared the distraction of books and scarcely ever read. To very few passages even of the Bible did they attach significance. Theirs was a very close community, protected by many secret oaths.

They attached the greatest importance to secrecy, and everything hinged on it. Their religious life was enacted by night, separate and hidden from the outer world. The center of their life, what they had above all to keep secret, namely the act of castration, they called "the making-white." This particular operation was supposed to make them pure and white and like angels. They lived as though they were already in heaven. The ceremonious veneration they showed each other, their obeisances, and their acts of praise and worship were such as angels might use among themselves. The mutilation to which they submitted had the sharp character of a command. It was a command from on high which they derived from certain words of Jesus in the Gospels and from words spoken by God to the prophet Isaiah. This command struck them with tremendous force, and they had to pass it on with the same force. Our theory of the sting could very well be applied to them. Here the command is carried out on the recipient himself. Whatever else he might do, the main thing he had to do was to castrate himself. In order to understand this, we must examine some commands of a special kind. Since, with the Skoptsy, commands are given within the framework of a strict discipline, they can be compared to military commands. The soldier, too, is trained to expose himself to danger. The final purpose of all his drill is to train him to stand firm in the face of the enemy when he is ordered to do so, even though the latter threaten him with death. His capacity to stand firm is just as important as his efforts to kill his enemy. Without the one, he would never be capable of the other. The soldier, like the Skopets, offers himself as a victim. Both hope to survive, but are resigned to wounds, pain, blood, and mutilation. By tighting the soldier hopes to become the victor; by castrating himself, the Skopets becomes an angel, with a claim to heaven. Because he has done this, he is, in fact, already there.

But the command we are here concerned with, operating within the discipline of the sect, is a secret one, and thus the position of the believer resembles that of a man under military discipline who has to carry out a secret order by himself, without anyone knowing anything about it. To do this, he must not be recognizable by a uniform, but must disguise himself. The Skopets' uniform, that which makes him equal with his companions, is his castration, and this by its very nature remains hidden and never to be disclosed.

One might say that the Skopets resembles a member of the dreaded sect of Assassins, entrusted by his chief with a murder he must never divulge. Even when he has succeeded in carrying it out and has himself been apprehended, no one must ever know exactly what happened. The command he receives contains his own death sentence and is thus very close to its biological origin. He believes he is being sent to certain death, but this is never even mentioned. For his own death, which he freely accepts, is made use of to strike down another—the named victim. The command here is thus a double death sentence. One death remains unexpressed, although expected; the other is fully and clearly purposed. Thus the sting in the first man, which will perish with him, is made use of before he dies to kill another. The Mongols have a graphic expression for this hurried killing of another before one is killed oneself: The heroes in their Secret History say of an enemy they want to kill in their own last moment, “I shall take him with me as my pillow.”

But though this glance at the Assassins has taught us something about the Skopets, his real position is still unexplained. For it is himself the Skopets has to strike or mutilate. The command he has accepted must be carried out on his own body, and only when this has been done does he become a full member of his secret army. The fact that the operation is generally performed by someone else should not mislead us. Its significance is that the man surrenders himself. Once he has declared his willingness, it does not very much matter how it is done. In any case, since he receives the command from outside, his sting will be the same, and he will want to pass it on later. Even if, as seems likely, the mutilations started with one man, who castrated himself, he too acted on a supposed command—the command from heaven. Of this he will have been firmly convinced. He himself was first converted by the passages in the Bible which he then uses to convert others; what he passes on is only what he has received. The sting here is visible and takes the form of a physical scar. It is less secret than the sting of command usually is, but it remains a secret from all except those who belong to the sect.

Negativism in Schizophrenia

A man can EVADE commands by not hearing them; and he can evade them by not carrying them out. The sting—and this can never be too emphatically stated—only results from the carrying out of a command. It is the action itself, performed as a result of external, alien pressure, which leads to the formation of a sting in human beings. A command carried out impresses its exact shape on the performer. How deeply and firmly this is imprinted depends on the force with which the command is given, its phrasing, the extent of the giver's superiority, and also, of course, on its actual content. In every case something remains, and remains as discrete and isolated as the original command. It is this that I have called the sting.

We can see now how inevitable it is that each man should come in the end to carry within himself a multitude of stings. Their persistence is remarkable; nothing sinks so deep into human beings and nothing is so indissoluble. A man can become so completely riddled with them that he has no interest left for anything else and, except for them, can feel nothing. His defence against new commands then becomes a matter of life and death. He tries not to hear them so as not to have to accept them. If he cannot help hearing them he refuses to understand them. If he is made to understand, he evades them flagrantly, by doing the opposite of what he is asked to do: when told to step forward he steps back and when told to step back he steps forward. In doing so he cannot be said to be free of the command. His is a clumsy and impotent reaction, still, in its own way, determined by the content of the command. This reaction, which, in psychiatry, is called negativism plays a specially important part in Schizophrenia.

The most striking thing about schizophrenics is their lack of contact; they are much more isolated than other people. They often give the appearance of being paralysed within themselves, as though there could be no connection between them and other people; as though they could not understand and did not want to either. In their obstinacy they resemble statues; and there is no attitude in which they may not petrify. But these same people, in other phases of their illness, suddenly behave in exactly the opposite way. They exhibit a suggestibility which can reach fantastic proportions. They do what one shows them or demands of them so quickly and so perfectly that it is as though one was in them and did it for them. They are overcome by sudden fits of servility, "suggestion-slavery" as one of them called it himself. From statues they turn into officious slaves, exaggerating their performance of whatever is asked of them in a manner that often appears ridiculous. The contrast between these two attitudes is so great that it is difficult to understand. If, however, we provisionally leave out of account how they may appear to the schizophrenic himself and consider them, as it were, from outside, we have to admit that "normal" people frequently exhibit them too. But with them they serve a specific purpose and their manifestations are less extreme. The soldier who resists all provocations and remains rigid and upright where he was put, never leaving his post, and not tempted to do what he normally likes doing and often has done, is in an artificial state of negativism. It is true that he can sometimes act, namely at the command of his superior; but never otherwise. In order to make him act only on commands, he has been trained to a state of negativism. But it is a negativism which is open to manipulation, for his superior can, if he chooses, transpose him into the exactly opposite state.

As soon as a soldier is ordered to do something by the proper authority, he behaves in a manner as officiously compliant as the schizophrenic in his alternative state. The soldier knows perfectly well why he acts as he does. He obeys because he is threatened with death. The unmistakable external resemblance between the soldier on duty and the schizophrenic is unimportant.

A schizophrenic in a state of extreme suggestibility behaves as a member of a crowd would. He is just as impressionable and yields just as much to every impulse reaching him from outside. But we cannot think of him as one because he is alone. Since no crowd can be seen round him, it does not occur to anyone that he, from his own point of view, may feel as though he were in one. He is a fragment broken from a crowd.

Innumerable examples of schizophrenics' own imaginings can prove this contention. One woman claimed to have "all human beings in her body"; another to hear "the mosquitoes talking". A man "heard 729,000 girls"; another "the whispering voices of the whole of humanity". Under many different guises, all kinds of crowds appear in the imaginings of schizophrenics. It would be possible to make them the starting point for an enquiry into the nature of crowds.

The two contrary states which have been described are necessary to the schizophrenic because of what happens to an individual when he becomes part of a crowd. The liberation from the burdens of distance, called the discharge, includes the stings of command accumulated in every individual. Within a crowd, all are equal; no one has a right to give commands to anyone else; or, one might say, everyone gives commands to everyone. Not only are no new stings formed, but all the old ones are got rid of for the time being. It is as though people had slipped out of their houses, leaving their stings piled in the cellars.

The stepping out of everything which binds, encloses, and burdens them is the real reason for the elation which people feel in a crowd. Nowhere does the individual feel more free, and if he desperately tries to remain part of a crowd, it is because he knows what awaits him afterwards. When he returns to his house, to himself, he finds them all there again, boundaries, burdens, and stings. The schizophrenic, overburdened with stings, so much so that at times he is paralyzed by them, this cactus of torment and helplessness, succumbs to the illusion of the opposite state, that of being in a crowd. As long as he remains in it, he does not feel his stings. He has, or so he thinks, stepped out of himself, and though the way in which this happened is obscure and questionable, he seems to derive from it at least a temporary relief from the torment of stings; he has a sense of being linked with others again. To be sure, this deliverance is an illusion, for, just at that point where he enters on his freedom, new and stronger compulsions await him. But we are not concerned here with all the aspects of schizophrenia. Let us content ourselves with one conclusion: no-one is more in need of the crowd than the schizophrenic, who is crammed with stings and feels suffocated by them. He cannot find the crowd outside and so he surrenders to one within him.

The Reversal
"For whatever food a man eats in this world, by that food he is eaten in the next world." This mysterious and startling sentence comes from the Shatapatha-Brahmana, an ancient Indian treatise on sacrifices. There is a story in this same book which is even stranger, the story of the wanderings of the Seer Bhrigu in the other world. Bhrigu was a saint and the son of the god Varuna. He had acquired great Brahminical knowledge, which had gone to his head. His pride became over-weening, and he set himself above his own divine father. The latter, in order to show his son how little he knew, recommended him to wander successively to the four quarters of the heavens, east, south, west, and north. There he should look carefully at everything there was to see and, on his return, report what he had seen.

"First, in the east, Bhrigu saw men chopping off the limbs of other men and dividing the pieces among themselves, saying, "This is for you and this for me." When Bhrigu saw this, he was horrified. The people who were cutting others in pieces explained to him, "Thus they did to us in the other world, and so we do it to them in this world."

Then Bhrigu wandered to the south and saw men chopping off the limbs of other men and dividing them with the words, "This is for you and this for me." On questioning them, he again received the same answer: "Thus they did to us in the other world, and so we do it to them in this world."

In the west, Bhrigu saw people silently eating other people, and those who were being eaten kept silence too. "Thus," he was told, "did they do to us in the other world, and so we do it to them in this world."

But, in the north, he saw people who screamed loudly as they ate others, and those who were being eaten were screaming too. The same thing had been done to them in the other world.

On his return, Bhrigu was asked by his father Varuna to recite his lesson, like a pupil. But Bhrigu said, "What shall I recite? There is nothing." The things he had seen were so terrible that everything seemed as nothing to him. Then Varuna knew that Bhrigu had seen these things and he explained: The people in the east chopping off other people's limbs were the trees. The people in the south chopping off other people's limbs were the cattle. The people in the west silently eating silent people were the plants. The people in the north screaming aloud and devouring screaming people were the waters. In all these cases, Varuna knew of remedies. By certain sacrifices, which he indicated to his son, it was possible to escape the consequences of one's deeds in the other world.

"In another treatise on sacrifice, the Jaiminiya-Brahmana, the same story about Bhrigu appears in a somewhat different form." He does not wander into the four quarters of the heavens, but from one world into another. Instead of four pictures there are only three. First, Bhrigu sees trees, which in this other world have assumed human shape and are now cutting men into pieces and eating them. Then he sees a man eating another man, who is screaming. This is explained to him: cattle, which were slaughtered and eaten there, have here assumed human shape and do to man what he once did to cattle. The third thing he saw was a man eating another man, who kept silence. Rice and barley have taken human shape and, in this way, repay their sufferings.

In this version, too, certain sacrifices are prescribed. Anyone who performs them properly will escape being eaten in the other world by trees or cattle, or rice and barley. But what we are interested in here is not the ways of avoiding this fate, but the folk-concept hidden beneath the priestly disguise. Whatever a man does in this world will be done to him in another. No special servants of justice are nominated to mete out punishment, but everyone is punished by his own victim.

The only kind of deed, however, for which punishment is exacted is the eating of something else. "Just as, in this world, men eat animals, so, in the other world, animals eat men." This sentence, which comes from another Brahmana, similar to the one quoted at the beginning of the chapter, finds a curious confirmation in the Laws of Manu. It is stated there that eating meat is no sin, for it is natural to all creatures; but for anyone who abstains from it, there is a special reward.

The Sanskrit word for flesh, which is Mamsa, is explained when we split it into its two syllables: mam is "me" and sa is "he". Thus mamisa means "me-he": "the one who eats my flesh in this life will devour me in the next world." This, the wise, declare, is the real meaning of the word "flesh."

Here the reversal is conceived in terms of flesh and reduced to the concisest possible formula: I eat him, he me. The word for the second part of the process, the consequences of what one has done, is the actual word for flesh. The animal which was eaten remembers who ate it. Its death is not the end of it. Its soul goes on living and turns into a man in the next world and there waits patiently for its devourer. As soon as the latter dies and arrives in the other world, the original situation is reversed: the victim finds his devourer, seizes him, cuts him in pieces, and eats him.

The connection with our concept of a command and the sting it leaves behind should be quite evident. But here the thing is carried to such extremes and made so concrete that at first it only terrifies us. Instead of happening in this life, the reversal is deferred till the next. Instead of a command simply threatening death and, in this way, compelling services of various kinds, what we are dealing with here is killing in its most extreme form, when the creature killed is eaten.

Man in the end is completely ruled by his stings. He may not succeed in bringing about a reversal, but he never ceases to strive for it. Whether he obtains deliverance or not, his stings shape him; they are his destiny. Since, however, we no longer seriously entertain the notion of another life, we think of the sting implanted by a threat of death as existing only so long as the victim is alive. According to the Indian conception, with its certainty of another life, the sting, as the hard core of the soul, continues to exist after death, and reversal happens in every case; it becomes the main business of life in the other world. There each creature does exactly what was done to him here, and does it with its own hands. The fact that change of shape does not hinder the reversal is particularly significant. It is not the actual animal I have eaten that seizes me in the other world and cuts me up and eats me; it is a man with the soul of that animal. The outward shape of the creature has changed completely, but the sting remains the same. In all the scenes of horror Bhrigu meets on his wanderings, the sting appears as the main concern of the soul. One might even say that the soul consists of it.

The true nature of the sting, about which so much has been said in the course of this enquiry into command—its absolute immutability and the exactness of the reversal it strives for—finds its most compelling expression in this Indian concept of the eaten feeding on the eaters.

The Dissolution of the Sting Through Forms during the carrying out of the command. It detaches itself from the command and, as an exact image of this, imprints itself on the performer. It is small, hidden and unrecognized; its most essential characteristic, as we have already seen, is immutability. It remains isolated within the person concerned, a foreign body lodged in his flesh. However deep it may lie hidden, however incapsulated, it always remains a burden.

It is very difficult to get rid of the sting. It must in fact dislodge itself and can only do so if and when it reacquires force equal to that with which it originally penetrated. For this to happen there must be an exact repetition of the original command-situation, but in reverse. This is what the sting waits for through months, years and decades. It is as though each sting had a memory of its own, but of one thing only: the situation in which it was implanted. When this situation recurs, the sting cannot fail to recognize it, for this is its sole content, the only thing it can recognize. Suddenly everything is as it was before; only the roles of the actors are reversed. When this moment comes, the sting seizes its opportunity and hastens to fall on its victim. The reversal has at last taken place.

This is what one may call the pure case, but it is not the only possible one. The same command can be given several times over by the same speaker to the same victim so that numbers of identical stings form. These do not remain isolated, but fuse into each other to form a new entity, which grows palpably and which can never be forgotten by the person it is lodged in. It is always there, it sticks up and continually obtrudes itself.

It may also happen, however, that a person receives one and the same command from several different sources. If this occurs often enough and order follows pitilessly close upon order, then the sting loses its clear outline and develops into a monster which endangers life. It grows until it forms the main substance of its host. He can never forget it and carries it around, seeking any opportunity to get rid of it. He finds innumerable situations which seem like the original one and thus suitable for reversal. But they are not. The command has been repeated so often and from so many different angles that the original situation has been obscured and he can no longer find the key to it. One memory has overlaid another, as one sting another sting. His burden can no longer be broken up into its elements. Whatever he attempts his general situation remains the same. Alone he is no longer capable of freeing himself from his burden. The emphasis is on alone, for liberation can be found from all stings, including the most monstrous and the most complex; it can be found within a crowd. We have often mentioned the reversal crowd, but it was not really possible to explain its nature until we had studied the way in which commands operate. A reversal crowd comes into existence for the joint liberation of a large number of people from the stings of command they cannot hope to get rid of alone. They unite to turn on some group of other pennle whom they see as the originators of all the commands they have borne so long. If they are soldiers, any officer can stand for those under whose command they actually were; if they are workers, any employer can take the place of those they have actually been working for. In such moments class and caste cease to be mere concepts and become reality, operating as though they were actually composed of equals. The lower class, which is in revolt, forms a single, cohesive crowd; the higher one, which is threatened and outnumbered and surrounded, forms a series of frightened packs, bent on flight. In those who now form the crowd every individual sting, complex as it is and built up on many separate occasions, has a number of possible culprits before it. The people the crowd are attacking are there in front of them, either separate or pressed together, and they know perfectly well why they should be afraid. They need not be the actual sources of any particular sting, but, whether they are or not, they stand for them and will certainly be treated as though they were. The reversal here is directed against many people simultaneously and can therefore dissolve the most oppressive sting. What the crowd experiences is clearest in the most concentrated case of this kind: when it is a single individual such as a king that the revolt is directed against. Here the ultimate scource of all commands has been the king, his officials and nobles being agents for the trans- mission and execution of his orders. The individuals who form the rebellious crowd have for long years been kept at a distance by threats and their obedience enforced by sanctions. Now, by a kind of unwind- ing process, they obliterate this distance, forcing their way into the palace which was formerly forbidden them. From as close as possible they see all it contains: rooms, furniture and inhabitants. The flight which was imposed on them by royal commands turns into intimate familiarity. If the king, from fear, deliberately allows this to happen, things may stop there for the moment; but not for long. Once the process of getting rid of stings has started, it continues inexorably. One must remember how much will have been done to these people to keep them obedient; how many stings will have accumulated in them in the course of years. The real threat which hung continually over all their heads was death. It was renewed from time to time in executions and its authen- ticity proved beyond all doubt. There is only one way in which they can obtain redress for this threat, that is, by beheading the king who could formerly behead them. In this way the greatest sting, the most inclusive, the one which seems to contain all other stings, is removed from those who have jointly had to bear it. It is not always possible to see so clearly what a reversal means. Nor is it always carried through to so extreme a conclusion. When a revolt miscarries and people do not finally get rid of their stings, they none the less remember the time when they were a crowd. For that period, at any rate, they were free of stings and so will always look back to it with nostalgia. 330 CROWDS AND POWER The Command and the Execution. The Contented Executioner

One special case has so far been purposely omitted from this inquiry. A command has been shown to be a threat of death and we have said that it derives originally from the flight-command. The domesticated commands we know combine reward with this threat. The promise of food enhances the effect of the threat, but does not otherwise change its character. The threat is never forgotten by the person it is addressed to. He retains it in its original form until opportunity arises to get rid of it by passing it on to someone else.

But a command can also be a commission to kill. When this is so, its result is an execution; what is otherwise only threatened actually happens. But the action is distributed between two people: one receives the command and the second is executed. The executioner is in the same position as anyone who submits to an order under the threat of death. But he becomes free himself from this threat by himself killing. He immediately passes on his own possible fate and so anticipates the ultimate penalty which hangs over himself.

He is told to kill, and he kills. He is not in a position to resist such a command, for it is given him by someone whose superior strength he acknowledges. It has to be carried out quickly; generally at once, in fact. There is no time for a sting to form. But, even if there were time, there is no reason why a sting should form. An executioner passes on exactly what has been imposed on him. He has nothing to fear and so nothing remains behind in him. In his case, and in his only, the account balances; the essential nature of the command coincides with the action it brings about. Its fulfillment, moreover, is made easy for him; no obstacles are put in its way and it is unlikely that the victim will escape. All these circumstances are known to the executioner from the start. Thus he can regard the command with equanimity; he can trust it. He knows that carrying it out will change nothing in himself. It passes, as it were, straight through him, without damaging him at all. Of all men, the executioner is the most contented, the least affected by stings.

It is a monstrous situation and one which has never really been faced. It can only be understood if one remembers the real nature of commands. Each of them stands or falls by the threat of death; from that THE COMMAND 331 their whole force derives. This force is almost invariably in excess of what need be used to bring about the desired action and this is the real reason why a command leads to the formation of a sting. Of all commands those which really involve killing, which intend it, and actually lead to it, leave the fewest traces in the recipient. An executioner is a man threatened with death in order to make him kill, though only those he is told to kill. If he keeps strictly to his orders nothing can happen to him. It is true that he may allow the way he carries them out to be affected by other threats which have been used against him at different times: he naturally comes to his task with any stings he has accumulated from elsewhere. But the basic mechanism of his job remains the same: killing others he frees himself from death. To him it is a clean business, with nothing shocking or unnatural about it. He cannot find in himself any of the horror he awakens in others. It is important to be quite clear about this: official killers are contented in proportion as the commands they are given lead directly to death. A prison warder’s life is far more difficult than an executioner’s. It is true that society penalises the latter for the gratification they derive from their job by making them a kind of outlaw; but even this is not without some advantage for them. In fact, they are nothing but a tool, but they do survive their victims and so some of the prestige of the survivor accrues to them and compensates for their outlawry. They find themselves a wife, have children, and lead a normal family life.

Commands and Irresponsibility

It is known that men who are acting under orders are capable of the most appalling deeds. When the source of their orders is blocked and they are forced to look back on what they have done, they do not recognize themselves. They say, “I never did that,” and it is by no means always clear in their minds that they are lying. When they are faced with witnesses and begin to waver, they still say, “I’m not like that. I couldn’t have done it.” They search themselves for traces of the deed and cannot find them. It is astonishing how unaffected by them they seem. The life they lead afterwards really is another life, in no way coloured by their previous actions. They do not repent and do not even feel guilty. What they have done never really comes home to them.

They are people who are otherwise perfectly capable of judging their actions. What they do of their own volition leaves in them the traces one would expect. They would be ashamed to kill an unknown, defenceless creature who had not provoked them and it would disgust them to torture anyone. They are no better than most of those amongst whom they live, but they are also no worse. People who know them well in everyday life are prepared to swear on oath that they are unjustly accused.

When the long line of witnesses comes forward, however—the victims, those who know exactly what they are talking about—when, one after another, these recognize the accused and recall in minute detail his behaviour, so that it becomes absurd to doubt his guilt, then one seems faced with an insoluble riddle. But for us it is no longer a riddle, for we know how commands work.

Every command that is carried out leaves a sting in the man who does it. But this, though in him, remains as alien to him as the command itself was in the moment when it was given. However long it lodges in him, it is never assimilated, but remains a foreign body. It is indeed possible, as I have already shown, for several stings to fuse together and form a new conglomerate entity, but this, too, remains quite distinct from its surroundings. The sting is an interloper who never settles, an undesirable one wants to get rid of. It is what one has done and has, as we have seen, the exact shape of the command given to one. It lives within its host as an alien, not subject to his authority, and thus does not cause him any feeling of guilt. He does not accuse himself, but the sting; this is the true culprit, whom he carries with him everywhere. The more foreign to his nature the original command, the less guilt he feels about what it made him do; the more autonomous and separate the existence of the sting. It is his permanent witness that it was not he himself who perpetrated a given wrong. He sees himself as its victim and thus has no feeling left for the real victim. It is true, therefore, that people who have acted on orders can feel entirely guiltless. If they are capable of really facing their subsequent situation, they probably feel something like astonishment at the fact that they were once so completely at the mercy of commands. But even this stirring of insight is worthless, for it comes only when everything is long over and it relates only to the past. What happened then can still happen again; it is no assurance that they will not again behave in the same way, even when the new situation they are faced with exactly resembles the old. They remain just as defenseless as before in face of commands, only obscurely conscious of their danger. Few, fortunately, carry this to its logical conclusion: with them, the command becomes destiny, and they make it their pride to surrender to it blindly, as though it were particularly manly to blind oneself.

From whatever aspect we consider the command, we can now see that, as we know it today, in the compact and perfected form it has acquired in the course of its long history, it is the most dangerous single element in the social life of mankind. We must have the courage to stand against it and break its tyranny. The full weight of its pressure must be removed; it must not be allowed to go more than skin-deep. The stings that man suffers must become burrs which can be removed with a touch.

Transformations

Presentiment and Transformation among the Bushmen

"The ancient notion of transformation which has given man so much power over all other creatures has as yet scarcely been considered or begun to be understood. Though everyone possesses it, uses it, and takes it for granted, yet it is one of the great mysteries, and few are aware that to it they owe what is best in themselves. It is extremely difficult to understand the true nature of transformation. The most hopeful course is to approach it from several different angles.

There is a book on Bushman folklore which I regard as our most valuable record of early humanity and which has never yet been fully used, though Bleek collected the material a hundred years ago and the book has been in print for fifty. It contains a section on the presentiments of the Bushmen which throws considerable light on the subject of transformation. These presentiments are, as we shall see, the initial stages of transformations of a very simple kind. The Bushmen feel the distant approach of people whom they can neither hear nor see. They also feel when game is near and will describe the signs on their own bodies by which they recognize its approach. Some examples of this follow, given in their own terms.

“The one man feels the other man who comes. He says to his children, ‘Look ye around, for your grandfather seems to be coming. This is why I feel the place of his body’s old wound.’ The children look around. They perceive the man coming and they say to their father, ‘A man is coming yonder.’ Their father says to them, ‘grandfather comes yonder; he would come to me. He was the one whose coming I felt at the place of his old wound. I wanted you to see that he is really coming. For ye contradict my presentiment, which speaks truly.

It is what might be called his distinctive mark. When the son thinks of his father, he thinks of his old wound, but it is more than just thinking. Not only does he visualize it exactly, but he feels it at the corresponding place on his own body. As soon as he feels it, he knows that his father, whom he has not seen for some time, is approaching; he assumes that he is coming because he feels the old wound. He tells his children, who, apparently, do not quite believe him: they may not yet have learned to trust such presentiments. He tells them to keep watch for someone coming and soon they see a man. This can only be their grandfather, and, in fact, it is he. Their father was right; the sensation in his body did not deceive him.

A woman leaves her hut, carrying a child by a leather thong slung from her shoulder. The man remains quietly sitting there. The woman is away a long time. Suddenly the man feels the thong on his shoulder. He has the sensation of it there. It feels as though he were carrying the child himself. As soon as he feels the thong, he knows that his wife is on her way back with the child.

There are presentiments of the same kind relating to animals, at least those he hunts and feeds on, which are as important to the Bushman as his nearest relations, and might almost be called his "nearest animals". An ostrich walks about in the warm sun. A black insect, called by the Bushmen an ostrich-louse, bites it on the back of the neck, and the ostrich scratches the place with its foot. The Bushman feels something in the lower part of the back of his own neck, at the same place where the ostrich is scratching itself. He feels a tapping, and it tells him that there is an ostrich near.

The springbok is a particularly important animal for the Bushman, and there are many kinds of presentiments about it, which refer to its various characteristics and movements. "We have a sensation in our feet. We feel the feet of the springbok rustling in the bushes." This sensation in the feet means that the springbok are coming. It is not that the Bushmen hear them, for they are still too far off, but with their own feet, they feel the rustling the springbok make in the distance. But this is not the only thing transmitted from the animal to the man.

The Bushmen say, "We have a sensation in our face on account of the blackness of the stripe on the face of the springbok." This black stripe runs down the centre of the forehead and finishes at the tip of the nose. The Bushman feels it on his own face. They also say, "We have a sensation in our eyes on account of the black marks on the eyes of the springbok." A man feels a tapping on his ribs and says to his children, "The springbok seem to be coming, for I feel the black hair on the sides of the springbok. Climb ye the kop standing yonder that ye may look around at all places, for I feel the springbok sensation." The springbok has black hair on its flanks, and for the Bushman, the tapping at his own ribs indicates the black hair on the animal's flanks.

A second man will agree with the speaker. He too senses springbok, but not in the same way; he feels the blood of the slain animal. "I feel a sensation in the calves of my legs, when the springbok's blood is going to run down them. I always feel blood when I am about to kill a springbok. I sit feeling a sensation behind my back which the blood is wont to run down when I am carrying a springbok. The springbok hair lies behind my back." "Again, 'We have a sensation in our heads when we are about to chop the springbok's horns.' And again, 'The things which are numerous are used to come first when we are lying in the shade of the hut. They think we are probably lying asleep in the noonday sleep. For we really lie down to sleep the noonday sleep. But we do not lie like this when we have felt the things coming as they walk, moving their legs.' 'We feel a sensation in the hollows under our knees, upon which blood drops as we go along carrying the game.' From these Bushmen utterances we can see the importance they attach to such presentiments or precognitions. They feel in their bodies that certain events are going to happen. There is a kind of beating of the flesh which tells them things. Their letters, as they say, are in their bodies. These letters speak and move and make their bodies move. A man orders the others to be silent and is quite still himself when he feels that his body is tapping inside. 'The presentiment speaks the truth.' 'Those who are stupid do not understand these teachings; they disobey them and get into trouble, such as being killed by a lion. These beatings tell those who understand them which way they are not to go and which arrow they had better not use, and also warn them when many people are coming to the house on a wagon. They inform people where they can find the person of whom they are in search, which way they must go to seek him successfully.'"

We are not concerned here with whether or not these presentiments are true. It may be that the Bushmen have developed, and practice in their daily lives, faculties which we have lost, or that they have reasons for continuing to believe in their presentiments, even though these sometimes deceive them. However this may be, their descriptions of the way in which these presentiments announce themselves are among the most valuable material we have on the nature of transformation; there is nothing comparable to them, for, whatever myths and fairy stories can teach us about the subject, they are all open to the objection that they are something "invented", whereas here we learn what an actual Bushman in real life feels when he thinks of an ostrich or a springbok in the distance, what then happens to him, what it really means to him to think of a creature other than himself.

The signs by which the Bushmen recognize the approach of an animal or of another human being are in their own bodies. Their presentiments, as I have said, are the initial stages of transformations. If they are to have any value for the analysis of transformation, we must be careful to leave them as simple and as concrete as they are and not to import anything alien into the Bushman's world.

Let us lift them out of the context of our quotations and look at them one by one:

1. A son feels his father's old wound in exactly the same place on his own body.
2. A man feels on his own shoulders the thong his wife uses to carry a child.
3. An ostrich scratches the back of its neck where an insect has bitten it. Although he cannot see the ostrich, the Bushman feels something at the corresponding point on his own neck.
4. A man feels in his own feet the rustling of the springbok in the bushes. He feels on his own face the black stripe running from the forehead to the nose of the springbok. He feels in his own eyes the black marks on the eyes of the springbok. The black hair on the animal's flanks gives him a sensation round his own ribs. A man feels blood on his calves and back. It is the blood of the springbok he will kill and carry on his back. He has a sensation in his head when he is going to cut off a springbok's horns. He feels blood in the hollow of his knees where it will drip as he mneetaw Loe wool. Cailive uuiie ule Ballic.

Everything under the last heading relates to the dead animal and the desire for its blood determines the character of the transformation. It is less simple than in the other cases and it is better, therefore, to start by considering them separately. The most elementary thing about all of them is that one body is equated with another. The body of the son is the body of his father and so he feels the same wound in the same place. The husband's body is that of his wife and so the thong by which she carries her child presses on his shoulder too. The body of the Bushman is the body of the ostrich. The insect "bites" him at the same place on his neck and he scratches himself there. In each of these cases the equation of the two bodies is through a single particular, each different in kind from the others: the wound is an old peculiarity of the body which reasserts itself from time to time; the pressure of the thong is something constant and external; the scratching is one isolated movement.

But most interesting of all is the case of the springbok. Here four or five traits are combined and make the equation of the two bodies something very complete. We have first the movement of the feet, then the black hair on the ribs, the black stripe down the forehead and nose, and finally, the place on the head where the horns grow, as though the Bushman carried horns himself. Thus, movement—here movement of the feet instead of scratching as in the case of the ostrich—is added something which resembles a complete mask. The most striking thing about the animal's head, that is, its horns, combines with the black parts—the stripe down the nose and the marks in the eyes—to form the simplest possible mask. It is the Bushman's own head and yet an animal's at the same time. The man feels the black hair on his ribs as though he were wearing the animal's skin; but it is his own skin.

The body of one and the same Bushman can become in turn the body of his father, of his wife, of an ostrich, and of a springbok. The fact that he can at different times be all of them and then become himself again is of the highest significance. The successive transformations are provoked by external causes. They are clean transformations; each creature whose coming the Bushman feels remains itself; he keeps it separate and apart, for otherwise the presentiment would be meaningless: the father with the wound is not the woman with the thong, nor the ostrich the springbok. The individual identity which the Bushman gives up is preserved in the transformation. He can become this or that, but "this" and "that" remain separate from each other, for between transformations he always becomes himself again.

The isolated, very simple traits which determine each transformation could be called its nodes. The father's old wound, the wife's leather thong, and the black stripe on the springbok's head are such nodes. They are what is most striking about the other creature, characteristics which are often talked about and always easily recognized. They are what one watches for when expecting the creature's approach. An animal which is hunted as game is, however, a special case. The hunter longs for the animal's flesh and blood. He is happy when he kills it and carries it home. The carcass, slung on his back as booty, is more important to him than the living animal's body. He feels the blood running down his calves, in the hollow under his knees and on his back, and there he also feels its hair. The dead body he carries is not his own, and cannot be, for he wants to eat it.

The Bushman's presentiments about springbok are divided into two different phases. He feels the living animal, his body becoming its body, moving and watching as it does. But he also feels the dead animal, as an alien body pressed to his own and in a state in which it can no longer escape him. The two phases are interchangeable. One man may imagine himself first in the earlier phase, another in the later; or they can follow immediately on each other. Together they contain the Bushman's whole relation to the animal and the entire process of the hunt, from the rustling to the blood.

Flight Transformations. Hysteria, Mania and Melancholia

Transformation for flight, that is, in order to escape an enemy, is universal, being found in myths and fairy stories all over the world. The author proposes to give four examples to illustrate the different forms which this transformation can take. The two main forms can be described as the linear and the circular. The linear is manifested in the hunt, and is very common. One creature is pursuing another, the distance between them diminishing all the time until, at the very moment when the quarry is about to be seized, it escapes by transforming itself into something different. The hunt continues, or rather, starts afresh. The danger to the quarry mounts again and its pursuer may even succeed in getting hold of it, but, at the very last moment, it transforms itself into yet another shape and thus escapes again. The same process can be repeated as many times as new metamorphoses can be found. These must be unexpected in order to take the pursuer by surprise.

He is hunting a specific and familiar quarry. He knows its manner of flight, he knows its shape and knows how and when it can be seized. The moment of transformation throws him into confusion; he has to think of a new manner of hunting to match the change in his quarry; he has to transform himself. Theoretically, there need be no end to the sequence of transformations, and in fairy tales, the process is repeated as often as possible, sympathy being generally on the side of the pursued and the preferred ending the defeat or destruction of the pursuer.

The Australian myth of the Loritja provides an apparently simple case of linear flight transformation. The “eternal uncreated ones'', the Tukutitas, the ancestors of the totems, spring from the earth in human shape. They remain human until, one day, a monstrous black and white dog appears, who has designs upon them and pursues them. They flee, but fear that they are not swift enough. In order to remedy this, they transform themselves into all kinds of creatures—kangaroos, emus, and eagles being specially mentioned. It should be remarked, however, that each of them changes into one kind of creature only and retains that shape during the whole period of his flight. Two more ancestors appear, similar to the first, but either stronger or braver. They pursue the dog and kill it, whereupon, the danger being past, most of the other Tukutitas resume their human shape. 

But they retain the faculty of transforming themselves at will into the animals whose names they bear, the animals which they were during their flight. The limitation to a single animal metamorphosis is the very essence of these double figures, the totem ancestors. I shall discuss them at length in another context; here I only want to point out that the transformation they experience, and which they can always repeat, first comes about during flight. Linear transformations in abundance are found in the Georgian tale, The Master and His Apprentice. The wicked master, who is the Devil himself, has taken the boy as an apprentice and has taught him all kinds of magic. He does not want to let him go, but to keep him in his service for ever. The boy escapes, but his master catches him again and locks him into a dark stable. There he dreams of escaping, but cannot think how. Time passes and he grows sadder and sadder. One day he notices a ray of sunlight in the stable. He watches it carefully and finds the crack in the door by which it enters. Quickly he changes himself into a mouse and slips out through the crack. His master notices that he is gone, changes himself into a cat and runs after the mouse. Then follows a wild sequence of transformations. The cat opens its jaws in order to kill the mouse, but the mouse turns into a fish and jumps into water. Instantly the master turns into a net, and swims after the fish. He has almost caught it when it changes into a pheasant. This the master chases as a falcon. His claws are already on its body when the pheasant turns into a red-cheeked apple which drops straight into the king’s lap. The master turns into a knife in the king’s hand. The king is about to cut the apple in pieces, but it is gone and in its place is a small heap of millet. A hen and her chicks stand before it—the master again. They peck up the grains until there is only one left. This, in the very last moment, becomes a needle. The hen and its chicks turn into a thread in the needle’s eye. The needle bursts into flame and the thread is burnt up. The master is dead. The needle changes back into the boy, who goes home to his father. The sequence of paired metamorphoses is as follows: mouse and cat, fish and net, pheasant and falcon, apple and knife, millet and hen with chicks, needle and thread. In each pair, the one half is always congruent to the other, whether this is a living creature or an object. The one which represents the master is always in pursuit of the one which represents the boy, who always escapes at the last moment by transforming himself. It is a mad hunt, and, because of the nature of the metamorphoses chosen, a spasmodic one. Its location changes as often as its figures.

Turning to the circular form we remember the classical story of Proteus, as it is found in the Odyssey. Proteus, the wise Old Man of the Sea, is the master of the seals and, like them, comes once a day to dry land. First the seals come, then Proteus. He counts them all carefully, for they are his herd, and then lies down amongst them to sleep. Menelaus, on his way home from Troy, has been driven off his course by adverse winds and cast with his companions on the coast of Egypt where Proteus lives. Years pass by and still they cannot sail, and Menelaus is in despair. Proteus’ daughter takes pity on him and tells him what he must do to seize her father, who can prophesy, and force him to speak. She provides Menelaus and three of his companions with the skins of seals, scoops out holes in the sand for them to hide in and covers them with the seal skins. There, in spite of the stench, they wait patiently until the seals arrive and then continue to lie among them in their innocent-seeming disguise. Proteus emerges from the sea, counts his lid [head?], and having reassured himself, lies down to sleep. This is the moment for Menelaus and his companions to leap upon him, seize him, and hold him fast. Proteus tries to escape from them by assuming all kinds of shapes. First, he turns into a lion, then into a snake; but they still keep hold of him. He becomes a panther and then a giant boar; but they do not let go. He turns into water and then a tree in full leaf; but still, they hold him fast. All the transformations by which he tries to escape take place within the grasp of their hands. In the end, he tires, resumes his own shape, that of Proteus, the Old Man of the Sea, asks them what they want, and answers their questions.

The reason for describing this kind of transformation flight as circular is evident. Everything happens on one spot. Each transformation is an attempt to break out in another shape, in a different direction, as it were; but each is fruitless and ends where it began, in the grip of Menelaus and his friends. There is no longer any question of a hunt; the hunt is over, the prey seized, and the transformations are a series of frustrated attempts to escape on the part of the prisoner.

Lastly, I want to quote the story of Peleus and Thetis, who later became famous as the parents of Achilles. Peleus is a mortal, Thetis a goddess, and she resists union with him, regarding him as unworthy of her. He surprises her sleeping in a cave, seizes her, and holds her fast. Like Proteus, she tries all kinds of metamorphoses; she turns into fire and water, into a lion and a snake; but he still holds her. She changes into an enormous, slippery cuttlefish and squirts ink at him. But it is all useless; she has to give in to him and later, after various attempts to get rid of his unborn child, she becomes the mother of Achilles.

Like Proteus, Thetis finds herself a captive, held fast by an assailant who never lets go, and the transformations she undergoes are very similar to his. Each of them is an attempt to find a direction in which she can escape. She moves within a circle trying to find a point of release. But nowhere does she succeed in breaking out of the circle and so she remains a prisoner and finally surrenders in her own person, as Thetis herself, the center of all the transformations.

The story of Thetis does not really add anything new to that of Proteus. I have quoted it here because of its erotic coloring. In this respect, it reminds one of an affliction which is widespread and well known, namely hysteria. Major attacks of hysteria are nothing but a series of violent transformations for flight. The sufferer feels seized by a superior power. In the case of a woman, it may be a man she wants to escape—a man who has possessed her or who, like Peleus, wants to possess her. It may be a priest who keeps someone prisoner in the name of a god; it may be a spirit, or an actual god. What is important in each case is the victim's feeling of the physical proximity of the superior power, its immediate grip on him. Everything he does, and especially every metamorphosis he achieves, has as its aim the loosening of the grip. An amazing number of transformations are attempted, though many are not carried beyond the initial stage. One of the most common transformations is the one where the pursued person appears to be dead, hoping to be left on the ground while their enemy goes away. This transformation is the one that is closest to the center of the circle, the point that is still. The subject renounces all movement, as if they were actually dead, until the other creature goes away. It would have been useful for Thetis and Proteus to be able to feign death; however, they were known to be gods and thus immortal. The circularity of flight-transformations explains one of its most striking features, the frequency of the transition from processes of an erotic to those of a religious nature. During a Shaman's attack, they remain on one spot during a whole séance, surrounded by a circle of people watching them. Their body should remain where it is, and sometimes they ask to be bound, fearing that their body might wander with their spirit. The Shaman transforms himself to seek out auxiliary spirits who obey him, forcing them to help him in his undertakings. He is active, and his transformations serve the increase of his own power. He penetrates to the most distant parts of heaven and the underworld, flying like a bird or descending till he comes to the bottom of the sea. He forces his way into the house of a goddess, of whom he has an urgent request to make. The general character of his activity is expansive and masterful, resembling that of Proteus and Thetis only in the circularity of the multiple transformation process. The reader will remember that the master in the Georgian tale of the master and his apprentice turned into a cat to catch the boy who had escaped as a mouse. Later he turns into a net, a falcon, a knife, and a hen with chicks. Each of these metamorphoses makes possible a new kind of hunt, with changes in the way the hunt is followed and its location. The events are sudden and disconnected, and widely dispersed in space, and this, taken in connection with the fact that they spring from a hostile intention, gives them a striking affinity to the processes of another mental illness, namely Mania. The manic's transformations have a tremendous ease about them; they share the linear and roving character of the hunter's and also the disconnectedness of his aims, which change each time he fails to attain what he wants, though he nevertheless persists with the hunt. The manic also resembles the hunter in his elation; wherever he may find himself, his mood is always intense and determined; he always has an aim.

The boy in the story stands for the changing prey, which can be anything, but whose essence is to be simply prey. Mania is a paroxysm of desire for prey. What matters to it is to sight, overtake and seize the quarry; the incorporation, that is the eating of the victim, is not so important. The hunt in the story depends on the boy having escaped from the stable. It would come to an end—the attack of mania would, as it were, be over—if the master succeeded in recapturing the boy.

It was in the dark stable that we first met the boy. "He dreams of escaping, but cannot think how. Time passes and he grows sadder and sadder." He is experiencing the onset of that state which is the complement of mania, that is melancholia. As I have been discussing the one I ought, perhaps, to say something about the other. Melancholia begins when flight-transformations are abandoned because they are all felt to be useless. A person in a state of melancholia feels that pursuit is over and he has already been captured. He cannot escape; he cannot find fresh metamorphoses. Everything he attempted has been in vain; he is resigned to his fate and sees himself as prey; first as prey, then as food, and finally as carrion or excrement.

The process of depreciation, which makes his own person seem more and more worthless, is figuratively expressed as feelings of guilt. Guilt was originally the same as debt (in German there is still only one word for them both). If one is in debt to someone one is to that extent in his power. Feeling guilty and thinking of oneself as prey are thus basically the same. The melancholic does not want to eat and, as a reason for his refusal, may say that he does not deserve to. But the real reason is that he sees himself as being eaten and, if forced to eat, is reminded of this. His own mouth turns against him; it is as though a mirror were held before him and he saw a mouth in it and saw that something was being eaten. But this something is himself. The terrible penalty for always having eaten is suddenly and ineluctably there before him. This transformation into something which is eaten is the last, the transformation which ends all flight. It is to avoid it that, in whatever shape offers, everything living flees.

Self-Increase and Self-Consumption. The Double Figure of the Totem Orrae mytus which the younger Strehlow recorded among the Northern Aranda in Central Australia are of special interest to us. The first of them is the Bandicoot myth: "In the very beginning everything was resting in perpetual darkness: night oppressed all the earth like an impenetrable thicket. The ancestor—his name was Karora—was lying asleep, in everlasting night, at the very bottom of the soak of Ilbalintja; as yet there was no water in it, but all was dry ground. Over him the soil was red with flowers and overgrown with many grasses; and a great pole was swaying above him. 

This pole had sprung from the midst of the bed of purple flowers which grew over the soak of Ilbalintja. At its root rested the head of Karora himself: from thence the pole mounted up towards the sky as though it would strike the very vault of the heavens. It was a living creature, covered with a smooth skin like the skin of a man.

"And Karora's head lay at the root of the great pole: he had rested thus ever from the beginning."

"And Karora was thinking, and wishes and desires flashed through his mind. Bandicoots began to come out from his navel and from his arm-pits. They burst through the sod above and sprang into life."

"And now dawn was beginning to break. From all quarters men saw a new light appearing: the sun itself began to rise, and flooded everything with its light. Then the ancestor was minded to rise, now that the sun was mounting higher. He burst through the crust that had covered him; and the gaping hole that he left behind became the Ilbalintja Soak, filled with the sweet dark juice of the honeysuckle buds. The ancestor rose, feeling hungry, since magical powers had gone out from his body."

"As yet he feels dazed; slowly his eyelids begin to flutter; then he opens them a little. He gropes about in his dazed state; he feels a moving mass of bandicoots all around him. He is now standing more firmly on his feet. He thinks, he desires. In his great hunger he seizes two young bandicoots; he cooks them some little distance away, close to the spot where the sun is standing, in the white-hot soil heated by the sun: the sun's fingers alone provide him with fire and hot ashes."

"His hunger satisfied, his thoughts turn towards a helpmate. But now evening is approaching over the earth; the sun hides his face with a veil of hair-string, covers his body with hair-string pendants, vanishes from the sight of men. And Karora falls asleep, stretching his arms out on both sides."

"While he is asleep, something emerges from underneath his arm-pit in the shape of a bull-roarer. It takes on human form, and grows in one night to a full-grown young man: this is his first-born son. That night Karora wakes up, because he feels that his arm is being oppressed with the weight of something heavy: he sees his first-born son lying at his side, his head resting on his father's shoulder."

"Dawn breaks. Karora rises; he sounds a loud vibrating call. The son is thereby stirred into life. He rises; he dances the ceremonial dance around his father, who is sitting adorned with full ceremonial designs worked in blood and feather-down. The son totters and stumbles; he is still only half-awake. The father puts his body and chest into a violent quiver; then the son places his hands upon him. The first ceremony has come to an end."

"The son is now sent by his father to kill some more of the bandicoots which are playing peacefully about nearby in the shade. The son brings them back to his father, who cooks them in the sun-glowing soil, as before, and shares the cooked meat with his son. Evening has come again, and soon both are asleep. Two more sons are born that night to the father, from out of his arm-pits; these he calls into life on the following morning by the loud vibrating call as before. This process is repeated for many days and nights. The sons do the hunting; and the father brings into life an increasing number of sons each night—as many as fifty on some nights. But the end cannot be delayed overlong: soon father and sons have succeeded in devouring all the bandicoots which had originally sprung from Karora's body." In their hunger, the father sends his sons away on a three-day hunt to scour the great Plain. For hours, they search patiently among the tall white grass in the half-light of the almost limitless expanse of mulga trees. But the vast mulga thicket is devoid of bandicoots, and they have to return.

It is the third day. The sons are returning hungry and tired, through the great stillness. Suddenly, a sound comes to their ears, a sound like that of a whirling bull-roarer. They listen and proceed to search for the man who may be swinging it. They search and search and search. They stab with their sticks into all bandicoot nests and resting places. Suddenly, something dark and hairy darts up and is gone. A shout goes up—"There goes a sandhill wallaby." They hurl their sticks after it and break its leg. And then they hear the words of a song coming from the injured animal: "I am Tjenterama, have now grown lame, Yes, lame; and the purple everlastings are clinging to me. 'Lam a man as you are; I am not a bandicoot.' With these words, the lame Tjenterama limps away.

The astonished brothers continue on their way home to their father. Soon they see him approaching. He leads them back to the soak. They sit on its edge in circles, one circle around the other, ever widening out like ripples in disturbed water. And then the great flood of sweet honey from the honeysuckle buds comes from the cast and engulfs them; it swirls them back into the Ilbalintja Soak.

Here the aged Karora remains; but the sons are carried by the flood under the ground to a spot in the thicket. Here they rejoin the great Tjenterama, whose leg they had unwittingly broken with their sticks. He becomes their new chief. Karora remains behind: he is lying in eternal sleep at the bottom of the Ilbalintja Soak.

The second is the Lukara myth: "At Lukara the famous, on the brink of the great waterhole, in the very beginning, an old man was living in a deep sleep at the foot of a Witchetty bush. Ages had passed over him; he had been lying here undisturbed, like a man who is in a perpetual state of half-dream. He had not stirred ever since the beginning, he had not moved; he had always reclined on his right arm. Ages had rolled over him, in his ever-lasting sleep.

As he was nodding in perpetual slumber, the white grubs were crawling over him. They had always been on his body. The old man did not move, neither did he wake up; he lay there in a deep dream. The grubs moved over his whole body like a swarm of ants; and the old man now and then brushed a few of them off gently without waking from his slumber. They returned, however; they crept over his body, they bored their way in; he did not awaken; the ages rolled on.

And then, one night, as the old man slept, reclining on his right arm, something fell out from under his right arm-pit, something shaped like a witchetty grub. It fell to the ground and took on human shape and grew apace; and when morning broke, the old man opened his eyes and gazed with astonishment upon his first-born son.

The myth goes on to tell how a great host of grub men was 'born' in the same way. Their father never stirred: the only sign of consciousness that he ever gave was to open his eyes; he even refused all food which his sons offered to him. The sons, however, busily proceeded to dig out witchetty grubs from the bushes nearby; and they roasted and ate them. They themselves sometimes felt the desire to become grubs again; then they would chant a spell and so transform themselves into grubs, and re-enter the roots of witchetty bushes. Thence they would emerge again to the surface and assume human form once more. “One day, however, a stranger came from far-off Mboringka. The stranger beheld the great bundle of fat and juicy grubs which had been collected by the brothers of Lukara, and he lusted after them. The stranger offered his own bundle of grubs in exchange for the juicy Lukara grubs. But the stranger’s grubs were all long and thin and poor creatures. Scornfully the Lukara men thrust the proffered bundle aside with their digging sticks; they spoke no word. The visitor was offended; he boldly snatched up the bundle of the Lukara men, and rushed away in flight before they could prevent him. “In dismay the Lukara men returned to their sleeping father. The latter had sensed the loss of their bundle even before they arrived: he felt a sharp pain in his body when the robber snatched the grubs away. Slowly he arose, and moved after the thief with tottering steps. But he did not recover the bundle; the thief carried them off to far-distant Mboringka. The father sank down, his body turned into a living tjurunga (a sacred object of stone or wood); the sons all became tjurunga; and the bundle of stolen grubs also turned into tjurunga.”” These two myths deal with two entirely different ancestors, one of whom is the father of the bandicoots, the other of the witchetty grubs. Both are important totems of the Aranda, who continued to celebrate their rites down to the very day when the legends were recorded.

I want to point out some striking traits common to both myths. Karora, the father of the bandicoots, is first alone for a long time. He lies in perpetual darkness, sleeping under the crust at the bottom of the soak. He is unconscious and, as yet, has done nothing. Suddenly a large number of bandicoots form in his body and emerge from his navel and his arm-pits. The sun appears and its light causes him to break through the crust. He is hungry, but still feels dazed. In this dazed state he gropes about him and the first thing he feels is a living mass of bandicoots all round him.

In the other myth the father of the grubs is lying asleep at the foot of a witchetty bush. His sleep has lasted for ever. The white grubs crawl over his whole body. They are everywhere, like a swarm of ants. From time to time he brushes a few of them off without waking. They return, however, and bore their way into his body. He continues to sleep under their swarming mass.

Both myths begin with sleep and in both the first awareness of other creatures is through a crowd-sensation, and that the densest and most direct possible, namely one felt on the skin. Karora feels the bandicoots when, half-awake, he first stretches out his arms. The old man feels the grubs on his skin as he sleeps, and brushes them away, but without being able to get rid of them, for they come back and bore their way into his body.

The sensation of being covered with enormous swarms of small insects is, of course, universally known. It is not an agreeable feeling. It occurs commonly in hallucinations, those of delirium tremens, for example; if not insects, the creatures are rats or mice. The tickling on the skin, or the gnawing at it, is imagined as caused by insects or small rodents. In the next chapter it is dealt with more fully, and the expression “crowd-sensation on the skin” is explained and justified. But there is one important difference between the cases we are dealing with here and those others. The sensation in the Aranda myths is a pleasant one; what the ancestor feels is something which springs from himself, not something hostile attacking him from outside. In the first myth, the bandicoots come out of the navel or arm-pits of the ancestor. He is a very strange being indeed. More than a father, he is, as it were, a mother of crowds. Innumerable creatures spring simultaneously from his body, though from parts not normally associated with birth; he is like a termite queen, but one which produces her eggs from quite different parts of her body.

In the second myth, the grubs are said always to have been there. There is at first no mention of their having sprung from the ancestor's body; either they crawl on it or they bore their way into it. But as the story proceeds, we come on things which lead us to suspect that the grubs spring originally from him, or that he actually consists entirely of them. These births are not only remarkable in that it is a father who gives birth, and gives birth to crowds, but also in that the process eventually results in something quite different being born.

After Karora, the father of the bandicoots, has satisfied his hunger, night falls and he sleeps again. From his arm-pit, a bull-roarer emerges; it takes on human shape and, in one night, grows into a young man. Karora feels something heavy weighing on his arm; he awakes and sees his first-born son at his side. During the following night, two more sons are born to him out of his arm-pits. The process is repeated for many nights, and each time, more sons are born; in some nights, he produces fifty. The whole process could, in the most literal sense of the word, be called the self-increase of Karora.

Something very similar happens in the second myth. The old man still sleeps, reclining on his right arm, when suddenly one night something shaped like a witchetty grub falls from his right arm-pit. It falls to the ground, takes on human shape and grows rapidly. When morning breaks, the old man opens his eyes and gazes with astonishment at his first-born son. The process repeats itself until a large number of "srub-men" have been born in the same way.

It is important to point out that these men can, when they so desire, transform themselves into witchetty grubs and then back again into men. Thus, in both myths, we have self-increase and in both two kinds of birth, two kinds of beings, sprung from the same ancestor. The bandicoot father first brings forth a large number of bandicoots and then a large number of men, both propagated in the same way. They necessarily regard themselves as closely related, for they have the same father. They both call themselves bandicoots. As a totem-name, this signifies that the men belonging to it are the younger brothers of the bandicoots who were born first.

Exactly the same holds for the ancestor of the witchetty grubs. He is the father, first of these grubs and then also of men, the men being the grubs' younger brothers. Together they are the visible embodiment of the fertility of the great ancestor of the totem. Strehlow, to whom we owe a great deal of gratitude for his recording of these important myths, puts this well. "The ancestor," he says, "represents the sum total of the living essence of all the witchetty grubs, both animal and human, regarded as a whole. If we may be allowed to express it thus, every cell in the body of the original ancestor is either a living animal or a living human being." When the ancestor is a "grub-man," every cell in his body is potentially either a separate living witchetty grub or a separate living man of the witchetty grub totem. This dual aspect of the totem manifests itself in the fact that the human sons sometimes feel a desire to become grubs again. They chant a spell, transform themselves into grubs, and creep back among the roots of the witchetty bushes where these grubs usually live. They can then emerge again and resume human shape when they wish.

The restriction to a single metamorphosis—for, after all, innumerable others would be possible—is what constitutes the nature of a totem. The ancestor who brought forth these two kinds of creature has nothing to do with any other. He personifies one age-old kinship, to the exclusion of any others there may be. His sons feel a desire to assume one or other of two shapes. By recourse to a spell, they can gratify their desire and practice this unique and inborn transformation.

It is impossible to overemphasize the importance of the double figure of the totem. In it, transformation, or rather one particular instance of it, is crystallized, and thus can be handed on to posterity. In important ceremonies, designed to serve the increase of the totem, this handing on is represented dramatically, which means that the metamorphosis the totem embodies is also represented.

The desire of grubs to turn into men, and the desire of men to turn into grubs, has been handed on as an inheritance from the ancestors to the living members of the totem clan, who regard it as their sacred duty to satisfy this desire through their dramatic ceremonies. For the increase rites to be successful, it is essential that this special transformation should be properly enacted, always in exactly the same way.

When events in the lives of grubs are represented, each participant knows exactly who it is he enacts or watches being enacted. He is named after the grub, but can also become it; as long as he bears its name, he will practice the traditional transformation. Its value for him is immense: the increase of the grubs depends on it, and also his own increase, for the one cannot be separated from the other. Every aspect of the life of his clan is determined by his hold on the transformation.

There is another important element in these legends, which I should like to call self-consumption. The ancestor of the bandicoots and his sons feed on bandicoots; the sons of the grub-ancestor feed on grubs. It is as though there were no other sort of food, or, at least, as though they were not interested in any other. What is eaten is determined by the particular form of transformation undergone. Both processes involve the same object. The ancestor who contains in his body both bandicoot and human sons thus feeds, as it were, on himself.

Let us examine the process more closely. After Karora has brought forth the bandicoots and the sun has begun to shine, he breaks through the crust above him, stands up, and feels hunger. Hungry and half-dazed, he gropes about, and this is the moment when he feels the moving mass of bandicoots all round him. Then he begins to stand more firmly on his feet. He thinks, he desires. In his great hunger, he seizes two young bandicoots and cooks them a little way off in the white-hot soil heated by the sun. His hunger satisfied, and only then, his thoughts turn towards a helpmate. The bandicoots he feels as a mass all round him have sprung from him; they are part of his own body, flesh of his own flesh. In his hunger he sees them as food. He seizes two of them—said to be young ones—and cooks them. It is as though he ate two young sons of his own. During the following night he produces his first-born human son. In the morning he sounds a loud vibrating call which infuses life into his son and sets him on his feet. Together they enact a ceremony in which their relationship as father and son is established. Immediately afterwards the father sends the son to kill more bandicoots. They are his other children, born earlier, and are playing peacefully in the shade nearby. The son brings back those he has killed to his father, who cooks them in the sun, as he did those of the previous day, and shares the meat with his son. What the son eats is the flesh of his brothers and, in fact, of his father; and it was his father himself who taught him how to kill and cook it. It is the son’s first food, as it was his father’s. There is, in the whole legend, no mention of any other kind of food.

During the next night two more human sons are born to Karora. In the morning he calls them to life and sends all three sons out to hunt bandicoots. They bring back the game and the father cooks it and shares it with them. The number of human sons increases, more being born each night and, in one night, fifty of them. They are all sent out hunting. But, while the number of human sons goes on increasing, Karora produces no more bandicoots. These all came into existence simultaneously at the beginning. Thus the time comes when they have all been consumed; the father and his human sons have eaten them all.

Now they are hungry and the father sends the sons away on a three-days’ hunt. They search patiently everywhere, always only for bandicoots, but they cannot find any. On their way back, they break the leg of a creature which they mistake for an animal. Suddenly they hear it sing, “I am a man, as you are. I am no bandicoot.” Then it limps away and the brothers, of whom there must by now be a great many, return to their father. The hunt is over.

Thus the father first brings forth a distinct kind of food for himself and his later-born sons; this food is the bandicoots. It is a unique act, never repeated in the legend. Then, gradually, his human sons come into the world and, together with their father, cat up this food until there is none left. He does not teach them to catch other creatures, nor indicate any other possible food. We get the impression that he wants to nourish them only with his own flesh, with the bandicoots sprung from himself. In the way in which everything else is disregarded, is almost kept away from himself and his sons, something like jealousy can be discerned.

The only other being who appears in the legend is the creature at the end, whose leg the sons injure, who is also a man and himself a great ancestor, to whom the sons finally turn. In the second myth about the father of the grubs the connection between food and progeny is similar, though not identical. The first son falls from the father’s armpit as a grub, which takes on human shape as soon as it touches the ground. The father does not stir, but remains quite still. He demands nothing of the son and teaches him nothing. Many other sons follow in the same way and all the father does is to open his eyes and watch them. The refusal of food offered to him, the focus on digging out witchetty grubs from nearby bushes, and the transformation into grubs for the sake of consumption are key aspects of the story. The old man's refusal to eat the grubs, which are his own flesh, showcases his fatherly role. The sons' easy consumption of the grubs and their subsequent transformation back into human form indicates a close link between food and transformation.

In another story, the grub-ancestor from Mboringka kills grub-men who are his own sons, consuming them with relish. The sons' flesh turns to grubs in his bowels, eventually devouring the father. This case of self-consumption has a curious climax, with the father eating his sons and the sons eating him in return. The transformations that link man with the animals he eats are as strong as chains.

The stories highlight the control of distinct species of animals, the origin of special types of food through transformation, and the consumption of food that leads to new life. Later societies have preserved the memory of the way food was originally gained through transformation, as seen in sacred communions. The flesh that is communally eaten is not what it seems to be; it stands for some other flesh and becomes it while it is being eaten. However, the self-consumption discussed does not occur in the real life of the Aranda. The actual relationship of the members of a totem clan to the animal whose name they bear is quite different from that in the legends. It is precisely the members of a clan who do not feed on their totem animal; they are prohibited from killing or eating it and should regard it as their elder brother. Only during the ceremonies which serve the totem's increase, when the old myths are enacted and the clan members appear as their own ancestors, is a small piece of the totem's flesh solemnly offered to them and eaten. They are told that they may only have very little of it; it is especially they who must abstain from it as solid nourishment. If the animal falls into their hands, they must not shed its blood; they must hand it over to such members of their family or their horde who belong to other totems; these are allowed to eat it.

Thus, in the period which followed the age of the ancestors and which from the point of view of living Aranda, can be described as today, self-consumption is replaced by what is essentially a principle of avoidance. Men eat the animals closely related to them as little as they would eat their own people; the period of what can be called totem-cannibalism is over: only people belonging to another clan are allowed to eat one's animal relatives, just as they allow one to eat theirs. In fact, it is more than permission that each clan gives; it facilitates the process by furthering the increase of its own totem animal. The rites serving this increase are handed down by tradition and it is a duty to perform them. Animals which have been hunted too much tend to wander away or to die out. We remember the moment in the first legend when all the bandicoots far and near had disappeared; they had been so effectively hunted by the innumerable sons of Karora that none were to be found within the space of a three-days' journey. In this moment of starvation fresh bandicoots should have been brought forth. Self-consumption had been carried too far; all the elder brothers, Karora's first sons, had been eaten up. Self-consumption should now have reverted to the self-increase with which the whole process started. It is precisely this reversal which we find in the later rites for the increase of the totem animal. A man's kinship with his own totem animal is so close that its increase cannot really be separated from his own. The representation of the ancestors who were both, sometimes a human being and sometimes the specific animal, is an essential and recurring part of the rites. The ancestors transform themselves as they wish from the one into the other and they can only be dramatically represented if the transformation has been mastered. They appear as double figures and the process of transformation is an essential part of their representation. As long as this is properly enacted, the kinship remains real and the animal which is oneself can be made to increase.

Tue wattucinations of alcoholics provide us with an opportunity to study crowds as they appear in the minds of individuals. It is true that the phenomena are due to a form of poisoning, but anyone can experience them and up to a certain point they can be artificially induced. Their universality is undeniable; the hallucinations of men of the most diverse origin and disposition all share certain fundamental characteristics. They reach their greatest force and density in Delirium Tremens. Study of this state is doubly productive, leading to increased understanding both of crowd processes and transformation processes. It is difficult to separate the one from the other. To give the reader an idea of the nature of these hallucinations, I will quote descriptions from Krapelin and Bleuler.

Krapelin: "Among the hallucinations of Delirium Tremens, those of sight tend to predominate. The delusions are mostly of a clearly perceptible distinctness and only rarely shadowy and indefinite. They are often terrifying and unpleasant in content. Sometimes the sufferers regard them as reality, sometimes as artifice—a magic lantern or cinematographic show meant to amuse or to frighten them. Frequently they see crowds of small or large objects, dust, flock, coins, spirit-glasses, bottles, rods. Almost always the apparitions are in more or less lively motion . . . ; double vision is also found. The unsteadiness of the hallucinations perhaps explains the frequency with which gliding or creeping creatures are seen. They throng between the sufferer’s legs, whir through the air and cover his food; everything swarms with ‘golden-winged’ spiders, beetles, bugs, snakes, vermin with long stings, rats, dogs, beasts of prey . . . Great crowds of people, gendarmes or enemy horsemen, some even ‘on stilts’, rush on the sufferer or march past him in long strangely grouped processions; he sees single bogymen, monstrous abortions, manikins, devils and 'fire-rowdies'"; ghosts put their heads through the door, skim over the furniture and climb up ladders. On rarer occasions, there are laughing, painted girls, lascivious scenes, carnival-jokes, theatrical performances. . . . "From various peculiar sensations on his skin, the sufferer gets the idea that ants, toads, or spiders are creeping over him. . . . He feels as though he were caught in a web of delicate threads, squirted with water, bitten, stung, or shot at. He collects money which he sees lying around in heaps and has the distinct feel of it in his hands, but it disappears like quicksilver. Whatever he touches vanishes, coalesces with something else or grows to monstrous proportions, to fall to pieces again, or roll or glide away. "Small knots or irregularities of texture in his bedclothes appear as fleas, and cracks in a table as needles; secret doors open in the walls. . . ."

Krapelin, summing up elsewhere: "Delirium Tremens' is remarkable for the masses of homogeneous hallucinations and their multiple, lively motion, appearing, disappearing and melting into each other. Bleuler's description of delirium tremens is equally striking: "Hallucinations of a quite distinctive character predominate. These involve primarily sight and touch. The visions are multiple in motion, generally colourless and have a tendency towards diminutions. In addition, the hallucinations of both touch and vision very often have the character of wires, threads, sprays of water and other elongated things. Elemental visions, as of sparks and shadows, are frequent. If auditory hallucinations are present, the patient usually hears music (especially with a very decided beat), which is very rare in other psychoses. During the entire course of the disease, delirious patients can establish visual relationships with hundreds of hallucinated persons, all of whom are speechless. . . .

"Small moving and multiple things are in real life usually small animals like mice and insects; hence these are among the most frequent hallucinations of alcoholics. Resides these, there are often other visual visions of the most varied kinds; pigs, horses, lions and camels may appear, either diminished or life-size. Sometimes there are animals 'that do not exist', fantastic combined creatures. In exactly the same way, I have strikingly often heard of processions of all kinds of animals projected onto an imaginary board fixed to the wall. These are usually large animals, but in some cases diminished to about the size of a cat; these the patient enjoys. People, too, are frequently reduced in size, but may also appear as large as in life.

"The hallucinations of the different senses combine readily. Mice and insects are not only seen, but are touched when the patient grabs them or they crawl over his body; money is gathered up and put in a hallucinated pocket; the patient sees passing soldiers and hears their band; he sees and hears someone shooting at him; he fights with hallucinated assailants whom he hears speak and, more rarely, touches." In the course of a few days "the hallucinations gradually become more and more blurred and less numerous. Often, however, they first lose the property of reality; the birds are no longer alive, but stuffed; the scenes are specially performed and finally become only visual projections, like those thrown by a magic lantern."

About themselves "all pure cases of delirium remain fully oriented. They know who they are, what position in the world they occupy, what family they have and where they live." These descriptions are a condensed summary of many individually observed cases. The first important point I want to stress is the connection between tactile and visual hallucinations. The itching and prickling on the skin is felt to be caused by large numbers of very small creatures simultaneously. We are not here interested in the physiological explanation of this; what matters is that the alcoholic thinks of insects—of ants, for example—and imagines his skin being assailed by thousands of these little creatures. They swarm over him in vast armies and, since he feels them moving on himself, he tends to assume their presence everywhere. Whatever he touches they are there; the floor at his feet and the air around him are thick with them, or with anything which can be felt as multiple. This sensation of a crowd on the skin is not peculiar to delirium tremens; everyone has experienced it with insects or some kind of irritation. Among certain African peoples it is inflicted as the traditional penalty for particular types of crime, naked men being buried alive in ant-heaps and left there until they are dead. During delirium, the sensation can become more violent than mere prickling. When the attack on the skin grows more insistent and covers larger areas of the body, penetrating deeper, prickling turns into gnawing. It feels as though numerous small teeth are at work on one's body. The sensation combines the nimbleness of movement and the way alcoholics describe the use of their teeth, along with their fertility. Delirium due to cocaine poisoning features more prominent tactile hallucinations localized in the skin. The sufferer wants to cut them out. Visual hallucinations often become "microscopic," with innumerable tiny details registered.

A patient reportedly saw "cats, mice, and rats jumping round his cell and nibbling at his legs." He leapt up and down, screaming that he felt their teeth in him. This crowd-sensation on the skin is what comes first, seeming to provoke some of the visual hallucinations. The second point to notice is the frequency of diminution. Not only is everything perceived and felt as small, but large things are diminished to enter this world. Men are seen as manikins, and large animals from the Zoo are reduced to the size of cats. Everything is multiplied and reduced in size, but the sufferer remains the same while his surroundings undergo a radical change.

The monstrous flux they are suddenly caught up in is one of masses of tiny things, most of which he sees as alive. In every possible way, there is more life around him, but it affects him as though he were a giant. The changed proportions are not as astonishing as they may appear at first sight. One should remember how numerous and small the cells of the human body are. These cells are of different kinds and act on each other continuously. They are attacked by hosts of bacteria and other minute creatures, which settle among them and are always active in their own way.

During delirium, alcoholics are almost wholly detached from their surroundings, focusing on themselves and filled with the most peculiar sensations. The constant trend of delirium tremens towards the concrete and the small (in cocaine-delirium, often the microscopically small) has some resemblance to a dissociation of the body into its component cells. The cinematic character of the hallucinations has, as we have seen, often been stressed. The content of the hallucinations represents the relationships and processes of the alcoholic's own body, along with crowd-phenomena of its minute component parts, transposed into concepts with which he is already familiar. This is, of course, only a guess, but it is worth remembering that there are moments when the whole life of the “giant” man, all his qualities and all his inheritance, is concentrated in minute individual cells, massed together and moving as a crowd: the animalcules of the sperm. Whatever we may think of this interpretation, the basic situation of the delirium—that is, a single large individual seeing himself in opposition to a numberless host of tiny aggressors—does exist and in the course of human history has become increasingly marked. It begins with the peculiar feeling about vermin, by which all mammals (to speak only of them) are plagued. Whether these are mosquitoes or lice, locusts or ants, they have always occupied men’s imaginations. Their threat lies in the fact that they appear in great crowds and very suddenly. They have often stood as symbols for crowds. It is very probable that it was they who first brought man to think in terms of great crowds; perhaps his earliest “thousands” and “millions” were insects. Man’s power and the conception he had of himself had already expanded enormously when he stumbled upon the bacillus. This discovery made the contrast immeasurably greater. Man, with his enhanced opinion of himself, increasingly seeing himself as an individual detached from his fellow-creatures, was suddenly confronted with entities much smaller even than vermin, multiplying even more rapidly and invisible to the naked eye. On the one hand was himself, greater and more isolated than before, and on the other a crowd, larger than any he had previously imagined, of infinitesimal creatures. It is impossible to overrate the importance of this concept. Its formation is one of the central myths in the history of human thought. It is the exact model of the dynamics of power. Man easily persuaded himself to see as vermin everything which opposed him; as such he regarded and treated all animals which he could not use. And the despot who reduces men to animals and only manages to rule them by regarding them as belonging to a lower species, reduces to vermin all who do not qualify even to be ruled and ends by destroying them by the million. The third important point about alcoholic hallucinations is the character of the transformations found in them. The hallucinations are always outside the patient; even when he experiences them as reality, they do not transform him. He preferably watches them from a distance. As long as they do not threaten him, and thus force him to define his position in relation to them, he enjoys their fluidity and ease of movement. But sometimes they reach a point where even a semblance of orientation becomes impossible; when everything round him is fluid and transitory he naturally begins to feel very uncomfortable himself.

Two very different kinds of transformation can be observed: first, there are crowds which transform themselves into other crowds—ants into beetles and beetles into coins, which, when collected, run into each other like drops of quicksilver. (Examples of this process, where something multiple changes into something different, but equally multiple, will be given later.) The second kind of transformation gives rise to monstrous hybrids. A single creature combines with another to form something new, as though two things had been photographed one on top of the other. In the processions of animals of which we heard were creatures “that do not exist, fantastic combined creatures.” 

Aborted monstrosities and "fire-rowdies" recall the Temptation of St. Anthony as painted by Griinewald, or the creatures which populate the pictures of Hieronymus Bosch. In order to form a clearer picture of the transformations, we shall have to follow the whole course of one or two cases. Only then shall we see exactly what changes into what and even be able to conjecture how and why it happens. Study of the complete course of a delirium can also, as our second example makes particularly clear, lead to deeper insight into the nature of crowd-processes.

The first case is that of an innkeeper treated by Krapelin. Here is a summary of the contents of his delirium, which lasted for about six days:

"He felt that it was a special day, with the devil about. Suddenly he ran into a marble pillar with his head. He wanted to dodge it, but there was an enormous marble slab opposite him across the narrow street, and one like it when he wanted to turn back. Both slabs collapsed, threatening him. Two insolent characters took him on a cart to the Ox Inn and laid him on his death-bed. A master of ceremonies directed hot rays on to his mouth with a pair of red-hot scissors, so that his vital strength gradually vanished. At his request, he was given a glass of red wine; a second glass was refused with a grin by Satan himself. He then, with all kinds of pious exhortations, said goodbye to the people standing round and expired; simultaneously the corpses of his three daughters were laid beside him. In the next world, he was punished by means of the sins he had committed on earth; he constantly felt a terrible thirst, but as soon as he grasped a tankard or glass, it disappeared out of his hand.

"The next morning he was alive again, lying on his bier in the Ox; his children were also there in the shape of white hares. There was a procession of Catholics taking place and, during it, whilst they were singing their chants, he had to press on innumerable pairs of golden TRANSFORMATION 365 spectacles lying on the floor in the backroom of the Crown Inn; each time he did this, there was a shot. Those taking part in the procession then discussed whether he should simply be beaten, or be beaten to death. The landlady of the Crown was for the first, on condition that he always lodged with her. But he wanted to get away because he was not given any beer. Then a police sergeant came to liberate him. The landlord of the Crown shot at him with a revolver and was taken to prison.

"Another evening the whole Protestant community was gathered in Church for a special service. In the centre was a member of the student corps, who, before the service began, gave a kind of circus performance with fifty fellow-students on small horses. Later the patient saw his wife go into a pew with one of her relatives; he himself was hidden behind the organ with a Sister of Charity and from there watched these two desecrating the Sanctuary. After that he found himself locked into the Church; eventually a glazier cut a hole in the window, so that at least some beer could be passed through to him. When he dressed himself, the sleeves and all the apertures in his clothes had been blocked; they were sewn up. The pockets were unstitched. In the bath, he saw himself surrounded by seven hares, floating under water, who continually splashed and nibbled him." The patient's new, real-life surroundings, of which, during his delirium, he knows nothing, and against which he really knocks his head, translate themselves for him into marble. In his hallucinated state, he enjoys finding himself amongst large numbers of people, as the object of their attention and even their threats. On his death-bed in the Ox, he is slowly deprived of his vital strength, which is like a long-drawn-out execution, allowing him to collect spectators around him and keep them there with his pious exhortations. Thirst represents all his personal desires; he suffers in the next world the punishment of Tantalus. His three daughters, laid out beside him as corpses, come to life again the next morning as he himself does, but as white hares. This expresses their innocence, but also contains the pangs of conscience he feels on their account and which gnaw at his drunkard's heart.

The procession of the Catholics is the first actual crowd-event. He is forced to play a part, but without really becoming one of the crowd. The pairs of golden spectacles lying on the floor in the back room where he finds himself are as innumerable as the participants in the procession. Each time he presses them there is a shot; this may have been intended as a salute of guns to heighten the general festivity, but, as a confirmed sinner, he feels as though he were shooting down Catholics.

The members of the procession see him for what he is and hold a kind of meeting to consider his punishment. It is an extension of the death-bed situation, this time with a larger number of people sitting in judgment on him. One might suppose that he has a low opinion of Catholics, but he treats the Protestant congregation assembled for their special service on another evening with scarcely more respect: he links it with a circus performance. Here we have a striking example of the transition of one kind of crowd into another: the congregation transforms itself into a circus.

The student, who perhaps stands for the clergyman, has no fewer than fifty fellow-students with him; the horses, as was to be expected, are reduced in size. It is possible that the patient feels their hoof-beats. The way in which the attitude in delirium tends towards that of an observer is clearly brought out by the way he watches his wife commit her offence.

Very peculiar is his relationship to his clothes; they too are transformed, the sleeves and all the apertures being sewn up and the pockets unstitched. The clothes have turned into deformed monsters, their organs no longer functioning as they should. A menagerie of transformed clothes is certainly possible in a delirium and would not be so remote from one of animals either. Finally, the seven hares in the bath have a fair number of teeth between them and gnaw him quite effectively.

The second case I want to quote at some length was treated by Bleuler. The patient, a schizophrenic, gave a description, 36 pages long, of his experiences during an attack of delirium tremens. It may be objected that this patient was not typical, nor, therefore his delirium. But it seems to me, on the contrary, that it is from this particular case that we can learn most about crowd-concepts in this kind of delirium. The hallucinations here are somewhat less disconnected and the transformations rather less agitated. Actually, the whole description has the character of a poetic utterance; even in the short extracts given here, something of this can be felt. "What I had suddenly to see there made my hair stand on end. Forests, rivers and oceans with every kind of dreadful animal and human figure, such as no human eye ever saw before, whirled by incessantly, alternating with the workshops of every trade, in which horrible spirit figures were working." On both sides, the walls were nothing but a single ocean with thousands of naked men and women indulging in their lust to music. Each time a pair had taken their pleasure, a figure stabbed them from behind with a long spear, so the ocean was colored red with blood. However, fresh multitudes succeeded them.

A train arrived with many people alighting. Among them, I heard the voices of my father and my sister K. They came to deliver me. I heard my sister whispering with an old woman. I called to her, begging her to deliver me. She called back that she would do it, but the old woman wouldn'ut let her go, warning that if she did, she would bring misfortune upon the whole household.

With prayers and tears, I awaited my death. A dead silence prevailed, and droves of spirit figures surrounded me. At last, one of the spirits came and held his watch at a certain distance in front of my eyes, indicating by signs that it was not yet three o'clock, as none of the figures were permitted to speak.

Then, there were long negotiations between the various relatives of the patient who wanted to ransom him, some with smaller sums and some with larger. Other voices debated how they should make away with the patient. The relatives were induced to climb ladders, whence they were thrown into the moat, where they were heard crying out and choking. The wife of the jailer came and cut off the patient's flesh piece by piece, beginning with his feet and going up to his breast, and fried and ate it. She poured salt on his wounds.

On a wildly swaying scaffold, he was drawn up into the various heavens, as high as the eighth, past choirs of trumpets who proclaimed his fame. At last, by some mistake, he was returned to earth.

People sat at a table and ate and drank things with marvelous aroma, but when a glass was handed to him, it disappeared into nothing, and he suffered great thirst. He had to count and reckon out loud for hours. In a little flask, divine drink was handed to him, but as he took it, it broke, and the contents flowed between his fingers like threads of glue.

Later, a great battle was fought between his tormentors and his relatives, of which he saw nothing, but heard the blows and the groans.

The "forests, rivers, and oceans" that appear here are already known as crowd symbols, but they are not yet quite detached from the crowds for which they often come to stand later. They are still alive "with every kind of dreadful animal and human figure, which no human eye ever saw before." The propagation of new creatures, and in such numbers, by the combination of existing ones, is the work of transformation.

The delirious patient is not himself drawn into these transformations; all the more marked, therefore, are the combinations and permutations in his world; and all these new creatures are immediately present in vast numbers. It is remarkable how this particular patient makes the familiar entities of the forest, river, and ocean, in which new life has a natural origin, alternate with the "workshops of every trade." He equates production with transformation, a notion which many primitive peoples share with him. The various trades are as separate as different species, but all their products are immediately present. 

It is the process of work as abstractions that we see here, together with their results; they are carried out by obscure spirit-figures. Then the walls return, as a single ocean; but now it is alive with thousands of small ships instead of with animal and human figures. The passengers are naked men and women, all, except for the differences of sex, identical in their nakedness and identical also in their dependence on the beat of the music. The crowd here is a crowd of copulating couples. They are stabbed as couples, and the blood of all of them flows into the sea and colors it red. But there are always fresh multitudes to succeed them. The "train from which many people alight" needs more explanation. In a train one imagines a large number of people together, who have been traveling in the same direction for a long distance, separated, it is true, by the walls of their compartments, but unable to part company entirely except at stations. The terminus is a goal which was common to all of them, even though they may have started from different places. Just before they arrive, when they feel they are near their journey's end, they get up, press into the corridor and station themselves by the windows. At this point, they exhibit a very mild form of crowd excitement; at least they have reached their goal together. When they alight and, on foot, cover the last stage of their journey, the length of the platform to the exit, the movement, their brief march together, is the last manifestation of this mild crowd. On the spectator, the emptying of a train, following immediately after the sight of many unknown faces, pressed closely to windows and doors, makes a crowd-effect very different from that felt by the traveler. Among all these strange faces, he has to find the one or two familiar ones he has been waiting for. The "train from which many people alight" is thus actually made for the "watching" of delirium, which is one of the things we have been discussing here. It is also transformation 369 significant that one visualizes the incident as taking place in a large station where many lines meet. The word "death" which comes a little later is followed by "dead silence." But while we only take this to mean an especially profound silence, for the patient, the "dead" detach themselves from the word and surround him as droves of spirit-figures. As he is drawn up into the heavens, he passes choirs of trumpets who proclaim his fame. Nothing expresses the nature of fame better. The man who desires fame wants exactly this: choirs of creatures which do nothing but acclaim him. Preferably, of course, they should be human. This, too, is in some sense a mild crowd. Once in position, the choir remains there, and however much noise it makes, it comes no nearer to its object than his name. Through the whole sequence runs a quarrel between two hostile groups: on the one side are the relatives of the patient who want to ransom and free him, on the other, the enemies who want to kill him; he, or rather his body, is the object they fight over. First come long drawn out negotiations, his relatives offering small and then larger sums for him; he becomes more and more valuable to them. By a stratagem, his party is thrown into the castle moat, where he hears them crying out and choking (we learned about the heap of the dying and the dead during our discussion of war). As a prisoner, the patient is tortured and eaten in the manner of cannibals. The conflict between his torturers and his relatives leads to a great battle; he hears the blows and hears again the groans of the wounded. Thus, in addition to everything else, this delirium contains the familiar double crowd and its discharge in war. The events out of which the battle develops remind one strongly of the corresponding phases in primitive warfare. Scarcely any of the crowd-phenomena we have discussed are missing from this account. They are not often found assembled in such distinctness and concentration.

Imitation and simulation are two different processes, and it is advisable to keep them separate, as they mean different things. Imitation relates to externals, while simulation involves deliberately remaining midway between imitation and transformation. Imitation is focused on a single trait, and it can be mistaken for "characterization" when it is not. A person can be recognized by certain formulae that he uses often, but a parrot who imitates them may superficially remind one of him. Imitation is just a first step towards transformation, which stop short. Monkeys provide a good example of this, as they can imitate something with ease but not grasp it fully.

Transformation, on the other hand, is like a solid body set beside the two-dimensional structure of imitation. There is also a transitional stage, which consists in deliberately remaining midway between imitation and transformation. This I propose to call simulation. When the stress is on concealing what one is, rather than on pretending to be what one is not, the common term is, of course, dissimulation; but in practice they can generally not be separated.

To approach someone in the guise of a friend, but really with hostile intent, is an early and important kind of transformation and one which has become part of all later forms of power. It is superficial and relates to external appearances alone, to skin, horns, voice, and movement. Underneath, unmoved and immovable in his deadly purpose, hides the hunter; here appearance and reality are as different from each other as they can be. This cleavage attains its perfection in the mask. Any hunter has control over himself and his weapon. But a masked hunter also controls the figure of the animal he represents; he has power over both which he exercises continuously. He is, as it were, two creatures simultaneously and keeps a firm hold on both until he has achieved his purpose. The flux of transformations that he is capable of is arrested; he stands on two sharply circumscribed sites, one within the other. Both are clearly demarcated, but it is essential that the outer one should completely and consistently cover the inner. The harmless and friendly creature is outside; the hostile and deadly one inside, revealing itself only in the final act. This duplicity is the extreme form of dissimulation. In its strict meaning, the word could not be more expressive, but it has so often been used in a more trivial connection that it has lost much of its force. I want to limit it again to its narrower meaning and use it for the hiding of a hostile figure within a friendly one.

"A washerman had a donkey which could carry extraordinary burdens. In order to feed him, the washerman covered him with a tiger skin and took him at nightfall to other people's corn; and the donkey enjoyed other people's corn to his heart's content. Nobody dared come near him and chase him away, for everyone took him for a tiger. But one day a watchman lay in wait for him. He had covered himself with a dust-grey cloak and held his bow in readiness to kill the beast of prey. When the donkey saw him from far-off, love stirred in him and he took the man for a she-donkey. So he cried out and ran to him. The watchman recognized the donkey by his voice and killed him."

This brief Indian tale of the donkey in the tiger's skin contains a whole small textbook of dissimulation. No one else has yet succeeded in saying so much about it in so few words. It must be admitted that it deals only with its applications, not its origins, but these are not always as far apart as one might think.

It all starts with a washerman, someone whose job it is to wash clothes; and clothes are men's second skin. He is a good washerman and has found a donkey who can carry heavy burdens for him. (We can assume that the donkey carries the washing his master has done and also, perhaps, that the tiger skin which is essential to the story was found among the clothes the washerman had to deal with in his job.) The donkey who works so well gets hungry and needs a great deal of food. His master clothes him in the tiger skin and leads him to other people's corn. There the donkey can eat to his heart's content, for the people are afraid of him, taking him for a tiger.

Here a harmless creature is clothed in the skin of a very dangerous one. But the donkey does not know what has been done to him; the terror he arouses is beyond his understanding. He eats peacefully and to his heart's content. The people who are afraid to approach him do not even know what he is doing. The dread they feel is that of a more powerful being; it contains an element of religious awe. This keeps them from unmasking the tiger as a donkey. They keep away from him and, as long as he remains silent, he can go on eating.

But now a watchman appears who is no ordinary man; he has the courage of a hunter and holds his bow in readiness to kill the tiger. In order to lure it nearer, he disguises himself as prey which might interest a tiger. He puts on a dust-grey cloak; it may or may not be the skin of a donkey, but, in any case, he wants to be taken for a donkey by the supposed tiger. His dissimulation is that of a dangerous creature pretending to be harmless. It is one of the methods used by the earliest hunters to get close to their prey. Now comes the point of the story. The donkey, having satisfied his hunger, feels lonely. He sees something in the distance that looks like another donkey, which he wants to be a she-donkey. He brays and gallops up to this supposed she-donkey. He is recognized by his voice and is killed by the watchman. Instead of making the effect of prey that a tiger would want to eat, the watchman, though unwittingly, made the effect of a she-donkey. Instead of the love he wanted, the donkey found death.

The story is built up as a sequence of deceptions. By simulating some creature which one is not, one tries to deceive other creatures. The action consists in each simulation being rapidly followed by an effect different from the one intended. It is only man who makes deliberate use of simulation. He can disguise himself, as did the watchman, for example, and he can also disguise another creature, as the washerman did his donkey. But an animal can only be a passive subject of disguise.

In this story, the separation between men and animals is complete. The age of myth is past, when men really acted as true animals and animals spoke like men. Precisely through these mythical experiences, man has learned to make use of almost any animal as it suits him; his transformations have become masks and skins with which he disguises himself. He remains clearly aware of his own purposes; he remains himself, the lord of the animals.

Those he cannot subjugate, like the tiger, he venerates. But some men of outstanding courage try to deal with even the tiger by means of dissimulation; the watchman by his ruse might have succeeded in killing a real tiger.

It is extraordinary that one short story should express so many essential relationships. It is not unimportant that it begins with a washerman, someone who handles clothes—the lifeless successors, as it were, of the animal skins which, in myths, are so often the means to transformation. The tiger skin the washerman uses to trick people puts life into his normally harmless bundles of washing.

Under simulation, this limited form of transformation, has always been, and still remains, the only form which a ruler can safely permit himself; and a despot cannot carry transformation further. He is only a despot so long as he remains conscious of his inner hostility to others. This is his core, or, as it might better be called, his real shape. He is limited to transformations which keep it always and perfectly intact.

His real shape is terror; it may suit him sometimes to disguise it, and he can use a variety of masks for this purpose. But he will only put them on for a time and they can never effect the slightest change in the inner shape which is his true nature.

The Figure and the Mask

The concept of transformation is something which I propose to call the figure. This is an entity which is not susceptible of further transformation and which manifests itself only after transformation has been completed. Its shape is clear and limited in every respect. It is not a natural object, but a creation of man; it is his escape from the ceaseless flux of transformation. (It should not, incidentally, be confused with the “kinds” or “‘species’’ of modern science.) We shall come nearest to understanding its nature by visualizing the divine images of ancient religions, those of the Egyptian gods, for example. The goddess Sechmet is a woman with the head of a lioness; Anubis a man with that of a jackal; Thot a man with the head of an ibis; the goddess Hathor has the head of a cow and the god Horus that of a falcon. 

These figures, in their clear, immutable shapes, which are twofold—the shape of an animal and a human being—dominated the religious conceptions of the Egyptians for thousands of years. In these forms they were depicted everywhere, and in these forms were wor- shipped. Their stability is particularly striking, but, even before any such rigid systems of divinities had evolved, dual animal-human figures were to be found all over the earth amongst peoples quite unconnected with each other. The mythical ancestors of the Australian aborigines are man and animal simultaneously, or sometimes man and plant. These figures, as we know already, are called totems: there is a kangaroo, an oppossum and an emu totem. Each of these is man and animal at the same time; it acts both as a man and as a particular animal, and is regarded as the ancestor of both. What are we to make of these archaic figures? What actually is it 374 CROWDS AND POWER that they represent? If we are to understand them we must remember that they are regarded as beings belonging to an age of myth, a period in which metamorphosis was the common gift of all creatures and constantly practised. It has often been pointed out how fluid the world was then. Not only could a man transform himself into anything, but he also had the power to transform others. In the universal flux certain figures stand out, which are nothing but particular metamorphoses fixed and made permanent. The figure which men cling to, which becomes a life-giving tradition enacted and spoken of over and over again, is not the abstraction of an animal species, not Kangaroo or Emu, but a kangaroo who is also a man, or a man who at will can become an emu. Thus these earliest figures are representations of the process of trans- formation. From the unending flux of innumerable possible trans- formations, one is picked out and given permanent form. The very process of transformation, or rather a particular instance of it, is secured for ever and thus, in comparison with all those which are excluded, is filled with special significance. The unchanging double figure of the totem, which contains and affirms the metamorphosis from man into kangaroo and from kangaroo into man, is the earliest and most important of all figures, their prototype. It is what one may call a free figure. Its two aspects are equal in im- portance; neither is ranked higher than the other and neither is hidden behind the other. It reaches back into the remote past, but is so pro- foundly imaginative that it still affects the present. It is accessible to men; by enacting the myths in which it occurs they can share in it. For us, too, insight into this earliest kind of figure is important. We must realize that the figure originates, not as something simple, but as something which to us seems complex and is thus quite different from our modern conception of a figure. Originally it expressed both the process of transformation and its result. The mask is distinguished from all the other end-states of trans- formation by its rigidity. In place of the varying and continuous move- ment of the face it presents the exact opposite: a perfect fixity and sameness. Man’s perpetual readiness for transformation is clearly expressed in the mobility of his face. The play of his features is far richer and more varied than that of any animal and he has, too, the richest experience of transformation. It is inconceivable how many changes a face can undergo in the course of a single hour. If one had time to study all the movements and moods which pass over a face, one would be astonished at the number of seminal transformations it reveals. People's attitude to this play of the features varies. In some civilizations, the freedom of the face is largely restricted; it is thought improper to show pain and pleasure openly; a man shuts them away inside himself and his face remains calm. The real reason for this attitude is the desire for personal autonomy: no intrusion on oneself is permitted, nor does one intrude on anyone else. A man is supposed to have the strength to stand alone and also the strength to remain himself. The two things go hand in hand, for it is the influence of one man upon another which stimulates the unending succession of transformations. They are expressed in gestures and the movements of the face, and where these are suppressed, all transformation becomes difficult and, in the end, impossible.

A little experience of the inflexibility of such unnatural "stoics" soon leads one to understand the general significance of the mask: it is a conclusion; into it flows all the ferment of the as yet unclear and uncompleted metamorphoses which the natural human face so miraculously expresses, and there it ends. Once the mask is in position, there can be no more beginnings, no groping towards something new. The mask is clear-cut; it expresses something which is quite definite, and neither more nor less than this. It is fixed; the thing it expresses cannot change.

It is true that behind one mask there can be another: there is nothing to prevent an actor wearing a second mask under his first. Special double masks are found among many peoples. As soon as one mask opens, another is seen beneath it. But this too is a mask, a separate conclusion. It is reached by a leap: whatever might lie between one mask and the other is eliminated; there is no preparation for the transition as there is in a face. The new, the different thing is suddenly there, as clear and fixed as the other was. Anything can be effected by a change of masks, but it always happens in a leap, in one sudden, concentrated movement.

The working of the mask is mainly outwards; it creates a figure. The mask is inviolable and sets a distance between itself and the spectator. It may come nearer to him, as sometimes in a dance, but he must always stay where he is. To fixity of form is added fixity of distance. What gives the mask its interdictory quality is the fact that it never changes. Everything behind the mask is mysterious. When the mask is taken seriously, as in the cases we are discussing here, no one must know what lies behind it. A mask expresses much, but hides even more. Above all, it separates. Charged with a menace which must not be precisely known—one element of which, indeed, is the fact that it cannot be known—it comes close to the spectator, but, in spite of this proximity, remains clearly separated from him. It threatens him with the secret dammed up behind it.

Unlike a face, there are no passing changes in it which can be interpreted, and so he suspects and fears the unknown that it conceals. Transposed into terms of sounds, this is an experience familiar to all of us. One arrives in a country knowing nothing of the language and is surrounded by people talking. The less one understands, the more one imagines; one attributes all sorts of things to them, one suspects hostility, and is incredulous, relieved, and even a little disappointed when their words are translated into a familiar language. How harmless, how innocent it all was! Every completely unknown language is a kind of acoustic mask; as soon as one learns it, it becomes a face, understandable and soon familiar. The true mask is something which never changes, but remains permanently and unmistakably itself, a constant in the continual flux of metamorphosis. Part of the strength of its effect is due to the fact that it reveals nothing of what is behind it. The mask is perfect because it stands alone, leaving everything behind it in shadow; the more distinct it is, the darker everything else. No one knows what may not burst forth from behind the mask. The tension created by the contrast between its appearance and the secret it hides can become extreme. This is the real reason for the terror the mask inspires. “I am exactly what you see” it proclaims “and everything you fear is behind me.” The mask fascinates and, at the same time, enforces distance. No one dares to lay violent hands on it; if anyone but the wearer tears it off he is punished by death. While it is in action it cannot be touched; it is inviolable and sacred. The mask is clear and certain, but is loaded with the terror of uncertainty. Its power derives from the fact that it is itself known, while what it covers is never known. The mask is only known from outside or, as it were, from in front. The real use of the mask is not in isolation, but in ceremonies and if it then behaves in a familiar and expected manner it can also have a reassuring effect. Here it stands between the dangerous power which is behind it and the spectator. If properly treated it can keep this power away from him. It can gather the danger into itself and contain it, only allowing it to overflow in one manner—the manner corresponding to its own shape. Once the spectator has established a relationship with the mask, he can behave in an appropriate way. It is a figure with its own idiosyncrasies of behavior. Once these have been learned, once one knows how much distance it demands, it acts as a protection against the dangerous power contained within itself.

There is much more that should be said about the mask which has become a figure: drama begins with it and cannot exist without it. But here we are only concerned with the mask itself. We must now look at it from the other side, for it does not only operate outwards, affecting those who do not know what it contains; a mask is something worn by a man and he is inside it. The wearer knows perfectly well who he really is; but his task is to act the mask. While doing so he must remain within certain limits, corresponding to the nature of the mask he wears. The mask is something put on, something external. As a physical object it remains quite distinct from the man who wears it. He feels it on him as something foreign, something which never wholly becomes part of himself; it hinders and constricts him. As long as he wears it he is two things, himself and the mask. The more often he has worn it and the better he knows it, the more of himself will flow into the figure it represents. But there is always one part of him which necessarily remains separate from it: the part that fears discovery, the part which knows that the terror he spreads is not his due. The secret he represents to those who see the mask from outside must also have an effect on himself inside it, but it clearly cannot be the same effect. They are afraid of the unknown; he is afraid of being unmasked. It is this fear which prevents him from abandoning himself completely to the mask. His transformation can go a very long way, but it is never complete. The mask is a limit set to transformation. Because it can be torn away, its wearer is bound to fear for it. He must take care that he does not lose it; it must never be dropped and must never open. He feels every kind of anxiety about what may happen to it. Besides playing a part in his transformation, the mask is also a weapon or a tool which its wearer has to handle. He must manipulate it, remaining his everyday self, and, at the same time, must change into it as a performer. While he wears the mask, he is thus two people and must remain two during the whole of his performance.

The Power of Unmasking

A person is always aware of his inner malevolence and therefore must dissimulate. But he cannot deceive everyone in this way. There are always others who also desire power and who do not acknowledge his claims, but regard themselves as his rivals. Against these he is always on his guard, for they are a potential danger to him. He waits for the right moment "to tear the mask from their faces"; behind it he finds the malevolence he knows so well in himself. Once they are unmasked, he can render them harmless. If it suits his purpose, he may spare their lives for the time being, but he will see to it that they do not get away with any fresh dissimulation; he keeps their true shape clearly in his mind's eye. He dislikes all transformations in others that he has not enforced on them himself. He may advance men he finds useful, but the social transformation thus accomplished must be absolutely distinct; it must stop there and be entirely within his power. Whether raising men up or abasing them, he determines their place; no one must dare to move on their own. A ruler wages continuous warfare against spontaneous and uncontrolled transformation. The weapon he uses in this fight is the process of unmasking, the exact opposite of transformation. It is a process the reader has already met: Menelaus unmasked Proteus, the old man of the sea, when he refused to be frightened by any of the forms he adopted to escape, and held him fast until he became Proteus again.

It is part of the nature of this process of unmasking that the perpetrator always knows exactly what he will find. He goes for it with a terrible assurance, despising all the metamorphoses he penetrates as irrelevancies. This can happen on one occasion, as with Menelaus who simply wanted Proteus' counsel, or it can be repeated until, in the end, unmasking becomes a passion. If it is practiced often, the whole world shrinks. The wealth of appearances comes to mean nothing; all variety is suspect. All the leaves on all the trees are the same, and all dry as dust; every ray of light is extinguished in a night of suspicion. In the mental disease whose processes most closely resemble the workings of power, the urge to unmask appearances becomes a kind of tyranny. This disease is Paranoia, and there are two characteristics by which, among others, it is particularly distinguished; one of these, in psychiatry, is called dissimulation. I have been using the same term with exactly the same meaning: paranoiacs are so skilful at dissembling that many of them are never identified as such. The other characteristic is a continual urge to unmask enemies. These the paranoiac sees everywhere, in the most peaceful and harmless disguises: he has the gift of seeing through appearances and knows exactly what is behind them. The transformation of the mask from every face is what the despot finds to be essentially the same enemy. He is addicted to the routine of unmasking, acting like a despot in a vacuum. The position he imagines he occupies and the importance he arrogates to himself are fictitious, but he will defend them by constantly applying the two linked processes of dissimulation and unmasking. A precise and valid examination of the unmasking process is possible only in the context of an actual individual case of paranoia, which the reader will find in the last chapters of this book, dealing with the case of Schreber.

Prohibitions on transformation are a social and religious phenomenon of great importance, never properly considered or understood. The Aranda permit only members of the totem to participate in the totem ceremonies. Transformation into the double figure of the mythical ancestor is a prerogative reserved to those with the right to it. The absolutely precise and definite form of the figure makes it easy to protect. The prohibition on usurping it is strictly enforced with full religious sanctions. A young man is received into the group of those to whom the transformation is permitted on certain occasions, after a long and complicated initiation. For women and children, the prohibition is permanent and absolute. As an act of particular courtesy, it is sometimes lifted for initiates of other totems, but this is a special occasion, and the prohibition regains all its old force.

It is a long way from this religion to Christianity, where the Devil is a prohibited figure to everyone. The fact that he is dangerous is stressed in every possible way. There are innumerable cautionary stories of what happens to people who have dealings with him, and the eternal torments of their souls in hell are depicted in every terrifying detail. The force of this prohibition is tremendous and is most striking where people feel a compulsion to act against it. There are many stories of those who became possessed and suddenly acted as if the Devil, or even several devils, were in them. Some of them left their confessions, among the most famous of which are those of Jeanne des Anges, the prioress of the Ursuline convent at Loudun, and of Father Surin who exorcized her until the Devil entered into him. These were people who had devoted their lives to the service of God; any approach to the Devil, let alone transformation into him, was even more emphatically forbidden to them than to laymen, and yet they were possessed by him; the prohibited metamorphosis completely overpowered them. We can scarcely be wrong if we relate the strength of the urge towards a transformation to the strength of the prohibition laid on it. The sexual aspect of prohibitions on transformation can be seen in the notion of witches. The real sin of witches was supposed to be sexual union with the Devil. Whatever they might do besides, the culmination of their secret existence was the orgies which the Devil shared. They were witches because they kept company with the Devil; an essential part of their metamorphosis was their sexual surrender to him. The concept of transformation through copulation is very old indeed. Since each creature normally copulates only with the other sex of its own kind, it is possible that any deviation from this rule was felt as a transformation. If this were so, early marriage laws could be regarded as forms of prohibition on all transformations except those laid down as permitted and desirable. This sexual aspect of transformation ought to be explored in detail. It might well lead to very important conclusions.

Perhaps the most important of all prohibitions on transformation are the social. No hierarchy can be maintained without prohibitions which make it impossible for members of one class to feel equal or related to members of a higher class. This is true even of the age-classes of primitive societies. Once divisions have evolved they tend to become more and more strongly marked and the rise from a lower to a higher class correspondingly difficult. It can be achieved only by undergoing a special initiation, and this is experienced as a transformation in the literal sense of the word. Often the candidate is thought of as dying in the lower class, to be brought back to life in the higher: death itself divides class from class. Transformation becomes a long and dangerous journey during which the novice has to undergo every kind of ordeal and terror; he is spared none of them. But everything that he suffers as a boy he can later, as a member of the higher class, inflict on the novices he then tests.

The higher class is thus conceived as something with a clear identity of its own and its own complete life. The knowledge of sacred songs and myths is linked with it and sometimes there is a special language. The members of lower classes and the women, who are permanently excluded from all higher classes, are kept in fear and obedience by terrifying masks and weird sounds. The division into classes is most rigid in a caste system. As in India, membership of a caste absolutely precludes social transformation of any kind. There is a meticulous separation both from what is above and what is below; contact with anyone lower is strictly prohibited. People marry only within their own caste and all members of a caste follow the same profession, so that it is not even possible to achieve transformation through the kind of work one does. The consistency with which this system is applied is so amazing that study of it alone would reveal all the different kinds of social transformation possible; since all have to be avoided they are all carefully listed, described and analyzed.

If one took any such complete system of prohibitions and reversed it, substituting positives for its negatives, one would know exactly what transformation from a lower into a higher class was thought to entail. An essay on castes in relation to transformation would be invaluable, but has not yet been written. But there is also a type of prohibition on transformation which is limited, that is, imposed only on the single individual who stands at the head of society. This is found in early forms of kingship. Surprising though it may seem, the two best articulated forms of power known to the older civilizations are primarily differentiated by their contrasting relationships with transformation. At one pole stands the master transformer who can assume any shape at will, whether those of animals, animal-spirits or the spirits of the dead: the trickster who takes everyone in is a familiar figure in North American Indian myth. His power depends on the countless shapes he can assume. Whatever he does is surprising; he appears and disappears unexpectedly, he snatches things or gets hold of them in extraordinary ways and only lets himself be caught if he knows he can escape again. The essential faculty which enables him to perform his astounding feats is transformation. The master transformer achieves real power as a Shaman. In his séance, the Shaman summons up spirits, whom he makes subject to him; he speaks their language, becomes like one of themselves and can command them in a way they understand. When he journeys up to heaven, he becomes a bird, when he dives to the bottom of the sea, some marine creature; anything is possible to him. His paroxysms result from the rapid sequence of transformations which continue to shake him until he selects from among them the one he needs for his purpose.

The master transformer is the one to whom the largest number of transformations is open. If we compare him with the figure of the divine king, who is subject to a hundred restrictions, who has to remain in one place and be always the same, whom no one can approach and who very often must not even be seen, then we see that the essential difference between the two lies in their exactly opposite relationship to transformation. With one, the Shaman, transformation is carried to its extreme and made full use of; with the other, the king, it is prohibited and prevented until he is, as it were, completely paralyzed. He has to remain so much the same that he is not even supposed to age, but must always be a man in the full maturity of health and strength. Indeed, as soon as the first traces of age show—grey hairs or a decrease in virility—he is often killed.

The static quality of this type of king, to whom all self-transformation is forbidden, though he is a continual fount of commands which transform others, has become part of the essence of power and has had a decisive influence on our whole modern conception of power. The non-transformer has been set on a pedestal at a fixed height in a fixed and permanent place. He must never descend from this height, never come half way to meet anyone and never forget his dignity. He can, however, raise others by appointing them to this or that higher position; he can transform them both by raising them up and by abasing them. It is his function to do to others what no one, even himself, may do to him.

The man who is himself denied all transformation can transform others as he pleases. Even this brief enumeration of a few instances of prohibition on transformation, which leaves almost everything still to be said, forces one to ask what this prohibition really signifies. Why does man want it? What deep need repeatedly drives him to impose it on himself and others? We can only approach this question tentatively. It seems as though early man was made uneasy by the increasing fluidity of his nature, by his very gift for transformation in fact, and that this was what made him seek for some fixed and immovable barriers. There were so many sensations which he experienced as something alien operating within his body—we remember the tappings of the Bushmen—that he felt as though he had been given over to it and forced to become it. Without transformation he could not have obtained his food, but it was also something imposed on him, and which continued to be imposed even after he had satisfied his hunger. He felt as though there was nothing but movement everywhere and that his own being was in a state of continual flux; and this inevitably aroused in him a desire for solidity and permanence only to be satisfied through prohibitions on transformations. Transformation 383

We should perhaps remember in this context the significance which the Australian aborigines attach to rocks and stones. Everything that their ancestors did or experienced, all their wanderings and everything that happened in them, have become part of the landscape—permanent, unchanging landmarks. There is scarcely a rock which does not signify that some particular creature once lived and did great deeds there. In addition to these monumental features of the landscape, which are immovable, there are smaller stones which the aborigines own as objects and keep in their sacred places. These are handed down from one generation to another and to each of them is attached some definite significance. The stone is the tangible manifestation of the legend; as long as the stone remains the same the legend does not change. This concentration on the permanence of stone, something by no means wholly unknown among ourselves, seems to me to express the same profound desire, the same need, as that which leads to prohibitions on transformation.

Slavery

A slave is not property in the sense that a lifeless thing is property, but rather as cattle are. He has roughly the same kind of freedom as an animal which is allowed to graze and, on occasion, to beget or bear its young. A thing is essentially impenetrable. It can be pushed or pulled about, but it cannot receive or store up commands. A slave may legally be accounted a thing which is owned, but this is misleading; a slave is an animal which is owned. A single slave can best be compared to a domesticated dog. The dog has been detached from its pack; it is isolated and under the orders of its master. When its own pursuits conflict with these orders it is made to give them up, in return for which it is fed by its master. For both the slave and the dog, commands and food come from the same source, and in this they resemble a young child.

Where they are essentially different from a child is in relation to transformations. In its play the child practises all the transformations it may be able to use later and its parents help it with these and continually encourage it to acquire fresh ones. It continues to grow in many different ways and when it has mastered its transformations it is rewarded by being promoted to adult status. This is the opposite of what happens to a slave. Just as its master does not allow a dog to chase whatever it wants, but confines its hunting to his own needs or wishes, so the slave’s master puts out of his reach one metamorphosis after another. The slave must not do this and must not do that, but some things he must do over and over again; and the simpler and more limited these are, the more likely his master is to require them of him.

Differentiation of functions need not damage the balance of transformation in a man as long as he is still allowed to carry out a variety of operations, but, as soon as he is restricted to one operation only and, in addition, is expected to get as much as possible done in the shortest possible time—that is, to be "productive"—he becomes what we cannot help describing as a slave. From the very beginning there must have been two distinct types of slave: the single slave, linked to his master as a dog is, and numbers of slaves together, like cattle in a field, who were, indeed, the earliest of man's slaves. The desire to turn men into animals was the principal motive for the development of slavery. It is as difficult to overestimate its strength as that of the opposite desire: to turn animals into men. Standing: Our pride in standing comes from feeling independent and needing no support. The memory of the first time one stood alone as a child or the sense of our superiority to animals contributes to this. A man who is standing feels confident and self-sufficient. When someone gets up from a sitting or lying position, their standing is the result of a specific effort to make themselves as tall as possible. Someone who has been standing for a long time expresses a capacity for endurance and resistance, either because they stand firmly in one place like a tree, or because they allow all of themselves to be seen without fear or concealment. The stiller he stands, the less often he turns and looks about him, the more impressive he is. He shows that he does not even fear an attack from behind, where he cannot see. If there is a space between the standing man and those around him, the effect he makes is enhanced. Particularly impressive is a man who stands isolated by himself, facing many others, but somehow detached from them. It is as though he, in his single person, stood for them all. If he draws closer to them, he will take care to stand higher than they do; and, if he comes right amongst them, they re-establish his superiority by hoisting him on their shoulders and carrying him. He has lost his independence, but he now, as it were, sits on them all.

People normally stand before they begin to walk or run, and because standing is thus the antecedent of all motion, a standing man creates an impression of energy which is as yet unused. Standing is the central position, from which every other position can be directly reached and any movement initiated. We tend, therefore, to ascribe a relatively high degree of tension to any one who is standing, even when he himself does not in fact feel it. (He may, for instance, be about to lie down and sleep.) We always overrate the man who stands.

When two men are introduced to each other, there is always an element of solemnity in the occasion. Standing, they exchange names and, standing, shake hands. By standing, each shows his respect for the other, but also measures himself against him. However their relationship develops, their first real contact takes place standing.

In those countries where personal independence is most highly prized, people stand more frequently and for longer periods than elsewhere. The English, for example, are particularly attached to their public-houses, where most of the drinking takes place standing up. The drinker can leave at any time and without any fuss. A small and inconspicuous movement releases him from his companions and thus he feels less constrained than if he had formally to get up from a table. Getting up would be tantamount to announcing his intention to leave, and to have to do that would limit his freedom. Even at private parties the English like to stand, indicating that they do not propose to stay long. They move about freely in the room and, since they are standing, are able to leave one person in order to talk to another with the minimum of formality. There is nothing unusual in this and so no-one is offended by it. Equality within a social group, one of the most important and useful fictions in English life, is particularly stressed on occasions when all alike have, or can have, the advantage of standing. No-one "sits above" anyone else. Everyone is free to seek out those he wants to meet.

Sitting
When we sit we make use of extraneous legs to replace the two we relinquished in order to stand upright. The chair, as we know it today, derives from the throne, and the throne presupposes subject animals or human beings, whose function it is to carry the weight of the ruler. The four legs of the chair represent the legs of an animal—a horse, an ox, or an elephant—and sitting in this way, on a raised seat, must be clearly distinguished from sitting or squatting on the ground, which means something quite different. To sit on a chair was originally a mark of distinction. The man who sat rested on other men, who were his subjects or slaves. While he might sit, they had to stand. Their fatigue did not matter so long as he was comfortable. It was he who was important and his sacred strength which must be saved, for on him depended the well-being of everyone else. Sitting always involves a downward pressure on something which is defenceless and incapable of exerting counter-pressure. This aspect of it derives from riding, but there it is disguised, because the motion involved makes it appear that the aim is simply to reach some objective quicker than would otherwise be possible, and not pressure as such. When the element of motion is removed and riding becomes sitting, the relationship between the sitter and what he sits on acquires an independent existence of its own and it is as though the point of sitting were precisely to express this relationship. The thing sat on is no longer even animate. Its function is settled for ever and it has less volition even than a slave; its state is the quintessence of slavery. Its user is free to do exactly as he likes with it. He can come and sit down and remain sitting for as long as he pleases, or he can get up and go away without giving it a thought. The dignity of sitting is a dignity of duration. A standing man may do anything, and our respect for him derives partly from the fact that 390 CROWDS AND POWER so many possibilities are open to him, that he is alert and able to move at any moment. But we expect someone who is sitting to remain sitting. 

Their fatigue did not matter so long as he was comfortable. It was he who was important and his sacred strength which must be saved, for on him depended the well-being of everyone else. Sitting always involves a downward pressure on something which is defenceless and incapable of exerting counter-pressure. This aspect of it derives from riding, but there it is disguised, because the motion involved makes it appear that the aim is simply to reach some objective quicker than would otherwise be possible, and not pressure as such. When the element of motion is removed and riding becomes sitting, the relationship between the sitter and what he sits on acquires an independent existence of its own and it is as though the point of sitting were precisely to express this relationship. The thing sat on is no longer even animate. Its function is settled for ever and it has less volition even than a slave; its state is the quintessence of slavery. Its user is free to do exactly as he likes with it. He can come and sit down and remain sitting for as long as he pleases, or he can get up and go away without giving it a thought. The dignity of sitting is a dignity of duration. A standing man may do anything, and our respect for him derives partly from the fact that 390 CROWDS AND POWER so many possibilities are open to him, that he is alert and able to move at any moment. But we expect someone who is sitting to remain sitting. The downward pressure of his weight confirms his authority and the longer he makes it felt the more secure he appears. There is hardly a single human institution which has not made use of this fact to preserve and strengthen its position. When a man sits it is physical weight which he displays, and, if this is to make its full effect, he needs to sit on something raised above the ground. In relation to the legs of a chair he actually is heavy. If he sat on the ground he would make an entirely different impression, for the earth is so much heavier and more solid than any of its creatures that the pressure they can exert is insignificant in comparison. The simplest form of power is that derived from a man’s own body and he can express it either in terms of height—in which case he must stand—or in terms of weight—in which case he must exert visible pressure. To stand up from a sitting position is to do both. The most striking instance of this is when a judge, who has remained seated and motionless throughout the hearing of a trial, rises to his feet to deliver judgement. The various ways of sitting are basically all ways of exerting pres- sure______ This outward process mirrors the inward process of going to sleep, for in sleep, too, we are stripped of much that seems indispensable when we are awake—the fixed, compulsive ways of thought which are the clothes of the mind. Anyone who lies down disarms himself so completely that it is impossible to understand how men have managed to survive sleep. It is true that in their primitive state they lived, when they could, in caves, but even there they were not secure; and the miserable shelters of leaves and twigs with which many had to content themselves gave no protection at all. The marvel is that there are still men in existence. One would expect them to have been exterminated long ago, when they were many fewer, long before they reached the point of lining up for reciprocal annihilation. This one fact of sleep—defenceless, recurrent, and prolonged—shows the inadequacy of all the theories of adaptation to environment which are put forward as explanations of so much that is inexplicable.

But we are not concerned here with the more profound and difficult question of how men have managed to survive sleep, but simply with lying down and how it relates to power as compared with the other postures of the human body. At one extreme, as we saw, there is standing, which expresses power through height and independence, and sitting, which expresses it through weight and continuance. Lying is the other extreme, expressing complete impotence, especially, of course, when it is combined with sleep. But it is not an active, struggling impotence. A man who lies down gives up all relationships with his fellows and withdraws into himself. There is nothing dramatic about his state; indeed it is only by being inconspicuous that he obtains a meagre measure of security. All he wants is to have something under him. He lies at full length and, as far as possible, sees that his whole body is in contact with something which supports or protects it.

A standing man is free and independent of support; a sitting man uses his weight to exert pressure on something. A recumbent man is certainly not independent, for he uses anything and everything to support him; nor can he really be said to exert pressure, for his weight is so spread that he is scarcely conscious of it. The contrast between lying and standing is so great that there is always a temptation to startle others by switching suddenly from the one position to the other. A man who can leap up from the ground or from his bed straight to his full height proves how much alive he is, how little mastered by sleep, how, even when asleep, he hears and notices everything that matters, so that he can never be taken by surprise. Many rulers have known this and have deliberately had reports spread of the lightning speed with which they could achieve the transition. Part of the impression it makes is certainly due to desire for the continued physical growth which is denied us after a certain age. All rulers would at heart like to be taller than they are, or, better still, to have the capacity to become taller when they wanted. They would like to be able to grow suddenly and unexpectedly, so as to terrify and dominate other men, and then, without anyone seeing them do it, to shrink again, so as to be able to repeat the performance on the next suitable occasion. A man who at one moment is asleep, curled up as though in his mother’s womb, and who then, on waking, springs out of bed, repeats in this sudden movement the whole process of his growth. Though, to his regret, he cannot make himself taller than he is, at least he makes himself as tall as he can. People lie down in order to rest, but there are also those who cannot stand, who are injured or wounded and have to remain lying down, however little they want to. Such people have the misfortune to remind those who can stand of a wounded animal. They are marked. They have taken a long step downhill towards death. A stricken creature is given the coup de grace. If it was dangerous when alive, it becomes an object of hatred when it is dead. People tread on it and push it to one side, for it cannot defend itself. It is blamed for still being in everyone’s way when dead; it ought not to exist at all, not even as the empty husk of a body. A man has further to fall than an animal and, therefore, when he does fall, arouses even more contempt and repugnance. Actually, the sight of a stricken man arouses two feelings at once: there is the instinctive and habitual feeling of triumph over a hunted-down animal and also uneasiness at the fall of a fellow-man. We are discussing here what a man who can still stand really feels when he sees someone down, not what he should feel, and there is no doubt that the element of triumph is always there and, in certain circumstances, will become very strong. The sight of large numbers of prostrate and lifeless bodies has a terrible effect on anyone who experiences it: he comes to feel as though he himself had struck them all down and his sense of power increases rapidly and uncontrollably. He appropriates to himself the whole heap of dying or dead; he alone is alive and everything around him is his booty. No feeling of triumph is more dangerous than this. A man who has once given way to it will do anything to repeat it. Of great importance in this connection is the numerical disparity between the standing and the lying; the circumstances of their confrontation are also significant. War and battle, for example (which have already been discussed as crowd events), have their own ritual and, in them, the impulse I have described is permitted to run its course. There are no sanctions attached to the death of an enemy; in relation to him, everyone can indulge his brute instinct. In time of peace, anyone who falls down in a crowded place and is unable to rise has a different effect on the many who see him. In their own time and fashion, and to differing degrees, they all identify themselves with him. One, though perhaps with a bad conscience, will pass him by; another will take the trouble to help him. If he manages to get to his feet fairly quickly, all the onlookers will feel pleased that this man, who is themselves, is on his feet again. If he fails, he is handed over to the care of the appropriate institution, and there is always, even amongst civilized people, a faint feeling of contempt for anyone to whom this happens. They procure him the help he needs, but in doing so expel him from the society of the erect. For a time, he is not considered fully adult. Sitting on the Ground Sitting or squatting on the ground denotes an absence of needs, a turning in on oneself. The body is rounded and compact as though expecting nothing from the world. Every activity that might require reciprocity is renounced. Since nothing is done, there is nothing for anyone to react to. A man who sits in this attitude appears peaceful and contented; no one fears violence from him. He is contented, either because he has all he needs or because he makes do with what he has, however little. The squatting beggar proclaims his readiness to accept whatever he may be given; he makes no distinctions and is content with anything. In oriental countries, it is not only the poor who sit on the ground, but also the rich when they have company; and then it expresses something of their peculiar attitude to property. They behave as though they carried it within themselves and were completely sure of it. By remaining in this position, they show that they feel no worry or anxiety about being robbed of it or losing it in any other way. They allow themselves to be waited on, but it is as though it were their wealth that was tended. Thus, the usual severity of the relationship between master and servant is mitigated.

Unlike those who use chairs, the oriental, when he sits, does not parade the fact that he could, if he wished, be sitting on his fellow-creatures. He is like a beautifully clothed sack; everything he owns is inside the sack, and it is this sack that his servants wait on. But squatting or sitting on the ground also implies acceptance of everything that may happen. If he were a beggar, the rich man would continue to sit in the same way and, in doing so, would say in effect that he was still the same man. The posture contains both wealth and poverty, and this, together with what we said about the absence of needs, is why it has become the posture of contemplation, familiar to all who know the East. The man who adopts it has freed himself from the world. He reposes in himself and burdens no one.

Kneeling
As well as the passivity of lying down, there is another form of powerlessness, which is active. It confronts a present power and expresses itself in ways which magnify this power. Kneeling is a gesture of supplication. The condemned man offers his neck for the blow; he has accepted the fact that he will die and does nothing to prevent it, but, by the position of his body, assists the fulfillment of the other's will. But he raises his joined hands and, even in this last moment, begs for mercy. Kneeling is always in some sense a prelude to a last moment. It is a form of flattery, and extreme because it has to attract attention. A man who appears resigned to being killed ascribes to him before whom he kneels the greatest possible power, the power over life and death. One so great must have it in his power to grant great things; his mercy should equal the defencelessness of his suppliant. The gulf between them is made to seem so immense that only his greatness can bridge it. If he does not, he will forever afterwards appear smaller in his own eyes than he was in the moment when his suppliant knelt to him.

The Orchestral Conductor
No more obvious expression of power than the performance of a conductor. Every detail of his public behavior throws light on the nature of power. Someone who knew nothing about power could discover all its attributes, one after another, by careful observation of a conductor. The reason why this has never been done is obvious: the music the conductor evokes is thought to be the only thing that counts; people take it for granted that they go to concerts to hear symphonies, and no one is more convinced of this than the conductor himself. He believes that his business is to serve music and to interpret it faithfully. A conductor ranks himself first among the servants of music. He is so full of it that the idea of his activity having another, non-musical meaning never enters his head. The conductor stands: ancient memories of what it meant when man first stood upright still play an important part in any representations of power. The conductor is the only person who stands in front of the orchestra and in front of the audience. He stands on a dais and can be seen from both the front and the back. In front, his movements act on the orchestra, and behind him, they act on the audience. He uses only his hands, or his hands and a baton, to give directions. Small movements are all he needs to wake up instruments or silence them at will. He has the power of life and death over the voices of the instruments; one long silent will speak again at his command. The diversity of the orchestra stands for the diversity of mankind, and the willingness of its members to obey the conductor makes it possible for him to transform them into a unit, which he then embodies.

The complexity of the work the conductor performs requires him to be alert. Presence of mind is among his essential attributes, as he must curb law-breakers instantly. The code of laws, in the form of the score, is in his hands. Others can check the way it is carried out, but the conductor alone decides what the law is and summarily punishes any breach of it.

The conductor's public visibility gives him a special kind of self-assurance. He grows accustomed to being seen and becomes less and less able to do without it. The immobility of the audience is part of the conductor's design, as they are under a compulsion to keep still. The presence of the players does not disturb anyone; they are scarcely noticed. Once the conductor appears, everyone becomes still. He mounts the rostrum, clears his throat, and raises his baton; silence falls. The audience applauds as soon as he finishes, and their desire for movement is banked up until the end of the work. The conductor bows to the clapping hands and returns to the rostrum as often as they want him to. The applause he receives is the ancient salute to the victor, and the magnitude of his victory is measured by its volume. Victory and defeat become the framework within which his spiritual economy is ordered.

During a concert, the conductor is a leader. He stands at the audience's head with his back to them. It is he they follow, as it is he who goes first. But instead of his feet, his hands lead them. The movement of the music, which his hands bring about, represents the path his feet would be the first to tread. The crowd in the hall is carried forward by him. During the whole performance of a work, they never see his face. He is merciless: there are no intervals for rest. They see his back always in front of them, as though it were their goal. If he turned round even once, the spell would be broken. The road they were travelling would suddenly cease to exist, and there would be nothing but a hall full of disillusioned people without movement or impetus. But the conductor could be relied upon not to turn round, for, while the audience followed him from behind, he was faced with a small army of professional players, which he must control. For this purpose, too, he used his hands, but they not only pointed the way, as they did for those behind him, but also gave orders. His eyes held the whole orchestra. Every player felt that the conductor saw him personally, and, even more, heard him. The voices of the instruments were opinions and convictions, which he kept a close watch on. He was omniscient, for, while the players had only their own parts in front of them, he had the whole score in his head or on his desk. At any given moment, he knew precisely what each player should be doing. His attention was everywhere at once, and it was to this that he owed a large part of his authority. He was inside the mind of every player. He knew not only what each should be doing but also what he was doing. He was the living embodiment of law, both positive and negative. His hands decree and prohibit. His ears searched out profanation.

For the orchestra, the conductor literally embodied the work they were playing, the simultaneity of the sounds as well as their sequence. As long as the performance was going on, nothing was supposed to exist except this work. The conductor was the Fame Fame 1s nor fastidious about the lips which spread it. Since the seeker after fame was indistinguishable from each other and was all counted as equal, this passion showed its origin in the experience of crowd manipulation. Names collected their own crowds. They were greedy and lived their own separate lives, scarcely connected with the real natures of the men who beat them.

Aspects of Power

The crowd the seeker after fame envisaged consisted of shadows, that is, creatures who did not even have to be alive, as long as they were capable of one thing: to repeat his name. He wanted them to repeat it often and to repeat it in front of others, so that as many as possible might hear it and learn how to say it themselves. But what these shadows were apart from this—their height, their appearance, how they lived and worked—was a matter of total indifference to the man whose fame they spread. As long as anyone concerned himself with the individuals to whom these mouths belonged, as long as he wooed, bribed, enticed, or whipped them on, he was not really famous. Only when he could afford to omit all this had he achieved fame.

The difference between a rich man, a ruler, and a celebrity was something like this: A rich man collected cattle and hoards of grain or the money which stood for them. He did not worry about men; it was enough that he could buy them. A ruler collected men. Grain and cattle or money meant nothing to him, except in as far as he needed them to get hold of men. He wanted living men, whom he could make die before him or take with him when he died. He was only indirectly concerned with those who lived before his time or who were born after it. A celebrity collected a chorus of voices. All he wanted was to hear them repeat his name. As long as there were enough of them and they were versed in his name, it did not matter whether these voices belonged to the dead, to the living, or to the as yet unborn. The Regulation of Time

No porrricat structure of any size can dispense with order, and one of the fundamental applications of order is to time, for no communal human activity can take place without it. Indeed, one might say that the regulation of time is the primary attribute of all government. A new power which wants to assert itself must also enforce a new chronology; it must make it seem as though time had begun with it. Even more important to such a power is that it should endure. Its own estimate of its greatness can be deduced from the stretch of future time it lays claim to: Hitler’s Reich was to last 1,000 years. The Julian calendar endured longer than this, and even today, the month called after Julius Caesar is known by his name. Of historical figures, only Augustus succeeded in attaching his name uninterruptedly to a month. Others tried it, but their names have crumbled with their effigies.

The most impressive mark on the reckoning of time is that made by Christ. Here he surpassed even God himself, from whose creation of the world Jewish chronology began. The Romans counted time from the foundation of their city, a method which they took over from the Etruscans and which certainly played a not inconsiderable part in the world’s picture of Rome’s mighty destiny. Some conquerors content themselves with inserting their names somewhere in the calendar: Napoleon is said to have had hopes of August 15th. There is an irresistible attraction in the idea of linking one’s name with a regularly recurring date. That the vast majority of people are ignorant of the origins of such designations seems to have not the slightest effect on the desire of rulers to immortalize themselves in this way.

No one man has succeeded in attaching his name to a season, although there are whole centuries which are known by the name of a dynasty. Chinese history, indeed, is reckoned in dynasties; one speaks of the Han or the Tang period. Even short-lived and inglorious dynasties, which would be better forgotten, get the benefit of this. Among the Chinese it has become the usual method of reckoning large stretches of time, but it is families rather than individuals which it immortalizes.

A ruler’s relationship with time, however, is not exhausted by the vanity of his name. He is concerned with the regulation of time and not only with giving his name to existing units. Chinese history begins in this way. The prestige of the Chinese legendary rulers derives in great part from the effective regulation of time which is ascribed to them. Special officials were appointed to watch over this and were punished if they neglected their duties. It was when they achieved a uniform calendar that the Chinese first became a nation.

Civilizations are perhaps best distinguished by their arrangement of time. They prove themselves by their continued capacity to organize their traditions and they disintegrate when they cease to do this. A civilization comes to an end when a people no longer takes its own chronology seriously. At this one point, an analogy with the life of an individual is permissible. A man who no longer knows or cares how old he is has finished with life; he might as well be dead, when he cannot know. For a civilization, as for an individual, periods when the awareness of time is lost are periods of shame, which are forgotten as soon as possible. There are obvious practical reasons for the overwhelming importance which the regulation of time has acquired. 

It binds together large aspects of power 399 groups of men who may live far apart and not be able to meet face to face. In a small group of perhaps fifty people, everyone knows what everyone else is doing. It is easy for them to join in common activity. The rhythm of their lives is beaten out within the pack. They dance the continuity of the group, as they dance so many other things. The time gap between one pack activity and another does not matter, for since people live in close proximity they can always alert each other when they need to. Every expansion of the physical milieu makes it more important to do something about time. Drum and smoke signals, which bridge distance, serve this purpose.

A different kind of unity was given to large groups of people by the lives of single individuals: Kings embodied the whole period of their reign. Their death, whether it came with the decline of their strength or, as later, coincided with their natural span of life, indicated a break in time. They were time. Between one king and the next, time stood still. There was a gap in it—an interregnum—which people sought to keep as short as possible.

The Court 1s thought of first and foremost as a centre, a point round which people orientate themselves. The tendency to move round and round a central point is very old and, indeed, can be observed even in chimpanzees. Originally this central point was itself mobile; it could exist anywhere; it moved with the wanderings of the people who moved around it. Only gradually did its location become fixed. Rocks and trees are the prototypes of everything permanent, and it was with rocks and trees that buildings intended to endure were first built. In the course of time more and more stress was laid on the element of permanence.

The difficulty of building such a centre, of moving blocks of stone for large distances, the number of men engaged in the work, and even the time it took to complete, all helped to increase the prestige it owed to its permanence. But this fixed centre of a diminutive world, to which it gave a kind of order, was not yet a court. A court entails the existence of a body of men whose connection with it is as organic and as closely defined as that of actual parts of the building. Their duties are precisely and exhaustively laid down; they must do exactly so much, but never more. And from time to time they must assemble and, without relinquishing their identity or forgetting their position, and fully 400 CROWDS AND POWER conscious of the restrictions on it, they must unite in homage to the ruler. Their homage consists in being there, their faces turned towards the ruler, gathered round him, but not approaching him too close, dazzled by him, fearing him and looking to him as the source of all things. In this unique atmosphere, in which splendour, terror and hope of favour are equally blended, they spend their lives. Nothing, or almost nothing, else exists for them. They have, as it were, colonized the sun; they show other men that it is habitable. Courtiers keep their eyes fixed on the ruler as though they were spell-bound. There is nothing else which is common to them all, but, from the highest to the lowest, they are alike in this. In the unvarying and identical direction of their gaze they have a certain crowd-like quality, but it is only a very rudimentary one, for what they look at puts each of them in mind of his particular function, that which differentiates him from all the rest. The bearing and behavior of a courtier infects, and is intended to infect, the ruler's other subjects. What the courtier does all the time, they should be at pains to do periodically, and certainly on various special occasions. When, for instance, the king enters a city, all its inhabitants should attend on him, as his courtiers habitually do in his palace; and their homage should be all the more enthusiastic because it has been owing for so long. The presence of the court should draw all the ruler's subjects to the capital, where they group themselves in large, concentric circles round the inner circle of courtiers. The capital is built round the court; its houses are a standing act of homage. The king, as is proper, generously repays this by the splendor of his state buildings. A court is a good example of a crowd crystal. The people who compose it all have their own separate functions and, to each other, seem to be quite different. But to the rest of the world they—the courtiers—appear as identical parts of a single unit, radiating the loyalty they have in common.

The Rising Throne of the Emperor of Byzantium Suppen crows has always made a powerful impression on men. Size in itself is a source of wonder, and so is a man's ability to attain his full height instantaneously from a sitting or lying position, but even greater astonishment is caused by something small which suddenly becomes gigantic under the eyes of the beholder. Such figures occur frequently, of course, in the myths and fairy stories of many peoples, but it is in 10th-century Byzantium that we find change of size used consciously for the purposes of power. Liudprand of Cremona, the ambassador of Otto I, left the following account of his reception by the Byzantine Emperor.

"Before the emperor's seat stood a tree, made of bronze gilded over, whose branches were filled with birds, also made of gilded bronze, which uttered different cries, each according to its varying species. The throne itself was so marvelously fashioned that at one moment it seemed a low structure, and at another it rose high into the air. It was of immense size and was guarded by lions, made either of bronze or of wood covered over with gold, who beat the ground with their tails and gave a dreadful roar with open mouth and quivering tongue. Leaning upon the shoulders of two eunuchs I was brought into the emperor's presence. At my approach the lions began to roar and the birds to cry out, each according to its kind; but I was neither terrified nor surprised, for I had previously made enquiry about all these things, from people who were well acquainted with them. So after I had three times made obeisance to the emperor with my face upon the ground, I lifted my head, and behold! the man whom just before I had seen sitting on a moderately elevated seat had now changed his raiment and 'was sitting on the level of the ceiling. How it was done I could not imagine, unless perhaps he was lifted up by some such sort of device as we use for raising the timbers of a wine-press. On that occasion he did not address me personally, since, even if he had wished to do so, the wide distance between us would have rendered conversation unseemly, but by the intermediary of a secretary he enquired about my master's doings and asked after his health. I made a fitting reply and then, at a nod from the interpreter, left his presence and retired to my lodging." While the ambassador prostrated himself, with his forehead touching the ground, the emperor's throne grew upwards. The abasement of the one was used for the elevation of the other. The distance between the two, which had been diminished by the fact of the ambassador’s reception, was thus re-established vertically. Artificial birds which sang and lions which roared were succeeded and surpassed by the contrivance of a throne which grew. It symbolized the urge to increase inherent in all power. Exhibited to the emissary of a foreign power its threat was unmistakable. 402 CROWDS AND POWER General Paralytics and Their Notions of Greatness

What we actually understand by "greatness"? The word is used in so many different ways that one might despair of ever attaching a clear meaning to it. What is there that has not been called "great"? Side by side with achievements without which no existence worthy of men can be imagined, we find the ludicrous and the monstrous. It is precisely in this confusion that the concept of greatness represents something men cannot live without. We must try to grasp it in its full ambiguity, and perhaps the best chance of doing so lies in approaching it in the minds of men who are not specially gifted, where it appears in its most comprehensible and prosaic form.

A common disease which has been exhaustively studied offers a particularly good opportunity. There are different forms of general paralysis, the classical form in particular being distinguished by a proliferation of notions of greatness following each other in the wildest variety and confusion and easily aroused by external events. There are also, it is true, depressive forms of the disease, in which these ideas are replaced by delusions of unworthiness and littleness. There are also cases in which both are present together. But we are not concerned here with the disease as such. What we are interested in is the concrete accumulation of notions of greatness in particular, fully documented instances. It is precisely in their profusion, their naivety and the ease with which they can be aroused (which is what makes them seem so strange to normal people) that they throw such an astonishing light on "greatness".

The reader must be patient with the long enumerations which follow. Their real significance cannot be understood unless they are given more or less complete. I should add that the two cases discussed here both lived in imperial Germany, a circumstance which affected many of their ideas.

A middle-aged business man who had been brought to Krapelin's clinic gave the following account of himself: "He had been driven mad by fatigue and persecution. He was now quite recovered mentally and only a little nervous. His capacity for work had increased with the care taken of him in the clinics, so that he was now fit for anything and had in fact brilliant prospects. On his release, which was due shortly, he proposed to establish a large paper-mill; a friend was to give him the necessary money. In addition, Krupp, whom this same friend knew well, had put a property near Metz at his disposal and this he proposed to use for large-scale horticulture; the district was also very well suited to vineyards. There would be fourteen horses for the work of cultivation and also a large saw-mill, which was certain to bring him a sizeable profit. If it was pointed out that things might not go so smoothly and that all these businesses required substantial capital, he replied confidently that a man of his capacity for work would know how to overcome difficulties and that, with his excellent prospects of profits, he would never be short of money." At the same time, he casually let it be known that the Kaiser took an interest in him and had re-established him in the noble rank that his grandfather had relinquished because he had not the means to keep it up. As a matter of fact, he was already entitled to use it. All this information was given in a quiet, matter-of-fact tone of voice, and his behavior throughout was quite normal.

It was easy to get him to extend his plans. "If someone suggested that poultry-keeping might be profitable, he immediately assured him that of course he was going to keep turkeys, guinea-fowl, peacocks, and pigeons, fatten geese, and breed pheasants." It was through these grandiose schemes and purchases that his illness first became apparent.

When he came to the clinic, "he felt stimulated to work and was physically and mentally better than he had ever been. Everything about the clinic pleased him, and he wanted to write poetry there, which he could do better than Goethe, Schiller, or Heine. He wanted to invent countless new machines, surround the clinic with new buildings, and build a cathedral higher than that in Cologne. He wanted to cover the whole clinic with an armor of glass. He was a genius who spoke all the languages in the world. He was going to build a church made of cast steel, procure the highest decorations from the Kaiser, discover a way of controlling lunatics, and give the library of the institute a thousand books, mostly philosophical works. All his thoughts were god-like.

These delusions of greatness changed continually, springing up in an instant, quickly to be superseded by fresh ones. He spoke, wrote, and drew incessantly, ordered on the spot everything he saw advertised in the newspapers—food, houses, clothes, and furniture alike. He was soon a count and soon a lieutenant-general. He presented the Kaiser with a whole regiment of field artillery. He offered to transfer the clinic to the top of a mountain."

Let us try to arrange this motley confusion in a provisional order. First of all, there is the preoccupation with height. He wants to build a cathedral higher than that of Cologne and to transplant the clinic to the top of a mountain. The elevation he brings about then comes to him in his own person, translated into terms of rank: his grandfather was a nobleman, and he himself is a count and, in the military hierarchy, a lieutenant-general; the Kaiser is interested in him and takes his advice about the distribution of honors; finally, he gives the Kaiser a whole regiment, implying that he wants to be higher even than his emperor.

The same urge finds expression in the sphere of the mind. Because he is a genius, he speaks all the languages of the world; it is as though he were their ruler and they his subjects; he surpasses Goethe, Schiller, and Heine, the greatest poets he knows of. One gets the impression that this craving for height is not concerned with the state of being high up, but with the process of getting there quickly. The ascent must be made again and again, suddenly and quickly, whenever opportunity offers. It appears that heights hitherto thought the greatest attainable can, in fact, easily be surpassed and new records established. One is driven to suspect that the real field of competition is growth.

It means desire for every kind of increase, but particularly the increase of living creatures, whose own nature it is to want it. Turkeys, guinea-fowl, peacocks, pigeons, geese, and pheasants are all counted as separate species and, in every case, the idea is that they should breed and therefore multiply and become uncountable. Acquisitiveness here is what it originally was: the encouragement of increase in natural crowds, from which increase one will oneself then benefit. The third trait is prodigality. He orders everything advertised in the newspapers—food, clothes, houses, and furniture. If he were at liberty and really had the money, he would actually buy all these things. But this does not mean that he would hoard them. He would quite certainly be as liberal with them as he is with his money and would give them away to anyone he could find. Hoarding is no more part of his nature than ownership. It is true that he sees the things he would like to buy in heaps, as it were, before him; but only so long as he has not got them. The movement of wealth matters to him more than wealth itself. He appears to have two typical gestures, grabbing and throwing away in handfuls; but in reality these are one. It is a gesture of greatness.

Let us now turn to the second case, also a middle-aged business man, but suffering from a much more agitated form of paralysis. With him, too, the whole thing began with grandiose plans. Without any financial backing, he suddenly bought a bathing establishment for 35,000 marks, and ordered champagne and white wine to the value of 14,000 and 16,000 marks respectively, to start a restaurant. While in the clinic, he boasted continually: "He wants to have himself made bigger until he weighs 32 stone, have steel rods inserted into his arms and wear iron decorations weighing 2 cwt. He has an iron machine, with which he is going to make himself 50 Negresses and he will always remain 42 years old; he will marry a 16-year-old countess with a dowry of 600 million marks, who has received the rose of chastity from the Pope. He has horses who eat no oats and a hundred golden castles with swans and with whales made of bullet-proof armour. He is a great inventor and has built a castle costing 100 million marks for the Kaiser, with whom he is on Christian name terms. He has received 124 decorations from the Grand-duke and gives every beggar in the country half a million marks. At the same time, he has delusions of persecution. There have been five attempts on his life and every night two buckets of blood are drawn from his buttocks, which is why he is going to behead the attendants and have them torn to pieces by dogs; he is also constructing a steam-guillotine." In his case, everything is much cruder and more obvious. His concern is with growth, the naked process itself, measured by the 32 stone he is going to weigh; with strength: he has steel rods inserted in his arms; with distinction: he is able to wear insignia weighing 2 cwt., made of the heaviest and most durable metal; and finally with potency and the ability to arrest time: to his 50 Negresses he will always remain 42 years old and only the youngest, richest, and most virtuous bride is good enough for him. Oats are too commonplace for his horses; the swans in his 100 golden castles are probably women as well, and provide him with a contrast to his Negresses. He has whales, as the largest of all creatures. He also wants to be invulnerable: as well as the mention of bullet-proof armour in connection with the whales, there is much talk of metals. The 100 million marks he controls is the cost of the castle he gives the Kaiser. In virtue of these millions, he is on Christian name terms with him. There are millions of poor beggars. These, as it were, are only half-men and this is probably why he gives them half a million each. In his exalted position, he naturally has enemies, but one attempt on his life is not sufficient for so important a person. The attendants who draw his blood do so from behind to show their inferiority, and he has the right to behead them for their misdeeds and have them torn to pieces by dogs. But this is a slow, old-fashioned method, so he constructs a steam-guillotine for mass executions.

The more expensive a thing is, the higher the price demanded for it, and the more talk of thousands there is in connection with it, the more it attracts him. Money regains its original crowd characteristics, increasing compulsively by leaps and bounds until the figures run into millions, from which point onwards it is these millions that play the decisive role. The concept is ambiguous, referring to men as well as to units of money, and it is clear that, in this case, money has taken over from the human crowd that urge to increase which is its most important attribute.

A great man is one who disposes of millions. Acquisition and squandering are, as we have seen already, two aspects of a single movement; buying and giving away, like everything else this man does, are means to his own expansion. His concern here is with what one might call lateral growth, as compared with the preoccupation with height we spoke of earlier. He makes no distinction between buying and giving away. With his millions, he engulfs objects and makes them his; with both money and objects, he engulfs men, that is, wins them over.

We find here in a naive and therefore particularly convincing form that munificence which we know from fairy tales and history to be one of the ancient, traditional attributes of kingship: there is an account of a West African Negro King who, while on pilgrimage to Mecca, bought up the whole city of Cairo, an exploit which has never been forgotten. Ostentatious buying is still widespread today, and ostentatious spending equally so. The least resented manifestation of greatness in our own barely acknowledged money-kings is their gigantic public gifts: the madman scatters castles worth 100 million marks and finds a willing recipient in the Kaiser.

His notions of greatness change continually, but one does not get the impression that he changes with them. He 'always remains himself, even when his weight reaches 32 stone, or he marries his chaste countess, or addresses the Kaiser by his Christian name. On the contrary, everything which reaches him from outside is turned to his own purposes. He is the fixed and stable centre of the universe. He conquers it in that he eats and grows, but he always remains the same person. He feeds on the proliferation of his delusions and their variety is certainly important to him (for he wants to grow in every conceivable way), but it is deceptive, being basically only a variety of diet, which proves the omnivorousness of his appetite. The multiplicity of his ideas of greatness is only possible because no one need be persisted in; each is fulfilled as soon as it comes into his head and can thus be discarded for another. Why is it, however, that he never envisages any opposition to his ideas? A word has only to be mentioned for him to believe that all the potentialities of power, riches and personal aggrandizement it contains are actual and within his grasp. The belief seems to be connected with the feeling that the crowd is always on his side. In each of its manifestations, whether as the 600 million marks of his bride's dowry, the hundred golden castles or the fifty Negresses he makes with his machine, the crowd is for him. Even when he is annoyed about something, for instance, the attendants in the clinic, he can immediately summon up a pack of dogs, who, at his command, fall on them and tear them to pieces. As soon as the idea of executions comes into his head, he invents a steam-guillotine which deals with them wholesale. The crowd is always with him and never against him. The only hostile crowd we hear of consists of severed heads.

We saw in the earlier case how all the patient's projects were ready to flourish for him, particularly those connected with agriculture. Birds of all kinds were only waiting to increase and multiply for his sake, and when he suddenly wanted to do something for the library of the institution, he immediately found a thousand books ready to hand. With both patients, whether they were buying or giving away, all kinds of thousands and millions stood ready at their disposal.

It is important to stress the active and friendly role assumed by the crowd in the delusions of the general paralytic. It never opposes him, but provides the willing material for his plans, realizing for him every desire that comes into his head. He can never desire too much, for the crowd's capacity for growth is as limitless as his own. No ruler has ever had subjects so loyal and so compliant.

With paranoiacs, as we shall see, the crowd is quite different and is positively hostile. The greatness they imagine is always under attack, and their notions also tend to become more and more rigid. When the hostile crowd gets the upper hand, these turn into delusions of persecution.

Summarizing what we have learned from megalomania in paralytics, we can say that their notions of greatness center on growth, either continuous or repeatedly starting afresh; this growth is of two kinds. On the one hand, there is the growth of the individual who wants his body to become bigger and heavier, cannot accept the fact that he has reached his physical limit, and also wants every particular kind of strength with which he is endowed to grow as well. On the other hand, there is the growth of crowds, to which anything may belong that has a compulsive tendency to increase in numbers until the fabled million is reached. Coming or going, these millions flow through the hands of the "great man"; it is him they obey. The greatness of which men dream contains both individual biological growth and the compulsive increase which characterizes crowds. The kind of crowd is not specified, for its composition does not really matter; any crowd serves the purpose.

RULERS AND PARANOIACS
African Kings

In the African Kings who are the subjects of this chapter, we see in combination many of the aspects and elements of power which we have so far discussed separately. Everything about these Kings seems so strange and unfamiliar that one is at first tempted to dismiss them as exotic curiosities, or, if one lingers over accounts of them such as those which follow, to give way to a feeling of superiority. But one is well advised to show a little patience and humility and wait until one knows more about them. It is not for a European of the 20th century to regard himself as above savagery. His despots may use more effective means, but their ends often differ in nothing from those of these African Kings. The following is the description given by Du Chaillu of the death of an old king in Gaboon and the election of his successor.

"While I was in Gaboon, King Glass died. The tribe had grown tired of their King. They thought, indeed, that he was a most potent and evil-disposed wizard, and, though the matter was not openly talked about, there were few natives who would pass his house after night. When he became ill at last, everyone seemed very sorry; but several of my friends told me in confidence that the whole town hoped he would die; and die he did. I was awakened one morning early by mournful cries and wails. All the town seemed lost in tears; the mourning and wailing lasted six days. On the second, the old King was secretly buried by a few of the most trustworthy men of the tribe in a spot which they only knew of, and which is forever hidden from all others.

During the days of mourning, the old men of the village busied themselves in choosing a new King. This also is a secret operation. The choice is made in private, and communicated to the populace only on the seventh day, when the new King is to be crowned. But the King himself is kept ignorant of his good fortune to the last.

'Tt happened that Njogoni, a good friend of my own, was elected. The choice fell on him, in part because he came of a good family, but chiefly because he was a favourite of the people and could get the most votes. I do not think that Njogoni had the slightest suspicion of his elevation. As he was walking on the shore on the morning of the seventh day, he was suddenly set upon by the entire populace, who proceeded to a ceremony which is preliminary to the crowning, and which must deter any but the most ambitious men from aspiring to the crown.

They surrounded him in a dense crowd and then began to heap upon him every manner of abuse that the worst of mobs could imagine. Some spat in his face; some beat him with their fists; some kicked him; others threw disgusting objects at him; while those unlucky ones who stood on the outside, and could reach the poor fellow only with their voices, assiduously cursed him, his father, his mother, his sisters and brothers, and all his ancestors to the remotest generation. A stranger would not have given a cent for the life of him who was presently to be crowned.

'Amid all the noise and struggle, I caught the words which explained all this to me; for every few minutes some fellow, administering an especially severe blow or kick, would shout out, 'You are not our King yet; for a little while we will do what we please with you. By-and-by we shall have to do your will.'

Njogoni bore himself like a man and a prospective King. He kept his temper and took all the abuse with a smiling face. When it had lasted about half an hour, they took him to the house of the old king. Here he was seated, and became again for a little while the victim of his people's curses.

'Then all became silent; and the elders of the people rose and said, solemnly (the people repeating after them), 'Now we choose you for our king; we engage to listen to you and to obey you.'

A silence followed, and presently the silk hat, which is the emblem of royalty, was brought in and placed on Njogoni's head. He was then dressed in a red gown and received the greatest marks of respect from all who had just now abused him.

'Now followed a six days' festival. during which the new king, who had taken with the office also the name of his predecessor, was obliged to receive his subjects in his own house, and was not allowed to stir out; six days of indescribable gorging of food and bad rum—of beastly drunkenness and uproarious festivity. 

Numbers of strangers came in from surrounding villages to pay their respects; and all brought more rum, more palm wine, and more food. Everything that tended toward festivity was given away, and all who came were welcome. “Old King Glass, for whom for six days no end of tears had been shed, was now forgotten; and new King Glass, poor fellow, was sick with exhaustion, for day and night he had to be ready to receive and be civil to all who came. RULERS AND PARANOIACS 413

"Finally, all the rum was drunk up, the allotted days were expired, and quiet once more began to reign. Now, for the first time, his new majesty was permitted to walk out and view his domains."

The sequence of crowd events is particularly important here. The whole thing begins with the lamenting pack, mourning the dead king. This lasts for six days. Then, on the seventh day, quite suddenly, comes the assault on the man selected as the new king. The hostility aroused by the dead king is only let loose on his successor. The baiting crowd which forms round the latter is also a reversal crowd; but it is directed, not against him, but against the dead king; it is the people freeing themselves from their hatred for the man who ruled too long and whom they came in the end only to fear.

The new régime starts with the situation which every ruler fears most: that of being surrounded by rebellious subjects closing in on him. But, in spite of this, Njogoni remains calm, for he knows that it is all transferred hostility; in as far as it is directed against his own person, it is only acted. The painful beginning of his rule will nevertheless stick in his memory as an intimation of what may at any time actually happen to him.

The king here takes up his office in the middle of a revolution, but it is a posthumous revolution, directed against a king who is already dead and not, as appears, against his successor.

The third crucial event is the feast, which, like the mourning, lasts for six days. The distribution and uninhibited general enjoyment of food and drink expresses the increase the new ruler is expected to bring about. If now, at the start of his reign, his land flows with rum and palm wine, so, too, it shall later; then as now, everyoneshall have more to eat than he needs. It is in order to achieve such increase that the new king is installed.

The feast crowd as the start of a new reign guarantees future increase, Du Chaillu's report is a hundred years old. It has the merit of describ- ing things from outside without too much confusing detail, but, since we now know much more about African kings, it may be useful to look at one of the more recent accounts as well.

The king of Jukun in Nigeria was regarded as a divine being and his whole life was bounded by strictly observed limitations. It was not his task to lead his people in battle nor to distinguish himself by administer- ing his country wisely. He was not expected to be a great personality, but was regarded rather as a living reservoir of those forces which make the earth fertile and seed flourish and thus bring life and well- being to men. The conservation of these forces was ensured by cere- monies determining the course of the king's days and years. 414 CROWDS AND POWER

The king rarely appeared in public. His naked foot must never touch the ground, for, if it did, the crops would be blasted; he was also for- bidden to pick up anything from the ground. If he fell off his horse he was, in earlier times, promptly put to death. 

It might never be said that he was ill; if he did contract any serious illness, he was quietly strangled on the grounds that “it would cause confusion among the people if the groans of the king in illness were overheard”. Sneezing was permissible: when the king sneezed, all present slapped their thighs respectfully. It was not proper to refer to his body or to imply that he had an ordinary human body at all. A special word was used instead, signifying the kingly personality. The same word was used for any action of his. Its real meaning was a royal fiat or word issuing from the king’s mouth.

When he was about to take his meal, special officials uttered loud shouts, while others slapped their thighs twelve times. There had to be complete silence throughout the royal enclosure, and, indeed, throughout the whole town; all conversation stopped and all domestic work. The king’s food was considered sacred and was set before him with elaborate ceremony, as before a divinity. When he had finished, fresh shouts and thigh-slappings, taken up by officials in the outer court, announced that work and conversation were permitted again.

It was disastrous for the king to fly into a rage, point his finger at a man, or strike the ground in wrath. If he did, the whole land would be affected by blight, and so all possible means had to be used to calm him in time. His spittle was sacred, and he himself preserved his hair and nail-clippings in a bag which was buried with him when he died.

Referring to his powers of fertility, he was solemnly addressed as “Our guinea-corn! Our ground-nuts! Our beans!” He was believed to be able to control the rain and the winds. A succession of droughts and bad harvests indicated the waning of his strength, and he was secretly strangled by night.

A newly elected king was made to run three times round a mound and, while doing so, was well buffeted by the dignitaries. On a later occasion, he had to kill a slave, or sometimes only to wound him, in which case someone else would kill the man with the king’s spear and knife.

At his coronation, the leader of the royal clan would say to him, “Today we have given you the house of your father. The whole world is yours. You are our guinea-corn and our beans, our spirits and our gods. Henceforth you have no father or mother. But you are the father and mother of all. Follow in the footsteps of your forefathers and do no evil to no-one, that your people may abide with you and that you may come to the end of your reign in health.”

All then fell down before the new king and threw dust on their heads, saying, “Our crops, our rain, our health, and our wealth.” The king had absolute power, but there were safeguards against excessive tyranny. He was compelled to consider the advice of his counsellors, a patrician caste headed by the Abo, or permanent prime minister. If the ruler’s excesses threatened to harm the country, or if bad harvests or any other national calamity occurred, it was always possible to discover some breach of taboo committed in the course of his innumerable ritual duties and thus check his presumption.

The Abo always had access to the king; he could admonish him and was in a position to embarrass him considerably if he chose to absent himself from the court for any longer period. The king did not usually accompany warlike expeditions, but all spoils were theoretically his property. In practice, however, he returned half or a third of any spoils to the man who had obtained them, as a mark of esteem and an expression of his hope that the latter would acquit himself equally well on future occasions. 

If a king proved his worth, he would, in earlier times, rule for seven years and then be killed at the harvest festival. In his History of Africa, the first serious undertaking of this kind, Westermann speaks of "the amazing similarity of structure and institutions among these kingdoms" and lists the features which they have in common. I propose to cite the most important of these, reduced to their bare essentials, and to try to interpret them in the light of the general conclusions we have reached in this book.

"The king possesses powers which give fertility to the soil; whether the crops thrive depends on him. He is also often the rain-maker." Here the king appears as the increaser; this is his cardinal quality. Indeed, one might say that it was for the sake of this quality that the institution of kingship was evolved. Commands of all kinds issue from the king, but the most characteristic is this enforcing of growth. "You are the father and mother of all" say the people of Jukun, and this does not only mean that he feeds them all, but also that it is he who makes them and everything else grow. Here his power is that of the increase pack. The whole purpose and substance of that composite entity is transferred to a single individual, who just because he is single, can ensure continuity in a way that the pack cannot; being made up of many individuals, it must frequently disperse. The king is a living vessel, containing within himself all the forces of increase. It is his sacred duty not to allow them to escape.

It is in virtue of this that he also has the following characteristics. "In order to preserve his powers of inducing growth and to keep him from harm his person is hedged in by a great number of regulations and taboos, which sometimes render him virtually incapable of action." The preciousness of the king's person is actually the preciousness of what he contains, and it is this which leads to his immobility. He is a vessel which is very full, from which nothing must be spilled.

"He is never visible, or only at certain times. He must never leave his palace enclosure, or only at night or on special occasions. He is never seen to eat or drink." His isolation protects him from anything which might harm him. The rarity of his appearances means that he only exists for very special purposes. Eating and drinking may be thought unsuitable because they lessen what he is supposed to increase: he should be able to live by the forces within him alone.

The crucial thing about the king is his uniqueness: a people which may have many gods has only one king. As we have seen, it is important that he should be isolated. An artificial distance is created between him and his subjects and is maintained by all possible means. He shows himself rarely, or not at all, or in some sort of disguise which conceals his person either wholly or to a large extent. His preciousness is stressed in every possible way, first by covering or surrounding him with precious things and then by the rarity of his appearances. He is protected by a guard blindly devoted to him and also by ever wider spaces. The enlargement of the royal enclosure and the construction of bigger rooms within it serve to establish distance as well as to protect him. Uniqueness, isolation, distance, and preciousness thus form an important group of attributes which can be recognized at sight.

"Physical manifestations, such as conghing, sneezing, or blowing the nose, are imitated or applauded." 

"Whatever good or bad traits a king of Monomotapa possessed, whatever his vices, virtues, faults or bodily defects, his companions and servants were at pains to imitate them; if the king was lame, his companions limped. We know from Strabo and Diodorus that if one of the ancient kings of Ethiopia were maimed in any part of his body, all his courtiers had to suffer the same mutilation. An Arab traveler who visited the court of Darfur at the beginning of the last century reported the courtiers' duties as follows: when the Sultan coughs as though about to speak, everyone makes the sound 'ts, ts', as nurses do to quiet little children; when he sneezes, the whole assembly imitates the cry of the gecko, which resembles that of a man urging on his horse. If the Sultan happens to fall off his horse while riding, all his followers must do likewise. Anyone who remains in his saddle is laid on the ground and beaten, however high his rank. At the court of Uganda, if the king laughed, everyone laughed; if he sneezed, everyone sneezed; if he had a cold, everyone else said he had one; if he had his hair cut, so did they. This imitation of the king is not confined to Africa.

"At the court of Boni in Celebes it is a rule that whatever the king does, all the courtiers must do too; if he stands, they must stand; if he sits, they sit; if he falls off his horse, they must fall off likewise; if he bathes, they bathe and passers-by as well must enter the water in whatever clothes, good or bad, they happen to be wearing." In China, as was reported by a French missionary, "when the emperor laughs, the mandarins in attendance laugh too; when he stops laughing, they stop. When he is sad, their faces fall. One would think that their faces were on springs which the emperor could touch and set in motion at his pleasure." This taking the king as a model is universal. Sometimes it results only in admiration and veneration: nothing he does is unimportant or meaningless. But sometimes it goes further than this and people regard his every movement and utterance as a command: for him to sneeze means "Sneeze!"'; for him to fall off his horse means "Fall off your horses!'. He is so full of the force of command that everything he does must be an expression of it. Abandoning words, commands become actions again; in this case actions compelling imitation. In addition, since the whole purpose of his existence is increase, his own movements and physical peculiarities will tend to undergo the same process of multiplication. One might say that when his courtiers imitate him, they become a kind of increase pack. Even if they do not feel themselves to be one, they certainly behave like one. Everyone does the same thing, namely what the king does first. The court which had become a crowd crystal returns to its origin, which is an increase pack. Acclamation and applause can also be regarded as expressions of the will to increase. The movements and utterances which are taken as models are, as it were, strengthened by applause and the likelihood of their repetition thus enhanced. Few can withstand the compulsion of a thousand hands clapping in concert; an action which is applauded is bound to be repeated.

"If the king begins to age, his magical strength is threatened; it may grow weaker, or disappear, or evil powers may turn it into its opposite. Therefore, the ageing king's life must be taken and his magical strength transferred to his successor.' The king's person is of importance only so long as it is undamaged: only as an intact vessel is it capable of containing the forces of increase." The smallest defect renders the king suspect to his subjects, for it means he may lose some of the substance entrusted to him and so endanger the welfare of his people. The constitution of these kingdoms is the physical constitution of the king himself. He is sworn in on condition, as it were, of his strength and health. A king who shows grey hairs, whose eyesight deteriorates, who loses his teeth, or becomes impotent, is killed, or must commit suicide; he takes poison or is strangled. These are the usual forms of death, for the shedding of his blood is forbidden. Sometimes the length of his reign is fixed from the start: the kings of Jukun, as we saw, originally ruled for seven years. Among the Bambara the newly elected king traditionally determined the length of his own reign. “A strip of cotton was put round his neck and two men pulled the ends in opposite directions whilst he himself took out of a calabash as many pebbles as he could grasp in his hand. These indicated the number of years he would reign, on the expiration of which he would be strangled.” But the artificial shortening of the king’s life serves a second purpose as well as the safe-guarding of his precious increase-substance. By it his passion for survival, which might otherwise grow to dangerous proportions during the course of his reign, is blunted and checked from the very start. The king knows when he will die, and this is sooner than many of his subjects. He has the moment of his death always clearly in sight and in this respect must feel substantially inferior to those he rules. He makes a kind of pact with them. He is a ruler who, in accepting office, renounces the despot’s claim to survive at all costs. The dignity he succeeds to is truly a burden. He declares his readiness to surrender his life after the lapse of a certain period of time. The insults and blows he is subjected to before entering on his office are an intimation of what awaits him in the end. As he submits to them, so he will submit to his ultimate fate. His death is anticipated. Either by threatening him with it as a recurring possibility or by regarding it as something virtually pre-determined, the baiting crowd which forms round him makes it painfully clear to him that it is not for his own sake that he will rule. Prospective kings of the Yoruba were said to have been beaten first and anyone who did not endure the pain calmly was rejected. It might happen that the choice had fallen on one of the poorer princes who was quietly pursuing his own life and had no designs at all on the throne. He would be ordered to appear and then, to his amazement, would be brutally maltreated. His counterpart in Sierra Leone would be loaded with chains and well thrashed before being proclaimed king. The reader will remember Du Chaillu’s description of a royal election in Gaboon. Between the death of a king and the installation of a new one, a period of lawlessness intervened. This, as we saw, found meaningful expression in the maltreatment of the king-elect. But the same lawlessness might also be turned against the weak and helpless. Among the Mosi of Wagadugu, all criminals were released from prison after the death of a king. Murder and robbery and every kind of license were allowed. In Ashanti, it was the members of the royal clan who profited from the period of anarchy; they were permitted to kill and rob any commoner. In Uganda, the death of the king was at first kept secret. Then, after perhaps two days, the sacred fire burning at the entrance to the royal enclosure was extinguished and a great wailing began. The drums beat the death rhythm, so that the people knew what had happened. But no-one was allowed to speak of death; what they said was, “the fire is extinguished”. A wild period of anarchy followed. Everyone tried to rob everyone else, and only chiefs with a strong band of followers were able to feel safe. Lesser chiefs were in danger of being killed by the stronger ones, who did as they pleased during the short interregnum. In such circumstances, it was obviously the weak and helpless who suffered most. Order returned with the new king; he actually embodied it in his own person.

The succession was not always clearly settled, and even when it was, people only recognized it when forced to do so. A peculiar concept of succession existed in the Hima states. This has been lucidly expounded by Oberg in his excellent study of the kingdom of Ankole. The king had to take poison as soon as his wives and followers saw signs of weakness in him. Very great stress was laid on his strength, and this also determined the choice of his successor. To the ruling Hima minority, it was a matter of considerable importance that the strongest of the king’s many sons should succeed him. The test of strength could only be fighting. A war of succession was thus inevitable, but the kingdom could not remain without a king while it took place.

Therefore, after the mourning ceremonies for the dead ruler, a mock battle took place in his kraal between common herdsmen, the winner of which was declared the mock king. The legitimate royal brothers watched this battle, and after it had been decided, each gathered his own followers together and went to look for the royal drums. If one met another on the way, they fought and each tried to kill each other.

“If one brother had fewer followers than the other, he generally got killed or fled to another country. On the other hand, strategy often made up for lack of followers. The brothers spied upon one another in order to creep up during the night and get the other unawares. They put poison into the other’s food or stabbed him in his sleep. Magic and the help of foreign allies were both resorted to. Each son was aided by his mother and his sister, who practised magic against his enemies and protected him from the spirits of his slain enemies.”

The old king’s favorite son, his own choice as his successor, remained in hiding during the fight. The war of succession might last for several months, during which period the whole country was in a state of chaos.

“Every man resorted to his kinsmen for protection. It is said that there was much cattle stealing and people who had a grievance took advantage of the chaotic condition of the country to take revenge upon their enemies. But the great chiefs who guarded the borders of Ankole did not take part in the accession war. They endeavoured to keep as much internal order as possible and to guard the country from foreign invaders.”

One by one, the princes were either killed or driven into exile until only one remained. The hidden son, the late king’s favorite, then came out of his hiding-place and fought with the victor among his brothers for the possession of the royal drums. He did not always win, but he usually had the most powerful magicians on his side and a large following.

When all his brothers were dead, the survivor, with the royal drums and his mother and sister, returned to the royal kraal. The mock king was killed, and the victorious brother was proclaimed as the new king. All his rivals had been exterminated. The survivor, as victor, was considered to be the strongest and was acclaimed by everyone. It can be assumed that in the other Hima states, where wars of succession were also the rule, the same principle lay at their roots. The survivor as their king; the fact that he had killed so many enemies endowed him in their eyes with the power they wanted him to possess. But the actual contest for the succession was not the only means of imbuing the new king with the strength of a survivor. In the kingdom of Kitara on the northern borders of Ankole, the fight for the succession was recapitulated in an amazing rite which formed part of the coronation ceremonies of the new king. The last time it was performed was at the accession of King Kabarega in 1871.

The following is a description of what happened then. Among the princes, there were always some who were boys too young to take part in the fighting. Thus, they were still alive when their elder brothers, apart from the victor, had exterminated each other. One of these younger brothers was taken aside by the chief who was acting as a kind of regent and told that he had been chosen king. All the chiefs who were there assented. The boy, however, knew what was intended and said, “Do not try to deceive me. I am not king, and you only want to kill me.” But he had to submit and was placed on the throne. The chiefs came, brought him presents, and did homage to him. With them came Kabarega, the victor, whose coronation it really was. He was dressed as a simple prince and brought a cow with him as his present. The regent asked him, “where is my cow?”, to which Kabarega replied, “I have brought it to the lawful person, the king.” The regent appeared to take this as an insult to himself and struck Kabarega on the arm with a cord, whereupon the latter went away wrathfully, collected his warriors, and then returned. When the regent saw them coming, he said to the boy on the throne, “Kabarega has come to fight.” At this, the boy wanted to run away, but the regent caught hold of him, took him to the back of the throne-room, and strangled him. He was buried in the building.

The quarrel between the regent and the new ruler was feigned. The boy king's fate was pre-determined: a boy king was always chosen during the coronation ceremonies and killed "that death might be deceived". The war had been fought and decided; his rivals were all dead, yet even during his coronation, the new king had to survive a brother, and the victim was buried in the innermost room of the royal enclosure, where the throne and the royal drums were.

In this same kingdom of Kitara, the royal bow possessed symbolic significance; it had to be re-strung at each coronation. A man was chosen to supply the sinews for this from his own body. He regarded it as an honour and himself directed the removal of the sinews from his right side; it was said that he always died soon after the operation. The newly strung bow was handed to the king with four arrows, which he then shot, one to each of the four quarters of the earth, saying, “I shoot the nations to overcome them,” and adding, as he shot each arrow, the names of the nations who lived in that direction. The arrows were searched for, brought back, and kept to be used again. At the beginning of every year, the king repeated this “shooting of the nations.” The most powerful of the neighbouring kingdoms, and always at war with Kitara, was Uganda. There, when the king came to the throne, it was said that he had "eaten Uganda" or had "eaten the drums." Possession of the drums was the sign of office and authority. There were royal drums and chiefs' drums, and each office could be recognized by the beat of its drums. During the coronation ceremonies, the king said, "I am the king of Uganda. I am the king to live longer than my ancestors, to rule the nations and put down rebellion."

The new king's first duty was mourning for his predecessor. At the end of the mourning period, he had the drums beaten, and the next day a hunt took place. A gazelle was brought and set free, which the king had to pursue. Then two men were caught, casual passers-by on the road; one of them was strangled, and the other granted his life.

The same evening, the king mounted the old royal stool, and a high dignitary administered the oath to him. Two strong men then carried him on their shoulders through the whole enclosure for the people to pay homage to him.

Then two blindfolded men were brought before the king. One of them he wounded slightly with an arrow and sent as a kind of scapegoat to the enemy of Kitara. The other man was set free and appointed overseer to the king's inner court and guardian of his wives. Together with eight prisoners, the new overseer was led to a place of sacrifice. Here he was blindfolded again, and seven of the prisoners were killed with clubs in his presence; he was allowed to watch the death of the eighth. These deaths were supposed to give strength to the king; they certainly gave strength and loyalty to the overseer.

When the king had ruled for two or three years, two men were again brought before him; one of these he wounded, and the other was granted his life. The wounded one was killed outside the main entrance to the enclosure; the other was appointed assistant to the overseer, and his first duty was to take the corpse of the man who had been killed and throw it into the nearest river.

These two men were also killed to strengthen the king. There was killing to show that he had entered on his reign, and repeatedly, there was fresh killing so that, again and again, he might be a survivor. It was the actual process of survival that gave him power.

Striking here, and perhaps peculiar to Uganda, is the presentation of victims in pairs, one of whom dies while the other is granted his life. The king exercises his two rights simultaneously. He draws strength from the death of the one man, but he also profits by his pardoning of the other. For this man is a witness of his companion's fate; he himself is strengthened by being a survivor and, as one chosen for mercy, becomes all the more faithful a servant of the king.

After all this, it is surprising that a king of Uganda should ever have died. There were many of these occasions on which lives were sacrificed to him. The idea that the king could increase in power through survival led to the introduction of regular human sacrifices. But these were a religious institution, independent of the private appetites of this or that king. Each would have his own moods and whims, and it was part of his nature that these should be dangerous. One of the main attributes of an African king was his absolute power over life and death. The terror that he spread was tremendous. "You are now Ata, you have power over life and death. Kill everyone who says he does not fear you": thus the formula of investiture of the king of Igara. He killed as he pleased and gave no reason. His wish was sufficient; he did not have to account for it. In many cases, he was not allowed to shed blood himself, but the executioner who did it for him was the one indispensable official of his court. Whether the man who started by occupying that office ultimately became Prime Minister, as in Dahomey, or whether there were hundreds of executioners who formed a kind of caste, as in Ashanti; whether executions were frequent or were limited to occasional cases, the pronouncement of death sentences was always the undisputed right of the king. If he let any considerable time pass without exercising it, the terror essential to his power was lost; he was no longer feared, but was held in contempt.

The king was regarded as a lion or a leopard, whether because the animal was thought to be his ancestor, or simply that he shared its qualities without being directly descended from it. His lion- or leopard-nature meant that he, like these animals, had to kill. It was right and proper for him to kill, to spread terror as these animals did; his propensity for killing was inborn.

The king of Uganda ate alone and no one was allowed to see him eat. One of his wives had to hand him his food and then turn her back while he ate. "The lion eats alone," it was said. If the food was not to his liking, or was not brought quickly enough, he would call for the offender and spear him to death. If the wife who was waiting on him coughed during his meal, she, too, was killed. He had two spears always at hand. If someone happened to enter and surprise the king eating, he was transfixed on the spot. Then the people said, "When the lion was eating, he killed so-and-so." No human being was permitted to touch any food left by the king. It was given to his favorite dogs.

The king of Kitara was fed by his cook. The cook brought the meal, stuck a fork into a piece of meat, and put it into the king's mouth. He did this four times, and if he accidentally touched the king's teeth with the fork, he was put to death. Every morning, after the milking of the cows, the king of Kitara sat on the throne and heard the cases which were brought before him. If there was talking when he was in court and required silence, he took his two-edged sword, which was always carried by a page in attendance on him. The page wore a lion skin over his right shoulder, the head hanging down in front and concealing the sword. When the king wanted it, he simply held out his hand, the page put the sword into it, and the king then struck down someone in the court. There were also other occasions on which he executed summary justice. When he walked within the royal enclosure, he was always accompanied by the page carrying the sword, and if anything displeased him, he held out his hand, the sword was put into it, and he struck the offender down on the spot. All his commands had to be obeyed absolutely; to disregard any of them meant death.

Here the command manifests itself in its oldest and purest form, as the death sentence with which the lion threatens all weaker animals. If these were enemies, they had, as it were, to be permanently in flight before the king; if subjects, they were forced to serve him. He ordered his people about as he liked, and as long as they obeyed him, granted them their lives. But essentially, he was always a lion; when he wanted to, he struck.

A Sultan of Delhi: Muhammad Tughlak Tuanxs To a fortunate chance, we have a picture of this Sultan far clearer and more detailed than those we have of most oriental rulers. Ibn Battuta, a famous Arab traveler who visited the entire Islamic world of his time from Morocco to China, spent seven years at the court of Sultan Muhammad Tughlak and wrote a vivid description of his experiences. He initially enjoyed the Sultan's favor, but later fell into disgrace and experienced the fear of the Sultan's wrath. Ibn Battuta's account provides a unique perspective on the two faces of power, encompassing both its generosity and its murderousness.

The account is supported by a second, independent source, written by Ziau-d din Barani, a high official who lived at the Sultan's court for over seventeen years. This work contains three conversations with the Sultan, revealing his thoughts on government and his subjects.

Sultan Muhammad Tughlak was a highly cultured prince, adept in Arabic and Persian, calligraphy, and the use of metaphors. He was well-versed in Persian poetry and had a thorough knowledge of Persian literature. He was also interested in mathematics, physics, logic, and Greek philosophy. The Sultan was pious, adhered strictly to the precepts of his religion, and expected his courtiers to respect the times for prayer.

He valued justice and had a strong sense of morality. His courage and initiative in war were well-known. The complexity of his nature is evident in the contrasting traits that made him both admirable and incomprehensible to his contemporaries.

The court of this just and highly accomplished prince was accessed through three doors, with guards and musicians outside the first door. When an amir or any other person of note arrived, the musicians would sound their instruments and declare, "So-and-so has come. So-and-so has come." Outside the door, there were platforms where the executioners sat. When the Sultan ordered a man to be executed, the sentence was carried out there, and the body was left lying for three days and nights. There were always heaps and mounds of corpses, as the sweepers and executioners were worn out with the heavy and endless labor.

Between the second and third door, there was a large audience hall for the general public. Outside the third door, there were platforms where "the scribes of the door" sat. No one was allowed to pass this door without special permission from the Sultan. When anyone came, the scribes would write down, "So-and-so came at the first hour," or the second or third, as the case might be. This report was given to the Sultan after the evening prayer.

Anyone who had been absent from the palace for three days or more, without excuse, was not allowed to enter it again without express permission from the Sultan. If the absence was due to illness or another excuse, the person would present the Sultan with a gift suitable to their rank.

Behind the third door was an immense audience hall called "A thousand pillars"; the pillars supported a wooden roof, marvelously carved and painted. The audiences were usually held in the afternoon, but sometimes also in the early morning. The Sultan sat cross-legged on his throne on a dais carpeted in white, with a large cushion behind him and two others as armrests.

The wazir stood in front of him, followed by the secretaries, then the chamberlains and so on, in order of precedence. As the Sultan sat down, the chamberlains and secretaries would say in their loudest voice, "Bismillah!" (In the name of God). A hundred armor-bearers stood on the right, and a like number on the left, carrying shields, swords, and bows. The other functionaries and notables stood along the hall to the right and left, where the Sultan could see them.

Then they would bring in sixty horses with royal halters, half on the right and half on the left, where the Sultan could see them. Next, fifty elephants were brought in, adorned with silken cloths and with their tusks shod with iron for greater efficiency in killing criminals. On each elephant's neck was its mahout, who carried a sort of iron axe to punish and direct the elephant. Each elephant had a large chest on its back, capable of holding twenty warriors, or more or less, according to the size of the beast. These elephants were trained to make obeisance to the Sultan and incline their heads, and when they did, the chamberlains would cry in a loud voice, "Bismillah."

They were arranged half on the right and half on the left behind the persons standing. As each person entered who had an appointed place of standing on the right or left, they would make obeisance on reaching the station of the chamberlains, and the chamberlains would say "Bismillah," regulating the loudness of their utterance by the rank of the person concerned. The person would then retire to their appointed place, beyond which they never passed. If it was one of the infidel Hindus who made obeisance, the chamberlains would say to them, "God guide thee." When the Sultan returns from a journey, the elephants are decorated, and on sixteen of them are placed sixteen parasols, some brocaded and some set with jewels. Wooden pavilions are built several storeys high and covered with silk cloths, and in each storey, there are singing girls wearing magnificent dresses and ornaments, with dancing girls amongst them. In the centre of each pavilion is a large tank made of skins and filled with syrup-water, from which all the people, natives or strangers, may drink, receiving at the same time betel leaves and areca nuts. The space between the pavilions is carpeted with silk cloths, on which the Sultan's horse treads. The walls of the street along which he passes from the gate of the city to the gate of the palace are hung with silk cloths. In front of him march footmen from his own slaves, several thousands in numbers, and behind come the mob and the soldiers. On one of his entries into the capital, I saw three or four small catapults placed on elephants, throwing gold and silver coins amongst the people from the moment he entered the city until he reached the palace.

Muhammad was especially open-handed with foreigners. His intelligence service gave him immediate information about anyone arriving at one of the frontier towns of his empire. His courier service was exemplary; a distance that travellers took fifty days to cover was covered in five by his couriers; every third of a mile, a fresh one took over. It was not only his letters that were carried in this way; special fruits from Khorassan arrived fresh on his table, and state criminals were bound, placed on a stretcher, which the runners carried on their heads and brought to him as quickly as letters and fruit. The reports on foreigners who crossed the frontiers were very minute. With the utmost care, they described each stranger's appearance and dress, the numbers in his party, his slaves, servants, and beasts, his behaviour both in action and while resting, and all his doings, omitting nothing. The Sultan studied these reports carefully.

Every foreigner had to wait in the capital of the frontier province until an order had come from the Sultan respecting his further journey and the degree of honour that was to be afforded him. Each was judged entirely on his behaviour, for nothing could be known of his family or lineage in distant India. Muhammad was particularly interested in foreigners and made a practice of bestowing governorships and high dignitics of state upon them: the majority of his courtiers, palace officials, ministers, and judges were foreigners. By a special decree, they were all given the title of "Honourable"; he paid out large sums for their maintenance and gave them magnificent gifts. They spread the fame of his generosity throughout the world. But even more famous was his severity.

"He punished small faults and great, without respect of persons, whether men of learning, piety or high station. Every day hundreds of people, chained, pinioned, and fettered, are brought to his hall, and those who are for execution are executed, those for torture tortured, and those for beating beaten. It is his custom that every day all persons who are in his prison are brought to his hall, except only on Friday; this is a day of respite for them on which they clean themselves and remain at ease." One of the gravest charges against the Sultan was that he had compelled the inhabitants of Delhi to leave their city. He had, as he thought, good reason for punishing them. They were in the habit of writing letters to him, which they sealed up and addressed "To the Master of the World. None but he may read this," and then threw them into the audience hall at night. When the Sultan broke the seal, he found nothing but insults and abuse. He decided to lay Delhi in ruins. He paid the inhabitants the full value of their houses and dwelling places and ordered them to move to Daulatabad, which he wanted to make his capital. They refused, and a herald was sent to proclaim that no person should remain in the city after three nights. The majority complied with the order, but some hid in the houses. The Sultan ordered a search for any persons remaining in the town, and his slaves found two men, one crippled and the other blind. They were brought before him, and he gave orders that the cripple should be flung from a mangonel and the blind man dragged from Delhi to Daulatabad, a distance of forty days' journey. He fell to pieces on the road, and all that reached Daulatabad was his leg. When the Sultan did this, every person left the town, abandoning furniture and possessions, and the city remained utterly deserted.

A person in whom I have confidence told me that the Sultan mounted one night to the roof of his palace and looked out over Delhi, where there was neither fire nor smoke nor lamp, and said, "Now my mind is tranquil and my wrath appeased." Afterwards, he wrote to the inhabitants of the other cities, commanding them to move to Delhi and repopulate it. The result was only to ruin their cities and leave Delhi still unpopulated, because of its immensity, for it is one of the greatest cities in the world. It was in this state that we found it on our arrival, empty and unpopulated, save for a few inhabitants.

The Sultan's exasperation with his subjects was not the result of having ruled for a long time. (The order to evacuate Delhi was issued in the second year of his reign.) From the very beginning, there was tension between them, and it grew with the passage of time. One can now only guess at the contents of the letters thrown into his audience hall, but there are grounds for believing that they referred to the way in which he had come to the throne. Muhammad's father, Tughlak Shah, lost his life in an accident when he had reigned for only four years, and though none but the initiated few could have known what really happened, suspicion was inevitable.

On his return from an expedition, the old Sultan ordered his son to prepare a pavilion for his reception. It was ready in three days, made, as usual, of wood, but constructed in such a way that a push at a certain point would cause it to collapse instantly. When the Sultan, with his younger and favourite son, was installed in the pavilion, Muhammad asked permission for an elephant parade. This was granted him, and the elephants were then paraded in such a way that, in passing under the wooden structure, they pushed against it at the sensitive spot. The pavilion collapsed and buried the Sultan and his favourite son. Muhammad delayed the rescue operations until it was too late. When the victims were at last found, they were both dead, or rather, as was alleged by some, the Sultan, bent over his son, was still breathing and had, as it were, to be murdered a second time. Muhammad ascended the throne without opposition, but it was not in his power to silence talk. From the very beginning of his reign, he was suspected of being his father's murderer. The Sultanate of Delhi attained its maximum size under Muhammad Tughlak. Over two hundred years passed before—under Akbar—so much of India was again united under one rule. But Muhammad was far from being content with the roughly two dozen provinces ascribed to him. He wanted to bring the whole habitable world under his rule and nursed various ambitious schemes for the realization of this project. None of his friends or advisers were let into the secret of these schemes; he kept them to himself, as he had conceived them by himself. Any idea of his own pleased him. He never doubted himself or his goal; to him, it seemed self-evident, and the means he used to attain it were the only proper ones.

430 CROWDS AND POWER

The most ambitious of his plans of conquest were for an attack on Khorassan and Iraq and another on China. For the former, an army of 370,000 horsemen was collected, and the dignitaries of the threatened cities were bribed with enormous sums. But the attack was never mounted, or came to grief in its initial stages, and the army dispersed. Sums of money which, even for Muhammad, must have been considered enormous, had been entirely wasted. The other plan, the conquest of China, was to be implemented by crossing the Himalayas. 100,000 horsemen were sent into the highest mountains, thence to subdue the whole massif and its savage inhabitants and secure the passes into China. Except for ten men, this whole army perished. The ten who got back to Delhi were executed by the Sultan in his disappointment.

The conquest of the world called for colossal armies, and these in turn called for more and more money. It is true that Muhammad's revenues were immense. The tribute of the subject Hindu kings flowed in from all sides, and from his father, he had inherited, among other things, a reservoir filled with a solid mass of molten gold. But, in spite of all this, he was soon in need of money and typically sought some method of supplying the deficiency at a single stroke. He had heard about the paper money of the Chinese and conceived the idea of doing something similar with copper. He had a large number of copper coins struck, arbitrarily fixed their value at that of silver coins, and ordered them to be used instead of gold and silver. Soon everything was bought and sold for copper.

The result of this edict was that the house of every Hindu became a private mint; in every province, copper coins were made in millions, and with these, people paid their tribute and bought horses and all manner of agreeable things. Princes, village chiefs, and landowners grew rich by means of this copper money, and the state grew poor. Soon the value of the new money fell rapidly. while the old coins, being very rare, came to be worth four or five times their former value. In the end, copper coins were worth no more than pebbles. People held back their goods, and trade came to a standstill.

When the Sultan realized the result of his edict, he revoked it in great anger and ordered all copper to be brought to the treasury, where it would be exchanged for money of the old type. So, from all the corners where it had been thrown in contempt, thousands fetched out their copper and thronged to the treasury, where they were given gold and silver in exchange. Mountains of copper piled up in Tughlakabad; the treasury lost large sums, and the shortage of money grew acute. As soon as the Sultan was able to assess what the copper had cost his treasury, he turned against his subjects even more. Rulers and Paranoiacs

431 Another way of finding money was through taxation. Already, under his predecessors, taxes had been very high, and now they were raised and collected with relentless cruelty. The peasants were impoverished. Any Hindu who owned land left it and fled to the jungle to join the rebels, whether in larger or smaller bands, which were everywhere. The land lay untilled; less and less corn was grown; there was famine in the central provinces, which, after one particularly long drought, spread throughout the empire. It lasted for several years, families were torn apart, whole towns starved, and thousands of people perished. It was possibly this famine that brought about the real change in the fortunes of the empire. Revolts became more frequent, and one province after another broke away from Delhi. Muhammad was continually in the field, crushing rebellion. His cruelty grew. He laid waste to whole regions; the jungles were surrounded, and anyone—man, woman, or child—captured there was slaughtered. The terror he spread was so great that, wherever he appeared, people prostrated themselves—if they had not already fled. But no sooner had he enforced a peace or created a desert than revolt broke out again in another part of the country. Governors of provinces who broke away from him were skinned; the skins were stuffed with straw and the gruesome puppets carried through the countryside to arouse terror. Muhammad felt no remorse for his cruelty; he was firmly convinced that all his measures were justified.

The conversations he had on this subject with Zia Barani, the historian, were so illuminating that they deserved quotation. "You see," said the Sultan to Barani, "how many revolts spring up. I have no pleasure in them, although men will say that they have all been caused by my excessive severity. But I am not to be turned aside from capital punishment by talk, or by revolts. You have read many histories. Have you found that kings inflict capital punishment under certain circumstances?"

Barani quoted in his reply a high Islamic authority who regarded capital punishment as permissible in seven circumstances. Otherwise, it produced disturbances, trouble, and insurrection, and inflicted injury on the country. These seven were: Apostasy from the true religion; wilful murder; adultery of a married man with another man's wife; conspiracy against the king; heading a revolt; joining the enemies of the king and conveying information to them; and disobedience productive of injury to the state, but no other disobedience. The Prophet himself had condemned three of these offenses, namely, apostasy, murder of a Muslim, and adultery with a married woman. Punishment of the other four offenses was more a matter of policy and good government.

But the authorities, said Barani, had also stressed the fact that kings appoint wazirs, advance them to high dignity, and place the management of their kingdoms in their hands in order that they may frame regulations and keep the country in such good order that the king is spared the necessity of staining his hands with human blood.

To this, the Sultan replied, "The punishments which were then prescribed were suited to the early ages of the world, but now there are more turbulent and wicked men. I visit them with chastisement on the suspicion or presumption of their rebellious or treacherous designs, and I punish the most trifling act of contumacy with death. This I will do until I die, or until the people act honestly and give up rebellion and contumacy." I have no such wazir as will make rules to obviate the shedding of blood. I punish the people because they have all at once become my enemies and opponents. I have dispensed great wealth among them, but they have not become friendly and loyal. Their temper is well known to me, and I see that they are disaffected and inimical to me.

In a later conversation, he regretted that he had not killed in time all those who later created so much trouble for him by their rebellions. On another occasion, when he had just lost one of his most important cities—the one to which all the inhabitants of Delhi had been forced to move—he sent for Barani and asked him what remedies former kings had resorted to in such cases: his kingdom was diseased and no treatment cured it.

Barani replied, "Some kings, when they perceived that they did not retain the confidence of their people and had become the objects of general dislike, have abdicated and handed over the government to the most worthy of their sons. Others have taken to hunting, pleasure, and wine, leaving all the business of the state to their wazirs and officers. If the people were satisfied with this and the king was not given to revenge, the disorders of the state could be cured. Of all political ills, the greatest and the most dire is a general feeling of aversion and a want of confidence among all ranks of the people."

But even this courageous and scarcely veiled advice of Barani had no effect on the Sultan. He said, if he could only settle the affairs of his kingdom as he wished, he would consign the government to three men and himself go on pilgrimage to Mecca. "But at present I am angry with my subjects, and they are aggrieved with me. The people are acquainted with my feelings, and I am aware of their misery and wretchedness, but no treatment I employ is of any use. My remedy for rebels, insurgents, opponents, and disaffected people is the sword. I employ punishment and use the sword, so that a cure may be effected by suffering. The more people resist, the more I inflict chastisement."

But the number of rebellions and the general disaffection throughout his empire did have one effect on the Sultan's mind. He began to feel scruples, not about the mounds of corpses before his palace and in all the provinces and cities he visited, but about the legitimacy of his rule. He was, as will be sufficiently clear by now, a pious and moral man and he wanted his position as king sanctioned by the highest spiritual authority of Islam.

In former centuries, the Abbasid Khalifs, whose headquarters were in Bagdad, were regarded as such. But their empire no longer existed: in 1258 Bagdad had been conquered by the Mongols and the last Khalif killed. For Muhammad Tughlak, who ascended the throne in 1325 and whose scruples awoke about 1340 as province after province of his empire began to fall away from him, it was not at all easy to find out where the right of investiture lay.

He had careful enquiries made; all travelers from the western countries of Islam who arrived at his court were diligently interrogated until, finally, he came to the conclusion that the Khalif in Egypt was his "Pope". He entered into negotiations with him, emissaries went to and fro, and his letters to the Khalif contained flatteries so gross that even Barani, who must have been used to a good deal in this way, could not bring himself to repeat them. When the ambassador of the Khalif arrived, Muham-mad, with all his nobles and scholars, went to meet him and walked barefoot before him for a considerable distance. He had his own name removed from the coinage and replaced by that of the Khalif, whom he regarded as the supreme ruler of Islam. The Khalif was named in the Friday prayer, but this was not enough to satisfy Muhammad: the names of all his predecessors who had not received the sanction of the Khalif were removed from the prayer and their authority retrospectively declared invalid. The name of the Khalif was inscribed on lofty buildings and no other name was permitted to stand beside it.

After a correspondence lasting for several years, a solemn document arrived from Egypt in which Muhammad was formally named the Khalif's Vicegerent for India. This document gave Muhammad so much pleasure that he had it skillfully put into verse by his court poets. In every other respect, he remained the same till the end, his severity increasing with his failures. He did not die by the hand of a murderer. After ruling for twenty-six years, he died of a fever caught on a punitive expedition. He is the purest case of a paranoiac ruler.

The way he lived is strange and unfamiliar to a European; everything about him is striking and thus it is easier to see him as a whole; the extraordinary consistency of his nature is patent. His mind was dominated by four kinds of crowds: his army, his treasure, his corpses, and his court (and, with it, his capital). He juggled with them ceaselessly, but only succeeded in increasing one at the expense of another.

He raised enormous armies, but in so doing exhausted his treasury. He banished the entire population of his capital, and suddenly found himself alone in the vast city, his anger appeased as he surveyed the empty metropolis from the roof of his palace. He savored to the full the exultation of the survivor. Whatever he did, there was always one crowd which he managed to preserve. In no circumstances did he ever cease to kill. All his prisoners were brought before him daily: as candidates for execution, they were his most precious possessions.

During the twenty-six years of his reign, famine and plague helping him, the heaps of corpses piled up in every province of his empire. The consequent loss of revenue certainly vexed him, but, so long as the numbers of his victims increased, nothing could seriously shake his self-confidence. In order to maintain the force of his commands—which were nothing but death sentences—at its highest pitch, he sought to have his position confirmed by a higher authority. God, in whom as a pious Mohamedan he believed, was not sufficient for him. He also wanted confirmation from God's legal representative.

Muhammad Tughlak has been defended by modern Indian historians. Power has never lacked eulogists, and historians, who are professionally obsessed with it, can explain anything, either by the times (disguising their adulation as scholarship), or by necessity, which, in their hands, can assume any and every shape. 'We must expect the same thing to happen in the case of rulers who are closer to us than Muhammad Tughlak. It may be useful, therefore, as a preventive measure, to lay bare the inner processes of power, though in a man who, fortunately for the world, only possessed it in his delusions.

The Case of Schreber: There is no richer or more instructive document than the Memoirs of Daniel Paul Schreber, sometime Senatsprasident at the Court of Appeal in Dresden. He was an educated and intelligent man trained by his profession in the precise use of words. He had spent seven years in mental asylums as a paranoiac when he decided to write down in full detail what the world must call his delusional system. His Memoirs of a Nervous Illness became a whole book. He was so firmly convinced of the truth and importance of his self-created religion that, after he had been released from the asylum, he had the book published. The language at his command might have been made for the description of this singular intellectual structure, enabling him to grasp just enough of his experience for nothing essential to remain obscure. He pleads for his case, but is fortunately no poet, so that one can follow his thoughts without being seduced by them.

I want to consider some of the most striking characteristics of his system, so far as it is possible to do so in a limited space. I believe that this will enable us to come very close to an understanding of paranoia. If others who study the Memoirs should arrive at different conclusions this may simply be a proof of the richness of the material.

The magnitude of the claim Schreber puts forward is most obvious when he appears to limit it. “After all,” he says, almost at the beginning. “I too am only a human being and therefore bound by the limits of human understanding. But on one point he has no doubts at all, namely that he has come infinitely closer to the truth than any other human beings. Thence he immediately passes on to eternity. The thought of it permeates his whole book; it means far more to him than to ordinary men. He feels at home in eternity and regards it not only as something which belongs to him by right, but as something which is part of him. He reckons in enormous spaces of time; his experiences stretch over centuries. It seemed to him “as though single nights had the duration of centuries, so that within that time there could very well have come about the most fundamental changes in the whole of mankind, in the earth itself and in the entire solar system.”

He is as much at home in universal space as he is in eternity. Certain constellations and individual stars, such as Cassiopeia, Vega, Capella and the Pleiades, are especially close to him; he speaks of them as though they were bus-stops just round the corner. But he is well aware of their real distance from the earth; he has some knowledge of astronomy and does not reduce the size of the universe. On the contrary, it is because they are so distant that the celestial bodies attract him. The immensity of space draws him, he wants himself to be as wide as space, so that he can extend all over it. One feels that it is not the process of growth which matters to him so much as the actual extension. He needs space in order to establish a position in it. Position in itself is the important thing, and for him it can never be eternal and lofty enough. To him the supreme principle is “the Order of the Universe”. This he ranks above God and, if God tries to act contrary to it, he runs into difficulties.

Of his own human body Schreber often speaks as though it were a celestial body and, as other people are engrossed with the management of their family, so he with the management of the planetary system. He wants to be part of it and anchored there. The changelessness of the constellations over thousands of years may have been what particularly attracted him to them: a place among them was a place for eternity. This sense of personal place, or position, is of cardinal importance for the paranoiac: there is always an exalted position to defend and make secure. By the very nature of power, the same must be true of the ruler. His sense of his own position is in no way different from that of the paranoiac; he, if he can, surrounds himself with soldiers and shuts himself in fortresses; Schreber, who also feels threatened in many ways, holds fast to the stars. As we shall see, his world is in a state of turmoil. In order to explain the dangers which threaten him, it is necessary to say something about the inhabitants of his world.

According to Schreber, the human soul is contained in the nerves of the body. While man is alive, he is both body and soul, but when he dies, the nerves remain as the soul. God is never body, but only nerve, and kin therefore to the human soul, but immensely superior to it, for the number of God's nerves is infinite and they are eternal. They have the faculty of transforming themselves into rays, the rays of the sun and of the stars, for example.

God has pleasure in the world which he created, but as a rule does not interfere directly in it. After the creation, he withdrew from it and now abides mostly at a distance. God must not come too near men, for the nerves of living human beings have such a power of attraction for him that he would not be able to free himself from them again and so would endanger his own existence. He is thus always on his guard against the living, and if it should happen that a particularly fervent prayer or an inspired poet tempts him to approach too close, he rapidly withdraws again before it is too late.

"Regular contact between God and human souls took place only after death. There was no danger for God in approaching corpses to draw their nerves out of their bodies and up to himself and so awaken them to new heavenly life."

Before human nerves could be raised to a state of blessedness, they had to be "sifted and purified." Only pure human nerves were of use to God, because it was their destiny to be attached to him and ultimately to become part of him as "forecourts of heaven." A complicated process of purification was necessary, which even Schreber could not describe exactly.

Souls completely cleansed by this process ascended to heaven and there gradually forgot who they had been on earth, though not all equally quickly. The souls of great men such as Goethe or Bismarck retained the knowledge of their identity for centuries, perhaps, but none, not even the greatest, for ever. Rather, it was the ultimate destiny of all souls to merge with other souls and become integrated into higher unities, conscious of nothing except that they were parts of God ("forecourts of heaven").

The merging of all souls into a single crowd is ordained as the highest form of blessedness, recalling the many Christian representations of angels and saints thronging together like a cloud, or sometimes actually as a cloud, only careful inspection enabling one to distinguish the separate heads. This image is so familiar that we never reflect on its meaning. It means that blessedness consists not only in closeness to God, but also in the close togetherness of equals.

The expression "forecourts of heaven" is an attempt to attribute even greater density to this crowd of blessed souls: they are actually integrated into "higher unities". God has very little knowledge of living human beings. In the later parts of the Memoirs Schreber repeatedly reproaches God with his inability to understand the living human being and, in particular, to judge his thinking correctly. He speaks of God's blindness and lack of knowledge of human nature; he is only used to corpses and takes great care not to come too near the living. The eternal love of God is basically for the creation as a whole. He is not a being of such absolute perfection as most religions attribute to him, otherwise he would not have allowed himself to be enticed into the conspiracy against innocent human beings, which was the real cause of Schreber's illness. The "miraculous structure of the Universe" as Schreber described it, has suddenly been rent. The crisis which has broken over the "realms of God" is intimately connected with Schreber's personal fate. What is at issue is nothing less than a case of soul murder.

Schreber had been ill once before and had been treated by Professor Flechsig, the Leipzig psychiatrist. After a year, he had been discharged as cured and had been able to resume his work. At the time, he had been most grateful to the psychiatrist, and his wife even more so. "She worshipped Professor Flechsig as the man who had restored her husband to her; for this reason, she kept his portrait on her writing table for many years." Schreber then spent eight healthy, happy, and busy years with his wife. During the whole of this period, he often had occasion to see the picture of Flechsig on his wife's desk, and it must clearly have occupied his mind very much without his being aware of it.

When Schreber fell ill a second time, and, as was natural (since he had been successful before), Flechsig was again approached, it became apparent that, in Schreber's mind, he had become a really dangerous figure. Perhaps Schreber, who, as a judge, had himself possessed a certain authority, resented having been in the psychiatrist's power for a whole year. He certainly hated him now, for having him in his power again. He became convinced that Flechsig was practicing "soul murder" or "soul theft" on him.

He says that the idea that it is possible to take possession of another person's soul is widespread and very old. In this way, one secures the intellectual powers of the victim or prolongs one's own life at another soul's expense. Inspired by ambition and the lust for power, Flechsig was plotting with God and was trying to convince him that the soul of one Schreber was of no importance. He adds that there may perhaps have already been rivalry between the two families: a Flechsig may suddenly have felt that some member of the Schreber family had outstripped his own. He therefore entered into "a conspiracy with the elements of the realms of God," working towards excluding the Schrebers from those professions which would lead to closer relations with God, for example, the profession of a nerve specialist. Since nerves were the actual substance of which God and all other souls consisted, it was obvious how much power a nerve specialist would possess. The result of this was that no Schreber had become a psychiatrist, while a Flechsig had. The way to soul theft was open to the conspirators; Schreber was in the power of the murderers of his soul.

At this point, one should perhaps stress the importance of plots and conspiracies for the paranoiac. They are continually with him, and anything even remotely resembling one is immediately seized on. The paranoiac feels surrounded; his chief enemy is never content to attack him single-handed, but always tries to rouse a spiteful pack to set on him at the suitable moment. At first, the members of this pack keep hidden and may be anywhere and everywhere, or else they pretend to be harmless and innocent, as if they were not lying in wait for anything. The piercing intellect of the paranoiac always unmasks them. He has only to stretch out his hand to drag forth a conspirator. The pack is always there, even if not actually baying at the moment; and its hostility is unchangeable. Once won over to the enemy, they remain his faithful hounds, and he can do what he wants with them. Even at a distance, he keeps them in leash to his wickedness and can direct them as it suits him.

By preference, he selects them so that they can attack the victim from all sides and in greatly superior numbers. Once the conspiracy against Schreber had come into being, what form did the actual attack on him take? What were the conspirators' aims and what means did they use to attain them?

Their real aim, the most important though not the only one, was the destruction of Schreber's reason, and this they persisted in for many years. They wanted to turn him into an imbecile, to push the illness of his nerves to the point where he would appear permanently incurable. Could there be any prospect more terrible for a human being as highly gifted as he thought himself?

His illness began with torturing sleeplessness, for which nothing could be done. Schreber held that, right from the beginning, there was a definite intention to prevent his sleeping and thus to bring about his mental collapse. For this purpose, large numbers of rays were directed against him. At first, these originated from Professor Flechsig, but later on, departed souls who had not yet completed their purification ("tested souls" as Schreber calls them) began to take an increasing interest in him and penetrate him as rays. God himself took part in this operation.

All these rays spoke to him, but so that they could not be heard by other people. It was like a prayer which one repeats silently, not speaking the words aloud. But the painful difference was that, whereas in prayer what one says depends on one's own will, these rays which were forced on him from outside went on and on with what they wanted to say.

"I could cite here the names of hundreds if not thousands who, as souls, trafficked with my nerves . . . All these souls talked at me as 'voices', each unaware of the presence of the others. The ensuing tumult in my head can readily be imagined . . . "My nervousness increased all the time, and with it, my power of attraction, so that an ever-growing number of departed souls felt drawn to me, to evaporate on my head or in my body. In a great number of cases, the process ended with the souls concerned leading a brief existence on my head as so-called 'little men'—tiny figures in human form but perhaps only a few millimetres high—before they vanished completely . . . I was very often told the names of the stars or constellations from which they had set out, or 'under which they hung' . . . There were nights in which the souls, as 'little men', finished by dripping down onto my head in hundreds if not thousands. I always warned them against approaching me because previous occurrences had made me continually aware of my nerves' immensely increased power of attraction.

"In soul-language, I was called 'the seer of spirits', that is a man who sees and is in contact with spirits or departed souls . . . Since the world began, there can hardly have been a case like mine in which a human being entered into continual contact, not only with single departed souls, but with the totality of all souls and with the very Omnipotence of God." Schreber's delusion is a precise model of political power, which feeds on the crowd and detives its substance from it. He attracts individuals who are to form a crowd, reducing them in size, and consuming them. This process is linked to a sense of catastrophe, which is abundantly evident in the Memoirs.

"It is obvious that all these phenomena which Schreber describes have something to do with crowds. As far as the distant stars, space is populated with the souls of the departed. All have their place assigned them, on this or that familiar star. Suddenly, through his illness, Schreber becomes their centre. In spite of his warnings they throng close, irresistibly attracted to him. One could say that he gathers them round him as a crowd and since, as he insists, they are the totality of all souls, they represent the largest crowd that can be imagined. But they do not simply continue to stand round him, like an assembled crowd, a people round its leader; they immediately and instantaneously experience what to a people only happens gradually and over the course of years: by contact with him they grow smaller and smaller. As soon as they reach him they shrink rapidly until they are only a few millimetres high. The true relationship between them comes out very clearly here: the one a giant and the others tiny creatures fussing around him, But that is not the end. The great man swallows the midgets; they literally go inside him and disappear completely. His effect on them is annihilating. He attracts them and gathers them round him, reduces them in size and ends by consuming them. Everything that they were now accrues to his own body. Not that they came intending to benefit him. Their purpose had actually been hostile; originally they were sent to confuse his reason RULERS AND PARANOIACS 441 and thus destroy him. But it was precisely this threat which gave him the strength to grow; and once he knows how to master them, he feels proud of his power of attraction. At a first glance, Schreber, in his delusion, could be taken for a man of some earlier period, when belief in spirits was universal and the souls of the dead flitted like bats past the ears of the living. It is as though he were a shaman, one who knows the worlds of the spirits inside out, can communicate directly with them and make use of them for all kinds of human purposes; and he likes to be called a “seer of spirits”. But the power of a shaman is not nearly as great as that of Schreber. It is true that the shaman does sometimes detain spirits within him, but they never dissolve there; they never lose their separate identity and it is part of the bargain that he always lets them go again. With Schreber, on the other hand, they vanish, disappearing as completely as if they had never existed in their own right. Disguised as one of the old conceptions of the universe which presupposed the existence of spirits, his delusion is in fact a precise model of political power, power which feeds on the crowd and detives its substance from it. An attempt at a conceptual analysis of power can only blur the clarity of Schreber’s vision. This contains all the real elements of the situation: the strong and lasting attraction exercised over the individuals who are to form a crowd; the ambiguous attitude of these individuals; their subjection through being reduced in size; the way they are taken into the man who in his own person, in his body, represents political power; the fact that his greatness must continually renew itself in this way; and finally, a very important point not so far mentioned, the sense of catastrophe which is linked with it, of danger to the world order arising from its sudden and rapid increase and unexpected magnetism. There is in the Memoirs abundant evidence of this sense of catastrophe." There is always a certain magnificence in Schreber's visions of the end of the world, as in the passage I want to quote now, which deals directly with his power of attracting souls. They drip down on him in crowds and thereby endanger the celestial bodies from which they originate. It appears that the stars are actually composed of souls, so that when they leave in large numbers to get to Schreber, the whole universe is in danger of dissolution. "From all sides came tidings of disaster: now that this or that star, or this or that constellation, had had to be abandoned; now that Venus had been 'flooded'; now that soon the entire solar system [page 442] would have to be 'uncoupled'; now that soon Cassiopeia—the whole constellation—would have to be pulled together into a single sun; that soon only the Pleiades might perhaps still be saved." Apprehension about the continued existence of the celestial bodies was, however, only one aspect of Schreber's feelings of impending catastrophe.

Much more important was the supposition with which his illness began. This did not refer to the souls of the departed, with whom, as we know, he was in constant communication, but to his fellow-men. These did not exist any more: the whole of mankind had perished. The few human figures he still saw, such as his doctor, the attendants at the asylum, or the other patients, he took for appearances: they were "flecting makeshift men', fabricated solely in order to confuse him. They came and went like shadows, or pictures, and he naturally did not take them seriously. All real people had perished; he was the only man left alive. Not only did he have special visions which revealed this fact, but he was at all times firmly convinced of it; he believed it for years. All his visions of the end of the world were colored by it.

He thought it possible that the whole of Flechsig's asylum, and perhaps the city of Leipzig with it, had been "scooped up" and removed to some other celestial body. The voices which talked to him sometimes asked whether Leipzig were still standing. In one of his visions he was taken in a lift into the depths of the earth, thus reliving all prehistoric and geological periods. In the upper regions there were still forests of leaf-bearing trees. Lower down everything became progressively darker and blacker. When he left the "lift" for a time, he seemed to be wandering through a cemetery. He came to the part where the inhabitants of Leipzig lay buried, and passed the grave of his own wife, one should add, was alive at this time and frequently visited him in the asylum.

Schreber pictured various different ways in which the destruction of mankind might have come about. He thought of a decrease in the heat of the sun, due to its moving further away from the earth and a consequent general glaciation. He thought of an earthquake: he received news that the great earthquake of 1755 in Lisbon had occurred in connection with a seer of spirits, similar to himself. "I envisaged the further possibility of news having spread that some- thing like a magician—namely Professor Flechsig—had appeared in the modern world, and that I myself, a figure known after all in wider circles, had disappeared. This had spread terror and dismay [page 443] amongst men, destroying the foundations of religion and giving rise to universal nervousness and immorality. Epidemics had followed, devastating mankind. There was talk of leprosy and plague, two diseases scarcely known in Europe any more. Schreber noticed signs of the plague on his own body. There were different varieties of plague: the blue, the brown, the white, and the black plague. While everyone else was perishing from these terrible maladies, Schreber himself was cured by beneficent rays. There was a distinction to be made between two kinds of rays: the "searing" and the "blessing" ones. The former were laden with the poison of corpses or other putrid matter and carried a germ of disease into the body or wrought other damage. The "blessing" rays healed this damage.

Schreber did not seem to mind that the disasters came upon mankind against his will. Instead, he appeared to feel satisfaction in the fact that the persecution he was exposed to by Professor Flechsig had appalling consequences. The whole of mankind suffered and was exterminated because Schreber believed someone was against him. He alone was protected in the epidemics by the agency of the "blessing" rays. Schreber wanted to be the only man left alive, standing in an immense field of corpses, with all men deceased except for him.

Schreber's desire to be the last man alive reveals his true nature as a seeker after power. He sends others to their death and diverts death onto them to be spared himself. He is especially likely to resort to this radical expedient of mass death when his dominion over the living is challenged. Once he feels threatened, his desire to see everyone lying dead before him can scarcely be controlled.

Some may argue that Schreber's "political" interpretation is implausible, as his apocalyptic visions are inherently religious and he claims no dominion over the living. However, his delusion starts from the idea that all men are dead, and there is no justification for attributing to him any interest in worldly power.

Schreber's political system is disturbingly familiar. God himself, he says, "determined the whole direction of the policy pursued against me." He claims that God would be able to annihilate any human being who inconvenienced him by sending a fatal illness or striking him with lightning. As long as men acted in accordance with the Order of the Universe, no collision could occur between their interests and those of God. That such a collision of interests did none the less occur in my case was due to a conjunction of circumstances so far unique in the history of the world and, I hope, never to be repeated." He speaks of the "restoration of God's absolute rule in Heaven" and of a "sort of confederacy between Flechsig's soul and parts of God" directed against himself and bringing about "a change in the relationship of the parties which has remained essentially the same to this day." He mentions the "colossal powers on the side of God's omnipotence" and his own "hopeless resistance." He conjectures that "Professor Flechsig's authority as administrator of one of God's provinces must have reached as far as America." Flechsig also appeared to govern England. He mentions a Viennese nerve specialist "who seemed to be a sort of administrator of God's interests in another of God's provinces, namely the Slavonic parts of Austria." Between him and Professor Flechsig a struggle for supremacy had arisen.

These extracts, taken from many different parts of the Memoirs, give us a very distinct picture of God: he is a despot and nothing else. His realm contains provinces and factions. "God's interests," as they are bluntly and summarily designated, demand the increase of his power. This, and this only, is why he would not deny any human being the share of blessedness due to him; human beings who hinder him are done away with. It cannot be denied that this is a God who sits in the web of his policy like a spider.

It should perhaps be mentioned at this point that Schreber grew up in the old Protestant tradition of Saxony and was therefore highly suspicious of Catholics and their proselytizing zeal. His first reference to the Germans is in connection with the victorious war against France of 1870-71. He claimed to have been given fairly definite hints that the bitter winter of 1870-71 was a deliberate move on the part of God to turn the war in the Germans' favour. God also had a weakness for the language of the Germans. "While undergoing purification souls learnt the so-called ‘basic language’ spoken by God himself, a some- what archaic but powerful German... This should not be taken to mean that Blessedness was reserved only for Germans. Nevertheless, in more recent times, probably since the Reformation and perhaps even since the Migration of Peoples, the Germans had been God's Chosen People, whose language he used by preference. In the course of history God's chosen people in this sense (meaning the most moral at a given time), had been successively the old Jews, the old Persians, the ‘Greco-Romans’ and, finally, the Germans."

The chosen people of the Germans was naturally threatened with dangers, first among which were the machinations of the Catholics. The reader will remember those hundreds if not thousands of names Schreber could have mentioned, all of souls who were in contact with his nerves and were continually talking to him. "Many of the bearers of these names had special interests in religion; a great many were Catholics who were expecting [from me] the advancement of Cathol- icism, in particular the Catholicizing of Saxony and Leipzig. Among these were the Priest S. in Leipzig, ‘14 Leipzig Catholics’ (presum- ably a Catholic club), the Jesuit Father S. in Dresden, the Cardinals Rampolla, Galimberti and Casati, the Pope himself and finally numerous monks and nuns. On one occasion 240 Benedictine monks led by a Father moved as souls into my head to perish there. Schreber's vision of a "complete cross-section of Catholicism" features various religious figures, including Jesuit Father (conjuring up visions of intrigue and conspiracy) and three Italian cardinals with euphonic names. The presence of monks and nuns in large numbers, as well as the transformation of the University Nerve Clinic into a nunnery and Catholic chapel, emphasizes the importance of Catholicism in Schreber's delusions.

The procession of 240 Benedictine monks under the leadership of a Father is a significant symbol of Catholicism. The procession's ability to attract believers and increase their desire to join in symbolizes the potential spread of Catholicism.

Schreber's "holy time" and the "first Divine Judgement" represent a critical period in his illness. This period is characterized by intense visions and a political conflict between Professor Flechsig and Schreber. The outcome of this conflict endangered the existence of God's realms and challenged the German people's leadership as God's chosen people.

Schreber's visions also included predictions of his future reincarnations, such as a Jesuit novice in Osseg, a Burgomaster of Klattau, an Alsatian girl defending her honor against a French officer, and a Mongol Prince. These predictions were connected to the general picture of his visions, emphasizing the significance of Catholicism and the struggles between Protestantism, Latin, and Slavic neighbors. The final prospect before me, that of becoming a Mongol Prince, seemed to me an indication that all the Aryan peoples had shown themselves unfitted to be pillars of God's realms and that a last refuge must now be found with non-Aryan peoples." Schreber's "holy time" falls in the year 1894; he had a passion for exactness about time and place and gives precise dates for the period of "the first Divine Judgement." In 1900, six years later, when his delusion had become clarified and established, he started composing the Memoirs, using the shorthand notes he had made before. In 1904 they were published. As no-one today is likely to deny, his political system had within a few decades been accorded high honour: though in a rather cruder and less literate form it became the creed of a great nation, leading, under "a Mongol Prince", to the conquest of Europe and coming within a hair's breadth of the conquest of the world. Thus Schreber's claims were posthumously vindicated by his unwitting disciples. We are not likely to accord him the same recognition, but the amazing and incontrovertible likeness between the two systems may serve to justify the time we have devoted to this single case of paranoia; nor have we finished with it yet. On some points Schreber was even further in advance of his century. The occupation of other inhabited planets is still only a possibility and no chosen people has as yet been worsted in the venture. But we have already seen the "later champion", not named by him, who experienced Catholics, Jews and Slavs as hostile crowds in the same personal manner as he did, hating them for their very existence and ascribing to them the marked urge to increase inherent in all crowds. No-one has a sharper eye for the attributes of the crowd than the paranoiac or the despot who—as will perhaps be more readily admitted now—are one and the same. But the only crowds which he (to indicate both with the same pronoun) is concerned with are those he wants to attack or to rule; these all have the same features. It is worth noticing the future existence Schreber chooses for himself. Of the five he mentions, only the first (which I omitted) has a non-political character. Each of the three following ones is a focus of violent conflict. He insinuates himself among the Jesuits as a novice; he becomes the burgomaster of a town in Bohemia where there was fighting between the Germans and the Slavs; and as an Alsatian girl he defends his honour against an officer of a victorious French army: this "honour" sounds suspiciously like the "racial honour" of his successor. Most significant of all, however, is his re-incarnation as a "Mongol Prince". He is slightly apologetic about this, as though he were ashamed of this "non-Aryan" existence, and seeks to justify it by the alleged failure of the Aryan people. The Mongol prince he has in mind is none other than Genghis Khan. He is fascinated by the Mongols' pyramids of skulls. (The reader will remember his preoccupation with accumulations of corpses.) He approves of their straightforward method of dealing with enemies wholesale. The man who exterminates his enemies has none to fear and can gloat over their defenceless corpses. Of all these four re-incarnations envisaged by Schreber, it was as the Mongol Prince that he was most successful. There is one immediate conclusion to be drawn from this close examination of a paranoiac delusion, namely that in it religion and politics are inextricably intermingled; the Saviour of the World and the Ruler of the World are one and the same person. At the core of it all is the lust for power. Paranoia is an illness of power in the most literal sense of the words, and the exploration of this illness uncovers clues to the nature of power clearer and more complete than those which can be obtained in any other way. One should not allow oneself to be confused by the fact that, in a case such as Schreber's, the paranoiac never actually attained the monstrous position he hungered for. Others have attained it. Some of them have succeeded in covering the traces of their rise and keeping their perfected system secret. Others have been less fortunate or had too little time. Here, as in other things, success depends entirely on accidents. ‘I'he attempt to reconstruct these accidents under the illusion that they are governed by laws calls itself history. For every great name in history, a hundred others might have been substituted. There is never any dearth of men who are both talented and wicked. Nor can we deny that we all eat and that each of us has grown strong on the bodies of innumerable animals. Here, each of us is a king in a field of corpses. A conscientious investigation of power must ignore success. We must look for its attributes and their perversions wherever they appear, and then compare them. A madman, helpless, outcast, and despised, who drags out a twilight existence in some asylum, may, through the insights he provides us, prove more important than Hitler or Napoleon, illuminating for mankind its curse and its masters.

RULERS AND PARANOIACS

The conspiracy against Schreber was not only soul murder and the destruction of his reason. His enemies also wanted to do something else to him, which would make him almost equally contemptible: they proposed to change his body into that of a woman. As a woman, he was to be "sexually abused and then simply 'left lying there'," in other words, left to rot. The idea of his transformation into a woman occupied him continually during the years of his illness. He felt female nerves being sent into his body as rays and gradually gaining the upper hand. At the beginning of his illness, he tried to take his own life in many different ways to escape so terrible a degradation. Every time he took a bath, he thought of drowning, and he several times demanded poison. But his despair about his proposed transformation into a woman did not last indefinitely. A conviction gradually grew in him that this would be the best way of guaranteeing the continued existence of mankind. As we know, he thought all human beings had perished in some terrible catastrophe, and he was the only one left alive. If he were a woman, he would be able to bring forth a new generation. The only possible father for his children was God, so he must win his love. To be united with God was a high honour; to change more and more into a woman for his sake, to dress up so as to attract him and to lure him with feminine wiles no longer seemed a disgrace and degradation to this bearded man, once chief judge of a court of appeal. In addition, he thought it would foil Flechsig's plot; God's favour would be won; more and more strongly attracted by the beautiful woman Schreber, the Almighty would come to depend on him. By such means, however obnoxious, as he admits, they may appear to others, Schreber succeeded in "attaching God to his person," though it was not without resistance that the latter surrendered to this somewhat ignominious fate. Schreber's attraction had grown too strong, and he found himself transformed into a woman, though this transformation was not the core of his delusional system. Paranoia can be occasioned by anything, and the essence of each case lies in the structure of the delusional world and the way it is peopled. Processes of power always play a crucial part in it.

Schreber's central point was the attack on his reason. He defended himself with tenacity, and his description of his enemies and his defense is exhaustive. We must take it out of the context of his self-created world and translate it into our own more ordinary language. The first thing to mention is his "compulsive thinking" – to use his own term. Only when he talked aloud was there "peace in his head".

The text has been cleaned up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. The mention of page numbers has been removed, and the text is now more readable and coherent. 

Then everything became deathly quiet, and he had the impression that he moved among walking corpses. All the people around him, attendants and fellow patients, seemed to have lost the ability to speak. As soon as he became silent, the voices returned, forcing him back to his endless thinking. They talked to him incessantly, making it impossible not to hear them or ignore them. He was at their mercy and forced to pay close attention to everything they said.

The voices had different methods, which they used in turn. A favorite one was to put a direct question to him: "What are you thinking of now?" He did not want to answer these questions, but if he kept silent, they would tell him what he should reply, saying, for instance, "You should be thinking about the Order of the Universe." This seemed to him to be a system of deliberate "thought-falsification." Not only did the voices question him in an inquisitorial manner, but they also wanted to dictate his thoughts.

Even the questions with which they tried to penetrate his secret thoughts aroused his opposition, and still more the answers dictated to him. Both questions and commands were an infringement of his personal freedom. Both are familiar means to power, and he, as a judge, had himself made frequent use of them.

The ways in which Schreber was tried were varied and inventive. First, he was interrogated; then various thoughts were dictated to him; then, from his own words and sentences, a further catechism was constructed. His every thought was controlled; not one was allowed to pass unnoticed; every word he used was examined to determine exactly what it meant to him.

His lack of privacy in relation to the voices was complete; everything was searched, everything brought into the light. He was the objective of a power which insisted on being omniscient. But though he had to submit to all this, he never really surrendered.

One of his defenses was to rehearse his own knowledge. He learned poems by heart to prove to himself how well his memory functioned, counted aloud in French, and repeated the names of all the "Russian Governments" and "French Departments." By the preservation of his reason, Schreber chiefly meant the safekeeping of everything he had stored up in his memory; the thing most important to him was the safety of words.

To him, all sounds were voices; the universe was full of words: railways, birds, and paddle-steamers spoke. When he was not uttering words himself, they immediately came from others. Between words, there was nothing. The peace he spoke of and longed for would have been a freedom from words. But this was not to be found. Whatever happened to him was simultaneously communicated to him in words. The harmful as well as the beneficent rays were all endowed with speech and were compelled to use it, as was he himself. "Do not forget that rays must speak!"

It is impossible to overrate the importance of words for the paranoiac. They are everywhere, like vermin, always on the alert. They unite to form a world order that leaves nothing outside itself. Perhaps the most marked trend in paranoia is that towards a complete scizing of the world through words, as though language were a fist, and the world lay in it. It is a fist which never opens again. But how does it come to clench? Here one should point out that the paranoiac exhibits a mania for finding causal relations, which finally becomes an end in itself. Schreber's mania for causality may be seen as a positive obsession, as it allows him to see the world through a private net of reasons and make it his own. However, this obsession can become unreasonable when it leads to a desire to unmask people and find causes where there are none.

Schreber's obsession with unmasking people can be compared to the common experience of mistakenly recognizing familiar faces in strangers. This process can be harmless when it is occasional, but it can become problematic when it multiplies and leads to seeing the same person everywhere. In such cases, the person may be thinking of someone they love or hate, and they may persist in the mistaken identity despite knowing that the person is not present.

In this instance, Schreber's obsession with unmasking people can be seen as a means of satisfying his desire to find causes and reasons for everything that happens to him. However, this obsession can become unreasonable when it leads to a desire to unmask people and find causes where there are none. The process of unmasking can become a habit, and when there is no one or nothing to practice it on, Schreber feels lost. There is an urgency in it; a hundred faces are stripped off like masks in order that the one face may appear behind them. If we were asked the main difference between this one and the hundred others we should have to say: the hundred are strange to us, the one is known. It looks as though we could only acknowledge the face which is familiar. But it has hidden itself and we have to search for it among strangers. With the paranoiac, this process is concentrated and heightened. He suffers from the atrophy of transformation; it begins in himself, in his own person, and is most marked there, but gradually it affects the whole world. Even things which are really different he tends to see as the same. In the most varied figures, he finds the same enemy. Whenever he tears off a mask, there is that enemy, hiding behind it. For the sake of the unmasking itself, everything becomes a mask for him. But he is not deceived; he sees through everything; to him, the many are one.

As the rigidity of his system increases, the world grows poorer and poorer in real figures, until only those remain who have a part to play in his delusion. He can get to the bottom of everything and he ends by explaining everything away. Finally, he is left only with himself and what he rules.

What happens here is the exact opposite of the process of transformation. In unmasking, some creature is driven in on itself, limited to a single position and prescribed one particular attitude, which is then taken to be its only genuine one. One starts as a spectator, watching people transform themselves into different people. One may go on for some time like this, watching the masquerade, though without approving of it or enjoying it, but then suddenly one shouts "stop" and the whole thing is brought to a halt. "Masks off" is the next command, and there the players stand, each as his real self, never to change again. The play is over. The masks have been revealed for what they are.

This process of undoing transformations is seldom found in a pure form. Generally, it is colored by the expectation of finding an enemy. The paranoiac assumes that the masks were intended to deceive; that the transformations had a purpose; that the most important thing to the actors was concealment and what they changed into or were meant to represent was of secondary importance to them, their main concern being to make themselves untecugnizable. They are felt as threatening, and thus the response to them, the tearing down of the masks, is harsh and spiteful, and in the paranoiac, can be so impressive in its violence that one can easily overlook the transformations which aroused it.

On this point, Schreber's Memoirs take us very close to the heart of the matter. He remembers the time at the beginning of his illness when everything within him was still in a state of flux. During the first year, in his "holy time," he spent a week or two in a small private asylum which his voices called "The Devil's Kitchen." This, he says, was the time of the "maddest miracle-mischief." His experience of transformation and unmasking during this period, long before his delusions grew clear and rigid, is a perfect illustration of my argument. This "officer of the High Court" had a habit of wearing my clothes now and again. From time to time, generally in the evening, there appeared a gentleman who was supposed to be the Medical Director of the Institution. He, again because of a certain resemblance, reminded me of the Dr. O. I had consulted in Dresden. I only once went for a walk in the garden of the Institution. On that occasion, I saw several ladies, among them Mrs. W., the wife of Pastor W. from Fr., and my own mother, as well as several gentlemen, including K., a High Court Judge from Dresden—though now he had a misshapen, enlarged head.

I could understand such likenesses occurring in two or three cases, but not the fact that almost all the patients in the Institution, that is to say at least several dozen people, looked like persons who had been more or less close to me during my life. As patients, he saw "only outlandish figures, among them sooty tufhans in linen overalls." One after the other, they came noiselessly into the Common Room and, equally noiselessly, went away again, apparently without taking any notice of each other. I repeatedly observed that, during their time in the Common Room, some of them changed heads, that is to say, without leaving the room and while I was watching them, they suddenly ran around with a different head.

"The number of patients I saw in the 'pen'"—Schreber's name for the courtyard where they went for air—"and in the Common Room, sometimes simultaneously, sometimes consecutively, was, as far as I could judge, out of all proportion to the size of the building. I was, and still am, convinced that it was impossible for all the forty to fifty people who were driven into the pen at the same time as myself, and who pressed back toward the door of the house on the signal for return, to have found sleeping accommodation there for the night."

Most of the time, the ground floor swarmed with human shapes. Among the shapes he remembers as being in the pen, he mentions a cousin of his wife, "who had shot himself as early as 1887"; and "B., the senior Public Prosecutor, who always adopted a bowed, devout posture as though praying and remained motionless like that." Other people he recognized were a Privy Councillor, a Chief Judge of a Court of Appeal, another High Court Judge, a lawyer from Leipzig, his nephew Fritz, and a casual summer acquaintance from Warnemiinde.

Once he noticed from the window his father-in-law in the drive leading to the Asylum. "Another thing that happened repeatedly was that I saw a whole group of people (4-5), and once even some ladies, pass through the Common Room and go into the corner rooms, where they must have vanished. At these times, I repeatedly heard the peculiar death-rattle connected with the dissolution of the 'fleeting makeshift men'."

"It was not only human forms that were bewitched, but also inanimate objects. However skeptical I try to be now when examining my recollections, I cannot expunge certain impressions from my memory: articles of clothing on the bodies of human beings were transformed under my eyes; similarly, the food on my plate during meals (for instance, pork into veal or vice versa)."

There are several striking things in this account. Schreber sees more people than there can possibly be room for, and they are all driven together into a pen. In common with them, he feels (as the word "pen" shows) degraded into an animal. This is the nearest he ever comes to a crowd experience. But even in the “pen” he, of course, never becomes completely merged with the other patients. He watches the play of transformations closely, critically indeed, but without actual hostility. Even food and clothes undergo transformation. What occupies him most, however, are his acts of recognition. Everyone turns out to be someone he used to know well; he takes care that there shall be no real strangers there. But his unmaskings are as yet relatively good-tempered; the only person he speaks of with hatred (in a passage not quoted here) is the senior attendant. He recognizes a large number of very different people; his “system” has not yet become ight and exciusive. Instead of taking off their masks, people simply change heads—the grandest and most amusing way of unmasking which can be imagined. But only rarely were Schreber's experiences of this entertaining and liberating kind.

During his "holy time" he repeatedly had an entirely different kind of vision, and this, I think, leads us directly into the prototypal situation of paranoia. The paranoiac feels surrounded by a pack of enemies who are all after him. This is his basic experience. It is most clearly expressed in visions of eyes; he sees eyes everywhere and all round him; they are interested only in him and their interest is menacing in the extreme. The creatures to whom the eyes belong intend to take their revenge on him. For a long time, he has made them suffer and has gone unpunished; if they are animals, they are relentlessly hunted and, threatened with extermination, have now suddenly risen against him. This, the prototypal situation of paranoia, is compellingly portrayed in many people's legends about their great hunters.

But the animals do not always keep the shape in which man knows them as prey. They change into more dangerous creatures which he has always feared, and when they press towards him, fill his room and occupy his bed, his terror becomes overwhelming. Schreber at night was beset by bears. At this period, he frequently got out of bed and sat on the floor of his room, clad only in a shirt. His hands, which he pressed firmly on the floor behind his back, were sometimes perceptibly lifted up by bear-like shapes—black bears; other "black bears", both greater and smaller, sat round him with glowing eyes; his bedclothes became "white bears". At times, whilst he was still awake, he saw cats with glowing eyes in the trees of the asylum garden. But these animal packs were not the only ones.

Schreber's arch-enemy, the psychiatrist Flechsig, had a particularly treacherous and dangerous habit of forming celestial packs to attack him. This was done by a process which Schreber called the partition of souls. He maintained that Flechsig's soul split, in order that the whole heavenly vault might be occupied by "soul-parts" and the divine rays meet resistance on all sides; there were nerves strung out all over it, constituting a mechanical obstacle to the divine rays which it was impossible to surmount. They were like a besieged fortress protected by walls and moats against the assault of the enemy. This was why Flechsig's soul had split into a great number of "soul-parts". (For some time there were between forty and sixty, amongst them many tiny ones.) It seems that other "tested souls", taking Flechsig as a model, then began to split too. The parts became more and more numerous and led, as is the nature of packs, a life of assaults and ambushes. A large proportion of them were occupied almost entirely with "circumventory" movements, maneuvers whose purpose was to attack the innocently approaching divine rays from behind and forcing them to surrender. Most of these "tested soul-parts" eventually became a nuisance even to God's Omnipotence. One day, when Schreber had succeeded in attracting a considerable number of them to himself, God's Omnipotence staged a raid on them and destroyed them all.

There may have been a connection in Schreber's mind between this "partition of souls" and the multiplication of cells through division, which, of course, he knew about. The employment as celestial packs of the large numbers originating in this way is one of the most characteristic conceptions of his delusion and it is impossible to find a clearer expression of the importance of hostile packs for the structure of paranoia.

'The complicated and ambiguous nature of Schreber's relationship with God and with the "soul-policy" whose victim he felt himself to be did not prevent him from experiencing God's omnipotence as splendor, from outside, as it were, and as a whole. But in all the years of his illness, he only had this experience once, during a few consecutive days and nights; and he was entirely aware of its preciousness and rarity.

Once only, in one single night, did God manifest himself. "As I lay wide awake in bed, the shining image of his rays became visible to my spiritual eye. Simultaneously I heard his voice. It was not a soft whisper, but a mighty bass which resounded as though directly outside my bedroom windows." On the following day, he saw God with his "bodily eye." It was the sun, although not the sun in its usual appearance, but surrounded by a silver sea of rays which covered a sixth or eighth part of the sky. The sight was of such overwhelming splendor and magnificence that he did not dare look at it continuously, but tried to avert his gaze from the phenomenon.

He experienced this radiance not only as coming from God but sometimes as coming also from himself—which was not surprising considering his importance and his close connection with God. 'Owing to the massive contuence of rays, my head was frequently encircled by a shimmer of light, similar to the halo of Christ in pictures, but incomparably richer and brighter: the so-called 'crown of rays'."

But Schreber elsewhere describes the sacred aspect of power even more impressively. His experience of it reached its culmination in what he calls his period of immobility. During this period, his outward life was extremely monotonous. Apart from daily morning and afternoon walks in the garden, he sat motionless the whole day at his table, never even moving to look out of the window. Even in the garden, he preferred to remain seated in one place the whole time. This absolute passivity he considered a kind of religious duty.

The idea was induced by the voices which spoke to him. Over and over again, they repeated "Not the slightest movement!" Schreber explained this demand by the fact that God did not know how to treat a living man, being accustomed to dealing only with corpses—hence the monstrous demand that Schreber should behave continuously as though he himself were a corpse. "I considered this immobility a duty incumbent on me both in the interests of self-preservation and towards God, to free him from the quandary he had got into owing to the 'tested souls'." I had reached the conclusion that the loss of rays would be greater if I moved about much. Being at that time still filled with holy awe towards the divine rays, and being also uncertain whether eternity really existed, or whether the rays might not suddenly come to an end, I considered it my duty to do whatever I could to prevent their being wasted in any way. He added that it was much easier to draw the “tested souls” down and force them to spend themselves in his body if he kept completely still. Only in this way could God’s absolute rule in Heaven be restored. He had therefore made the incredible sacrifice of desisting from every movement for weeks and months. Since the arrival of “tested souls” was mostly to be expected during sleep, he did not even dare to change his position in bed at night. This self-petrifaction lasting for months is among the most extraordinary things that Schreber recounts. His reason for it is twofold: it is both for God and for himself.

That he, for the sake of God, should have kept still as a corpse sounds even odder to our modern European ears than it actually is. This is mainly because of our puritanical attitude to a corpse. Our customs require it to be removed quickly; we do not pay much attention to it in itself and, though we know how soon it will decay, we very seldom do anything to prevent this. We dress it up a little, and may put it on show for a short time, but make subsequent access to it impossible. Whatever the pomp of a funeral, the corpse itself does not appear at all; the funeral is the feast of its concealment and suppression. To understand Schreber, we must think of the mummies of the Egyptians, in whom the personality of the corpse was conserved, cherished, and admired. It was not really as a corpse that Schreber sought for months to behave for love of God, but as a mummy. In this case, the word he uses is not really accurate.

His second motive for remaining motionless was dread of wasting the divine rays. This dread he shared with the many widely separate civilizations which have evolved a conception of power as something sacred. He experiences himself as a vessel in which the divine essence slowly collects. The smallest movement could lead to his spilling some of it and therefore he must not move at all. Here the man who holds power holds it in the most literal sense and also holds onto it, because he feels, either that it is an actual substance which can be exhausted by use, or because a higher authority expects this parsimony from him as an act of veneration. He slowly petrifies in the posture which seems to him most likely to conserve his precious substance; any change may be dangerous and fills him with anxiety. Only by conscientious avoidance of all movement can it be safeguarded.

In some cases, these postures of conservation, by virtue of their sameness throughout centuries, have come to determine the shape of society. The core of the political structure of many peoples is the rigid and meticulously ordered behavior of one individual. Schreber, also, makes provision for “a people”, though he is not their king, but rather their “National Saint”. He describes how an attempt was actually made on a distant star to create a new human world out of “the Schreber spirit”. These new human beings were of much smaller stature than earthly men. He was told that they had achieved a fairly high level of culture and kept small cattle proportionate to their own size. He was also told that as their 'National Saint' he had become an object of veneration, as if his physical posture were of some significance for their faith. Here we see very clearly how a particular posture can become significant. These human beings are not only created out of Schreber's substance, but their religion depends on his posture. It was not only Schreber's reason that, during his illness, was exposed to every refinement of attack. His body was interfered with too, and in ways that beggar description. Scarcely any of it was spared. The rays overlooked nothing, but dealt with every part in turn. The effects of their interference were so sudden and unexpected that he could only regard them as "miracles".

First of all, there were the manifestations of his coming transformation into a woman. This he had accepted and ceased to resist. But the other things that happened to him were almost unbelievable. A lung worm was sent into his lungs. His ribs were temporarily smashed. In place of his healthy natural stomach, the Viennese nerve specialist mentioned above inserted a very inferior "Jew's stomach". Altogether, the vicissitudes of his stomach were amazing. Frequently, he had to exist without one and would tell the attendant that he could not eat because he had no stomach. If he ate in spite of this, the food simply poured into the abdominal cavity and thence into the thighs. He became used to this state of affairs, however, and continued to eat unperturbed without a stomach. His gullet and intestines were often lacerated or made to vanish, and more than once he swallowed part of his larynx. "Little men" were planted in his feet to pump out his spinal cord; when he walked in the garden, it issued from his mouth as little clouds. He frequently had the sensation that his whole skull had become thinner. When he played the piano or wrote, attempts were made to paralyze his fingers. Some souls took the form of tiny human figures, a few millimeters high, and played havoc with his body, both inside and outside. Some of these busied themselves with opening and shutting his eyes, taking up their positions in his eyebrows and from there pulling the eyelids up and down as they pleased with fine filaments like cobwebs. Almost always, there were large numbers of little men assembled on his head. They literally walked about on it, nosing around to see if there was any fresh damage. They even shared his meals, helping themselves to a portion, though naturally only a tiny one, of whatever he ate. He suffered considerable pain from caries in the region of the heel and the coccyx. This was intended to make walking, standing, sitting, and lying equally impossible for him. He was not allowed to remain for long in any one position or at any one occupation. If he walked about, attempts were made to force him to lie down, and if he lay down, to chase him from his bed again. "The rays did not seem to understand that an actual, existing human being must be somewhere." At this point, one should notice one thing that all these phenomena have in common: they all have to do with the penetration of his body. The principle of the impenetrability of matter no longer applies. Just as he himself wants to extend and penetrate everywhere, even right through the earth, so, in the same way, everything penetrates through him and plays tricks in him as well as on him. He often speaks of himself as though he were a celestial body, but he is not even sure of his ordinary human body. The period of his extension, the very time in which he was asserting his claims, seems also to have been the period of his penetrability. For him, greatness and persecution are intimately connected and both are expressed through his body. Since he went on living in spite of all the assaults on him, he came to the conclusion that these same rays also healed him. They soaked up all the impure matter in his body, which is why he could afford to eat, although he had no stomach. The rays planted the germs of diseases in him, but also removed them again. Thus, one cannot help suspecting that the real purpose of the attacks on Schreber's body was to prove his invulnerability; they were meant to show him how much he could overcome. The more he was injured and shaken, the more secure he ultimately became. He began to doubt whether he was mortal at all.

What were the strongest poisons compared with the injuries he had surmounted? If he were to fall into water and drown, his circulation and the action of his heart would be restarted, and he would revive. If he put a bullet through his head, the inner organs and bones it destroyed would be restored. After all, had he not lived for a long time deprived of various vital organs which had then all grown again? Nor could any common disease endanger him. After much pain and suffering and many doubts, the violence of his craving for invulnerability had resulted in his acquiring it.

I have already shown how the craving for invulnerability and the passion for survival merge into each other. In this, too, the paranoiac is the exact image of the ruler. The only difference between them lies in their position in the world. In their inner structure, they are identical. One might even think the paranoiac the more impressive of the two because he is sufficient unto himself and cannot be shaken by failure. The opinion of the world is nothing to him. It is his delusion set against the whole of mankind. "Everything that happens," says Schreber, "is in relation to me. I became for God the human being, or the one human being to whom everything that happens must be related and who therefore, from his own standpoint too, must relate all things to himself."

The idea that all other human beings had perished dominated him for years, and this of course meant that he thought of himself as being the only one. Gradually, however, this idea was superseded by something less extreme: from being the only man alive, he became the only one who mattered. It is difficult to resist the suspicion that behind paranoia, as behind all power, lies the same profound urge: the desire to get other men out of the way so as to be the only one; or, in the milder, and indeed often admitted, form, to get others to help him become the only one.

The End of the Survivor

After a detailed study of a paranoiac delusion which found only one adherent, namely its originator, it is time to consider what we have learned about power in general. For every individual case, however valuable the clues it provides, arouses the same doubt in us. The more we learn about it, the more conscious we become of its uniqueness, so that we suddenly catch ourselves hoping that it is only in this case that things are as they are and that in others, therefore, they may be different. This is particularly true in the case of the insane. Here, our unshakeable arrogance clings to the inefficacy of their ideas. Even if it were possible to prove that every idea in the head of a Schreber were identical with those held by some dreaded ruler, we should still continue to hope that somehow, somewhere, there must be a fundamental difference between the two. Respect for the "great" of the world is not easily abandoned, and man's need to worship is limitless. Fortunately, we have not had to confine ourselves to a single Schreber. Some, indeed, may think that too much ground has been covered in this enquiry, even though some points have only been touched on and others, which may very well be important, not mentioned at all. These omissions I hope to supply later, but none the less the reader cannot be blamed for wanting to know now what he can regard as established.

We can start by saying that it is clear which of the four different types of pack dominate our time. The power of the great religions of lament is declining. They have become overgrown and stifled by increase. In modern industrial production, the ancient substance of the increase pack has undergone such a colossal expansion that, compared with it, all the other elements of life seem to be on the wane. Production happens here, in this life. It grows and proliferates all the time and with ever-increasing speed, so that we are left with no moment for reflection. Terrible wars have not halted it and, whatever the nature of the various opposing camps, it is rampant in all of them. If there is now one faith, it is faith in production, the modern frenzy of increase; and all the peoples of the world are succumbing to it one after the other.

One of the consequences of this increase in production is that more and more people are wanted. The more goods we produce, the more consumers we need. The point of business is the winning of as many customers as possible; and ideally everyone. In this respect it resembles, if only superficially, those universal religions which lay claim to every single soul. It looks forward to an equality of willing and solvent buyers. But even that would not really be enough, for all potential customers might have been induced to buy and still production would seek to increase. Thus what it really wants is more men. Through the multiplication of goods it finds its way back to the original sense of increase, the increase of man himself. Production cannot but be peaceful. War and destruction mean decrease and thus, by definition, harm it.

Here capitalism and socialism are at one, twin rivals in the same faith. For both of them production is the apple of their eye and their main concern. Their very rivalry has contributed to the ferocity of advance. They are becoming more and more similar and in each there is a perceptible growth of respect for the other, though confined almost exclusively to success in production. It is no longer true that they want to destroy each other. What they want is to surpass each other.

There exist today several very large centres of increase, which are all both highly efficient and rapidly growing. They are distributed between different languages and cultures; none of them is strong enough to monopolize power and none of them dare stand alone against a combination of any number of the others. There is a clear trend towards the formation of enormous double crowds, named after whole quarters of the globe—East and West. These contain so much within themselves that there is less and less remaining outside them; and what there is seems powerless. The rigidity of these opposed double crowds, the fascination each has for the other, the fact that they are both armed to the teeth and rivals for the moon, have awakened in the world an apocalyptic fear: war between them could be the end of mankind. But it is now apparent that the trend towards increase has become so strong that it takes precedence over that towards war. War is now nothing but a nuisance. As a means to rapid increase, it is played out. The Germany of National Socialism was the scene of its final eruption in its primitive form. One can safely assume that never again will war be waged for this purpose. Today countries are more anxious to protect their productivity than their people. Nothing appears more justified or more certain of general approbation. Even in this century, there are going to be more goods produced than men can use. War can be replaced by other systems of double crowds. We have learned in parliaments that it is possible to eliminate death from the activities of double crowds, and a similar peaceful and regular rotation of power could be established between nations. In ancient Rome, we already have an example of how, to a considerable extent, sport can replace war as a crowd phenomenon. It is on the point of regaining the same importance today, but this time on a worldwide scale. War is certainly dying, and its end could be predicted as imminent, but for the fact that we still have to reckon with the survivor.

What, meanwhile, remains of the religions of lament? In the blind and contrary extremes of destruction and production that have so far characterized the century, the religions of lament, insofar as they still exist in an organized form, present a picture of utter helplessness. Reluctantly or willingly, though with occasional dissentients, they give their blessing to whatever happens. Their legacy is, nevertheless, greater than might be supposed. The image of him whose death Christians have lamented for nearly two thousand years has become part of the consciousness of mankind. He is the dying man and the man who ought not to die. With the increasing secularization of the world, his divinity has become less important, but he remains as an individual, suffering and dying. The centuries of his divinity have endowed the man with a kind of earthly immortality. They have strengthened him and everyone who sees himself in him. There is no one who suffers persecution, for whatever reason, who does not in part of his mind see himself as Christ. Mortal enemies, even when both are fighting for an evil and inhuman cause, experience the same feeling as soon as things go badly with them. The image of the sufferer at the point of death passes from one to the other according to who is winning or losing, and the one who in the end proves weaker can see himself as the better. But even one too weak ever to have acquired a real enemy has a claim to the image. He may die for nothing at all, but the dying itself makes him significant. Christ lends him his lament.

In the midst of all our frenzy of increase, which includes men too, the value of the individual has become not less, but more. The events of our times appear to have proved the opposite, but even they have not really altered man's image of himself. The value that has been put on his soul has helped man to the assurance of his earthly value. He finds his desire for indestructibility justified. Each feels himself a worthy object of lament; each is stubbornly convinced that he ought not to die. Here the legacy of Christianity, and, in a rather different way, of Buddhism, is inexhaustible.

What has radically changed in our time, however, is the situation of the survivor. Few readers can have finished the chapters on the survivor without some feeling of disgust. But it was my intention to hunt him out in all his hiding places and show him for what he is and always has been. He has been glorified as a hero and obeyed as a ruler, but fundamentally he is always the same. His most fantastic triumphs have taken place in our own time, among people who set great store by the idea of humanity. He is not yet extinct, nor ever will be until we have the strength to see him clearly, whatever disguise he assumes and whatever his halo of glory. The survivor is mankind's worst evil, its curse and perhaps its doom. Is it possible for us to escape him, even now at this last moment? In the world today his activities have become so terrifying that we scarcely dare look at them: a single individual can easily destroy a good part of mankind. To bring this about he can use technical means he does not understand; he can himself remain completely hidden; and he does not even have to run any personal risk in the process. The contrast between his singleness and the numbers of those he can destroy is so great that we can no longer find a meaningful image to express it. One man today has the possibility of surviving at a single stroke more human beings than could generations of his predecessors together. The precepts of earlier rulers are there to be studied and it is not difficult to learn from them. Rulers profit from all our discoveries, as though it were expressly for them that they had been made. Today the stakes are immensely higher: there are many more people and they are all much closer together. The means have increased a thousandfold, but the victims, if not as submissive, are fundamentally as defenceless as ever. All the terror of a supernatural power which comes to punish and destroy mankind has now attached itself to the idea of the "bomb"; and this is something an individual can manipulate. It lies in his hands. An earthly ruler can now unleash destruction surpassing all the plagues with which God visited the Egyptians. Man has stolen his own God. He has seized him and taken for himself his armory of doom and terror. The most audacious dreams of those earlier rulers in whom the desire to survive had become a passion and a vice, seem meagre today. Seen in retrospect, history appears innocent and almost comfortable. Everything lasted for so long then and in an unexplored world there was so little to be destroyed. Today there is only a moment between decision and effect, and, measured by our potentialities, Genghis Khan, Tamerlane, and Hitler seem pitiful amateurs. EPILOGUE 469

Whether there is any way of dealing with the survivor, who has grown to such monstrous stature, is the most important question today; one is tempted to say that it is the only one. The fragmentation and fluidity of modern life blind us to the simplicity and urgency of this one fundamental issue. Hitherto the only answer to man's passionate desire for survival has been a creative solitude which earns immortality for itself; and this, by definition, can be the solution only for a few. To set against this growing danger which we all feel in our bones, there is one other new fact which should be remembered. Today the survivor is himself afraid. He has always been afraid, but with his vast new potentialities his fear has grown too, until it is almost unendurable. His triumph, when it comes, may last only for hours or minutes. For nowhere in the world is safe, even for him. There is nowhere the new weapons cannot reach, including whatever refuge he may make himself. His greatness and his invulnerability have become incompatible. He has over-reached himself. Rulers tremble today, not, as formerly, because they are rulers, but as the equals of everybody else. The ancient mainspring of power, the safe-guarding of the ruler at the cost of all other lives, has been broken. Power is greater than it has ever been, but also more precarious. Today either everyone will survive or no one. What is really required, however, is to deal with the survivor himself; and for this we must learn to see him for what he is even when his activity appears most natural.

The most unquestioned and therefore the most dangerous thing he does is to give commands. We have seen that the command, even in the domesticated form found in any community, is no less than a suspended death sentence; and we know that strict and effective systems of commands are in force everywhere. Anyone who works his way to the top too quickly, or, by any other means, suddenly seizes control of such a system, will acquire an abnormal measure of the anxiety of command and will inevitably try to get rid of it. The threat which he uses continually, and which constitutes the real essence of the system of commands, finally turns against himself. Whether or not he is actually in danger from enemies, he always feels himself menaced. The most dangerous threat comes from his own people, those to whom he habitually gives orders, who are close to him and know him well. The ultimate means of deliverance, which he never wholly renounces (though he may hesitate to use it), is the sudden command for mass death. He starts a war and sends his people where they are supposed to kill, but if large numbers of them die there he will not regret them. However much he may dissemble, he is never free of a deep and hidden need to see the ranks of his own people thinned.

To free him from the anxiety of command, what is really necessary is that not only his enemies should die, but also many of those who fight for him. The forest of his fears has grown so dense that he cannot breathe and he longs for it to be thinned. If he waits too long, his vision becomes blurred, and he may do something which will seriously weaken his position. The anxiety of command increases in him until it results in catastrophe. But before catastrophe overtakes him, it will have engulfed innumerable others.

The system of commands is acknowledged everywhere. It is perhaps most articulate in armies, but there is scarcely any sphere of civilized life where commands do not reach, and none of us they do not mark. Their threat of death is the coin of power, and here it is all too easy to add coin to coin and amass wealth. If we would master power, we must face command openly and boldly, and search for means to deprive it of its sting.