 Choreomania: Dance and Disorder
Kélina Gotman
Oxford University Press
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and certain other countries.

Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America.
© Oxford University Press 2018
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above. You must not circulate this work in any other form and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Gotman, Kélina, author.
Title: Choreomania : dance and disorder / Kélina Gotman.
Description: New York : Oxford University Press, [2018] | Series: Oxford studies in dance theory | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017015372 | ISBN 9780190840426 (pbk. : alk. paper) | ISBN 9780190840419 (cloth : alk. paper) | ISBN 9780190840457 (oxford scholarship online)
Subjects: LCSH: Choreography—Social aspects. | Choreography—History. | Dance—Philosophy.
Classification: LCC GV1782.5 .G68 2018 | DDC 792.8/2—de23
LC record available at <https://lccn.loc.gov/2017015372>
135798642
Paperback printed by WebCom, Inc., Canada
Hardback printed by Bridgeport National Bindery, Inc., United States of America
For Karen Ray

In the universality of the Western ratio, there is this division which is the Orient: the Orient, thought of as the origin, dreamt of as the vertiginous point from which nostalgia and promises of return are born, the Orient offered to the colonising reason of the Occident, but indefinitely inaccessible, for it always remains the limit: the night of the beginning, in which the Occident was formed, but in which it traced a dividing line, the Orient is for the Occident everything that it is not, while remaining the place in which its primitive truth must be sought. What is required is a history of this great divide, all along this Occidental becom- ing, following it in its continuity and its exchanges, while also allowing it to appear in its tragic hieratism. The following text has been cleaned up and separated into appropriate sections:

Michel Foucault, History of Madness (1961)
And those who were seen dancing were thought to be insane by those who could not hear the music.
Friedrich Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra (1883-1892)

Contents
List of Illustrations
ix
Series Editor Foreword
x
Preface
xiii
Acknowledgements
xv
Introduction: Choreomania, Another Orientalism
1

PART I: EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE
1
Obscuritas Antiquitatis: Institutions, Affiliations, Marginalia
25
2
Madness after Foucault: Medieval Bacchanals
41
3
Translatio: St. Vitus’s Dance, Demonism, and the Early Modern
70
4
The Convulsionaries: Antics on the French Revolutionary Stage
90
5
Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads: Nineteenth-Century Crowd Forms
112
6
Médecine Rétrospective: Hysteria’s Archival Drag
139

PART II: COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES: SCENES OF FERMENT IN THE FIELD
7
‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’: Tarantellas and Comparative Method
171
8
Ecstasy-Belonging in Madagascar and Brazil
196
9
Ghost Dancing: Excess, Waste, and Coda: Moving Fields, Modernity, and the the American West
224
Bacchic Chorus
298
10
‘The Gift of Seeing Resemblances’: Bibliography
315
Cargo Cults in the Antipodes
252
Index
341
11
Monstrous Grace: Blackness and the New Dance ‘Crazes’
271

List of Illustrations
2.1
Dancers of Kélbigk, in a seventeenth-century woodcut by Johann Ludwig Gottfried, from Historische Chronica, oder Beschreibung der fiirnemsten Geschichten, so sich von Anfang der Welt bifS auff das Jahr Christi 1619 (also known as Gottfried’s History of the World) (Frankfurt am Main: Merian, 1674), S.505.
63
2.2
Dancing couples, accompanied by a musi-cian, fail to kneel before the Sacrament as it is being carried by, upon which some two hundred people fall into the river and drown. Woodcut now attrib-uted to Albrecht Diirer. From Hartmann Schedel’s Buch der Chroniken [The Book of Chronicles, or The Nuremberg Chronicle], printed by Anton Koberger (1493), folio CCXVIlI recto.
64
4.1
‘Ms. Thibaut’s Disease’ [enormous dis- tension of the abdomen, legs, paralysis, etc.]. Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library.
97
4.2
‘Ms. Thibaut’s Cure’ [she is cured on the spot on June 19, 1731, when all her hydropic limbs are deflated before the spectators’ very eyes ... and to her serv-ant girl’s amazement]. Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library.
98
4.3
‘The grands secours’. From Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques dans lart (1887). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library.
99
6.1
‘Maenad having a seizure’. From Paul Richer, Lart et la médecine (1903). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library.
144
6.2
‘Saint Vitus’ dancers driven as pilgrims to the church of Saint-Willibrord, in Epternach [sic], near Luxembourg. After a drawing by P. Breughel, in the gallery of the archduc Albert, in Vienna’. From Charcot and______ Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library. 153 ‘Stage of the attitudes passionnelles of the great hysterical attack: attitude of crucifixion’. From Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques dans lart (1887). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library. 154 ‘Ovarian Compression Belt’. From Paul Richer, L’hystéro-épilepsie, ou grande hystérie (1881). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library. 155 ‘The Dancing Procession of Echternach’. From Nouvelle iconographie de la Salpétriére (1904). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library. 163 Portrait of Emma, Lady Hamilton as a Bacchante, by Louise Elisabeth Vigée Le Brun, c.1790. 185 Ghost Dance of the Sioux Indians in North America (1891). From Illustrated London News, 3 January 1891, 15-16. Courtesy the Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division, LC-USZ62-52423. 242 The Ghost dance by the Ogallala [sic] Sioux at Pine Ridge Agency. Drawn by Frederic Remington, Pine Ridge, South Dakota (1890). From Harper’s Weekly, 6 December 1890, 960-961. Courtesy the Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division, LC-USZ62-3726. 243 List of Illustrations 11.1 11.2 11.3 11.4 Cc. C.2 C.3 'Charleston posed by Ted Rogers, Jien Saergent and Viola Worden who are appearing with great success in vaudeville'. The photo appears alongside an article by Curtis Mitchell, 'Why Dorothy Dances Jazz Steps: Fred Stone, American Comedian, Tells Why He Trained His Daughter in Eccentric Rather Than Classical Dancing'. Originally in Dance Magazine, March 1926, 28-29. Courtesy the Jerome Robbins Dance Division, The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, Astor, Lennox and Tilden Foundations. 278 Postcard of Josephine Baker performing the Charleston at the Folies-Bergére, 926. Photo by Stanislaus Julian Walery. 279 Advertisement for a dance marathon. From Lawrence Mathews, Photographic Scrapbooks: Dance Marathons, c. 1930-1939. Courtesy the Jerome Robbins Dance Division, The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, Astor, Lennox and Tilden Foundations. 291 A dance marathon. From Lawrence Mathews, Photographic Scrapbooks: Dance Marathons, c. 1930-1939, courtesy Jerome Robbins Dance Division, The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, Astor, Lennox and Tilden Foundations. 292 Echternach dancing procession, 14 June 2011. Photo by the author. 312 Echternach dancing procession, 4 June 2011. Photo by the author. 313 Echternach dancing procession, 14 June 2011. Photo by the author. 313 Series Editor Foreword KELINA GOTMAN'S book Choreomania is an interdisciplinary, or what the author terms 'a-disciplinary', investigation of dancing manias. It takes us on a journey through the vast and uncharted terrain of dance and madness, a fantastical topography that is rooted in the European imaginary of the nineteenth century. Heir to the groundbreaking works on movement, pathology, and medical discourse—Joseph R. Roach's The Player's Passion (1993) and Felicia McCarren's Dance Pathologies (1998)—Gotman's book can appear by contrast elusive in that it does not______ In order to assert command over such (possibly imagined) phenomena, the discourses in question must first also produce it. In this respect, the influence of Foucault on Gotman's work extends beyond his Madness and Civilization to encompass his less understood Archaeology of Knowledge. Let us recall his definition of discourse in that book: 'It is, from beginning to end, historical—a fragment of history, a unity and discontinuity in history itself.'

Gotman describes these unities and discontinuities as 'choreozones'. The evidence for 'choreozones' is disseminated in the texts of a wide range of disciplines from medicine and anthropology to history and biology. Gotman adds to this area a colonialist dimension, thus pairing her patron saint Michel Foucault with Edward Said.

1 Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York: Pantheon Books, 1972), 117.

A return to historical methodologies and even subjects is an acknowledgement that areas between the early modern and the long nineteenth century are essential to the analysis of contemporaneity. Amidst the archival turn trending in dance scholarship today, the particular originality and theoretical cachet of Choreomania is its focus on dance history as an archaeology. As the question of the archive in relation to embodied memory is being hotly debated in dance and performance studies, Gotman's book suggests the emergence of a new historical turn in contemporary dance scholarship.

Mark Franko
Series Editor Preface

A number of significant events have transpired during the writing of this book over the past decade. Most recently and saliently, the refugee crisis in Europe, resulting from war in Syria and neighboring countries, displacing millions, has forced nations to reckon with the porosity of their borders and questions of priority and privilege. Uprisings in the Arab world, as well as in Greece, London, and New York, have suggested waves of change and an upsurge of popular opinion against the corporate classes; we have only just begun to see the effects of this spirit of resistance on economic and government strategies. In universities, the overwhelming dominance of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) subjects in structures of funding and reward, over the increasingly beleaguered and rapidly atrophying arts and humanities disciplines, has provoked much soul-searching among those who are still tied to the idea that the arts matter more than as instruments of public impact. All of these issues find a place in the fissures of this book, which while dealing with nineteenth-century fantasies of medieval and colonial outbreaks of dancing and song, uncovers a whole history of thinking about the forms—the choreographies—of unrest. In particular, this book rethinks the modern formation of a nineteenth-century fantasy, 'choreomania', which emerged across scientific disciplines to designate the spontaneous and uncontrolled movements of crowds and the jerky and seemingly inelegant movements of bodies subject to fits and starts. In the concatenation of these misfirings and misformations of bodies and body politics, a whole series of prejudices against spontaneity unfolds, suggesting widespread anxieties about impulsiveness and irregularity—as well as their grotesque spectacularization—which I argue subtend contemporary biopolitical life. At the same time, this book argues that dance, as a discipline, cannot be separated from the history of science and the social sciences. Dance serves as the site where bodies become public, and it infects audiences with erratic and spontaneous gestures. The "dancing disease," choreomania, represents a complex set of medicalized and anthropologized ideas about a disorderly social body that jerks uncontrollably, affecting those around it.

The flip side of this story is the story of control, as Michel Foucault (1926-1984) wrote, about the nineteenth century becoming a time of increasing regimentation. This book contributes to Foucault's discursive history—his genealogy—of the nineteenth-century scientific and political institution of madness as a site of sequestration and constraint. Simultaneously, it opens this story to new lines of thought around dance and the role that ideas about disorderly dance play in the process of disciplinarization.

The author hopes that this history of disciplines—called a "choreography"—will help reconfigure the "two cultures" divide that we are still entrenched in today. The aim of this book is to write a history of ideas about dance and to carve out a space of thinking about the way jaggedly moving bodies and crowds have come to signal the best and worst of modern biopolitics.

The book argues that movement itself is neither good nor bad; it is not more desirable than stillness, nor should it be criticized for epitomizing the regimes of stress, hyperproductivity, overperformance, and precarity. Yet, the relationship between movement and freedom is wrestled with in this book, particularly the privilege that comes with the freedom to move. Constraints on movement, such as in the current refugee crisis, signal constraints on political power and agency. Being able to move means being able to reaggregate and realign, disrupting choreographies that enable the smooth and efficient functioning of social and political life.

In summary, movement is "good" when it represents the capacity to move: the freedom to be still or to exercise a wider range of motions and displacements than is normally allowed. What We Do with That Possibility: A Book about Disorderly Dancing

Acknowledgements

This book, about disorderly dancing—and the language with which it has been imagined in colonial, medical, ethnographic, and other archives—has emerged across institutions, and I have many individuals to thank for traveling this journey with me. At Columbia University, Arnold Aronson, Julie Stone Peters, and Martin Puchner championed what seemed an impossible project and allowed me the freedom to roam. Bruce Robbins and Maura Spiegel received it graciously at the height of summer. Colleagues at King's College London have offered support and collegiality in various ways: thanks especially to my department chairs Mark Turner, Jo McDonagh, and Richard Kirkland, as well as to Seb Franklin, Paul Gilroy, Brian Hurwitz, Ananya Jahanara Kabir, Alan Read, Theron Schmidt, and Lara Shalson. I am particularly grateful to Richard and the School of Arts and Humanities at King's for essential research support in the final stages.

Among the many colleagues, mentors, students, and friends who have nourished this work with collegiality, conversation, and critique, published bits in progress, and offered injections of warmth, thank you especially to Michael Allan, Johannes Birringer, Melissa Blanco Borelli, Peter Boenish, Amanda Card, Broderick Chow, Nicola Conibere, Laura Cull, Thomas FE. DeFrantz, Kate Elswit, Rachel Fensham, Patrick ffrench, Clare Finburgh, Tony Fisher, Avishek Ganguly, Yelena Gluzman, Sam Godin, Huw Hallam, Alvan Ikoku, Amelia Jones, Michael Jonik, Eve Katsouraki, Joe Kelleher, Anjuli Raza Kolb, Alvin Eng Hui Lim, Dejan Lukié, Jon McKenzie, Penny Newell, Clare Parfitt-Brown, Ella Parry-Davies, VK Preston, Noémie Solomon, Arabella Stanger, Shilarna Stokes, Sarah Whatley, Suzy Willson, and Alison Wood. It is often, in times of doubt, for our students that we write. I owe thanks to all those who have asked the hardest questions and followed their own improbable strands.

Among the many mentors who have modelled ways of asking and offered vectors of thought, special thanks are due to Gil Anidjar, Etienne Balibar, Sylvére Lotringer, Chantal Pontbriand, Michael Taussig, and, long ago, Ruth Harris and Miri Rubin. Unbeknownst to her, Karen Ray at Marianopolis College in Montreal set me going on dance manias in the margins of an essay I wrote for her on the Black Death, sparking the fantasy of this book. Frederick Andermann shared thoughts on the history of neurology in early stages, Lesley Sharp on Madagascar. Karl Steel and Daniel Hadas both lent a hand with the stickiest bits of Latin. For impeccable help with German, thanks to Anna Gritsch and to Matia Gotman. Ellen MacCallum helped me see that my work is all, in the end, steeped in translation.

A visiting fellowship at the Society for the Humanities at Cornell University coincided with the last stages of writing and research; I am grateful to Timothy Murray and all the fellows for their warm welcome. An Audrey and William H. Helfand fellowship at the New York Academy of Medicine enabled me to pursue vital research into the tarantella; thank you to Arlene Shaner at the NYAM Library for supporting this work from early on. Among the many librarians who have enabled this research, thanks are also due to Eleanor Fitzpatrick at the Philip Richardson Library, Royal Academy of Dance; Arlene Yu at the Dance Collection, Jerome Robbins Dance Division, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts; Mary Frances Morrow, Rodney A. Ross, and Jill Abraham at the National Archives and Records Administration, Library of Congress; Diane Richardson at the Oskar Diethelm Library, Institute for the History of Psychiatry, Cornell Weill Medical Center and New York Presbyterian Hospital; Stephen Novak at the Columbia University Health Sciences Special Collections Library; and Chris Lyons at the Osler Library for the History of Medicine, McGill University. Many thanks to all staff at the Rare Books and Music Reading Room at the British Library; the Theatre and Performance Collections, Victoria and Albert Museum; the Special Collections Reading Room, School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London; the Warburg Institute; the New York Public Library; and the Union Theological Seminary in New York. I have shared portions of this work in progress at various seminars, conferences, and talks over the years and am grateful to all the colleagues and students who have extended a hand and indulged in the gift of conversation, including at the Society for Dance History Scholars / Congress on Research in Dance conference in Athens; the PoP Moves seedbed on dancing methodologies; the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama 'Practice (...) Research' conference; the Contemporary Arts Research Seminar and Chichester Festival Theatre Study Day, University of Chichester; the Research Seminar on the Theory, Practice and History of Performance at Goldsmiths, University of London; the Brunel Theatre Research Seminar and Artaud Forum, Brunel University; the London Theatre Seminar; the inaugural Performance Philosophy Research Seminar on 'dance(-theatre) and philosophy' and the first Performance Philosophy conference, both University of Surrey; various Theatre and Performance Research Association events at Queen Mary, University of London and King's College London; the Anglo-American Theatre, Performance and Philosophy conference at the Sorbonne; the Theatre Studies Seminar at the National University of Singapore; the Cornell Society for the Humanities; the University of Pennsylvania Graduate Humanities Forum; the Richardson History of Psychiatry Research Seminar at the Institute for the History of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College and New York Presbyterian Hospital; and the first International Congress on Epilepsy, Brain and Mind in Prague. At Oxford University Press, Norm Hirschy and Lauralee Yeary have been keen and supportive allies. Thank you to Richa Jobin for seeing this seamlessly through production; and to Martha Ramsey for copyediting. Mark Franko's enthusiasm for the work gave me the courage to keep writing, the certainty of an audience. I am grateful to him for his trust and his vision. My anonymous reviewers provided pointed and generous feedback and suggestions for improvement without which this work would be incomparably poorer; thank you. John Doddy has offered meticulous research support. Finally, I could not have done this work without the support of my family, who have taught me to live across languages and national lines. My parents in particular have modelled curiosity and perseverance, shown me science and art. Throughout so much of the writing, Steve Potter remained my closest critic and most trusted ear, sharing in this work with the patience of a friend and the clarity of a true reader. Dinah Gypsy has kept me laughing and awake at every conceivable hour. Thank you for your dancing and drawing, your painting and stories, your play. Choreomania Introduction

Choreomania, Another Orientalism

History is the concrete body of becoming; with its moments of intensity, its lapses, its extended periods of feverish agitation, its fainting spells —Michel Foucault, ‘Nietzsche, Genealogy, History’ (1971)

CHOREA, CHOREOMANIA: CONCEPTS IN MOTION

This book aims to intervene into ways we think about dance; and ways we imagine dance to be embedded into the fabric of scientific ideas. Indebted to the thinking of Foucault, and to some of Foucault’s successors in the postcolonial and dance and performance studies fields, notably Edward W. Said (1935-2003), this book traces a discursive history of ideas about dance—specifically, the dancing disease—in nineteenth- and early twentieth-century colonial medical circles.

Discursive history, often likened to ‘historical epistemology’—a term employed to denote histories of previous ways of knowing—takes as its primary object the way things are talked about in their time: the discourses, languages, and methods of circulation by which ideas have come to take shape and spread. Importantly for the story I tell here, discursive histories do not always heed disciplinary boundaries; instead, histories of ways of thinking often take shape on interdisciplinary terrain.

In the case of the dancing disease, this history—what I will later refer to as a ‘genealogy’, after Foucault, and further, given its particularly motional quality, as ‘choreography’—reconfigures the way we understand modern disciplines taking shape. This approach to the history of ideas about dance and discipline is further informed by an understanding of Foucault’s work articulated by his long-time friend and interlocutor, philosopher Gilles Deleuze (1925-1995).

Following Deleuze’s reading of Foucault’s method, I argue that the formation of modern ideas about choreomania is rhizomatic: it moves, multiplies, and branches out in non-linear ways. But choreomania's genealogy may also be read according to what Deleuze describes of Foucault's method as ‘topology’, a description of the spaces in and through which concepts may be imagined to form. In Deleuze’s account of Foucault’s work, topologies emerge through both linguistic and material processes. There are two types of space: associated space (espace associé), which is characterized by meeting and cross-pollination, and correlative space, where discursive enunciations encounter material subjects and objects, as well as other concepts.

Discursive zones of intensity are temporary clusterings of ideas, attitudes, and beliefs that may become rigidified and canonized through institutional means but are always on the move. This book describes not only a set of topologies but also the choreotopology of the dancing disease, its journey through discursive and institutional spaces, and the choreography—the movement—of this choreotopology as it clusters and transforms, revealing a sea of disciplinary changes on the way.

The book argues that fantasies of unwieldy and disruptive motion—likened to dance—saturated modern medical writing about dancing crowds, and that these ideas in turn reveal modern ways of thinking about the past as unruly and dance-like. Further at stake, then, in this book, is the history of ideas about dancing bodies in public space and the way public space itself is imagined in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to be constantly threatened by a resurgence of dancing motions.

This book argues that modern ideas about the dancing disease as an ancient frenzy re-emerging in present times permeate contemporary notions of the body politic: the way bodies move in and have the capacity to move public space. Choreography, as Foster points out, ‘began its life as the act of reconciling movement, place, and printed symbol’; the notion of ‘choreography’ worked with in this book suggests that ‘printed symbol’ is itself subject to movement; that place is inscribed in a bodily trajectory; that the history of thought is itself choreographic. Choreography is not merely "the art of dancing" (the Oxford English Dictionary definition, as Foster points out); nor is it, more anciently, 'the art of writing dances on paper'—nor is it even, in Foster's more expansive definition, 'a plan or orchestration of bodies in motion' (whether of office workers, troops, or traffic lights). It is a manner of articulating a concept and practice of—and in—motion; of irritating the border between these; irritating the very notion of 2. Gilles Deleuze, Foucault (Paris: Les éditions de minuit, 2004), 16. All translations mine unless otherwise indicated. 3. Deleuze, Foucault, 16. 4, Susan Leigh Foster, Choreographing Empathy: Kinesthesia in Performance (London: Routledge, 2011), 15-17.

Choreography renders motion (gestures, attitudes, gaits, intensities, trajectories) visible, intelligible, as form. At the same time, it is the very motion of bodies—books, pens, people—carrying this form, translating and further transforming it. Choreography thus shows 'planned' and 'orchestrated' or, conversely, unplanned and non-orchestrated (even untraced and unrepeatable) motion, occasioning the event of embodied discursivization—we might say, the practical concept—of form; specifically, the intelligibilization of order and disorder. Disorder, I submit, is the practical concept against which order comes to light; it emerges as a moving figure of thought, in the choreographic labour of articulating scenes and events.

Choreography in the sense I propose thus suggests an act of articulation, one that negotiates a border zone between order and disorder, planned and unplanned motion. Choreography may be understood as an apparatus of articulation investigating the part movement plays in structuring how we see, talk about, or embody relationships between order and disorder, historically and aesthetically. In this sense, choreography takes place between language and archive, where the archive is embodied as well as written or notated; choreography passes between systems of meaning, serving as an act of translation, at once a reinterpretation and reinscription of prior forms, returning to and moving prior systems of order along.

Choreography in this sense may further be understood as the art and science of highlighting, even disrupting, practices and concepts of orderliness; and of the disciplines—bodily, artistic, and scientific—that shape and entrench or query this partition. Choreography—as a practice and zone of articulation, a choreozone—thus moves; it performs a perpetual act of reorganization. As a manner of articulating ways of moving and vectors of thought, choreography is fundamentally historical and historiographical, always going somewhere and coming from somewhere, passing through, carrying a residue. As such, choreography constitutes a manner of seeing and writing a relationship in the present to a concept of motion from the past.

To write—to do—choreography is, in what follows, to articulate shifting zones of resonance (and dissonance) arising between moving ways of figuring order and its distempers. This does not have anything necessarily to do with concert dance forms, such as ballet or jazz or tap—and indeed this book will deal only very fleetingly with recognized dance genres. Rather, in what follows, choreography refers to a way of organizing bodies in a discursive field, that by which concepts and practices of organization are deployed and move across disciplinary as well as geopolitical terrains. As such, choreography arbiters bodily order, and the spaces through which this 'order' moves. Significantly, it is the language, genealogy, and historiography—the moving archive—of that arbitration that I rest my attention on here. In this regard, this book also resonates with recent writing in movement and mobility studies, arising as an interdisciplinary cluster to describe the circulation of bodies and ideas in an emergent 'global' modernity. And the book questions the disciplinary foundations of performance studies and dance as fields that, in different ways, imagine themselves to arise transhistorically and transnationally from out of post-disciplinary moments paradoxically reinscribed into the disciplinary structures of their respective markets. The symposium titled ‘Undisciplining Dance’ at the University of Auckland and the multisite ‘Fluid States’ iteration of Performance Studies international testify to a new vigorous movement in these fields to rethink disciplinarity and (transnational) geographic culture. But more work remains to be done to historicize these disciplinary imaginaries and rethink the foundations of dance and performance within a global, multidisciplinary context not separated from colonial or scientific methods; and importantly founded in the same ‘anecdotal’ methods cultural theorist Sean Cubitt argues serve as the humanities’ and some social sciences’ special purview, one that distinguishes these areas of inquiry, he argues, from science. This book not only shows dance and performance long embedded in scientific and social scientific methods and imaginaries, steeped in colonial administration (and violence) but also shows that these imaginaries were articulated with writing methods just as anecdotal, rhizomatic, and cross-disciplinary as current-day performance studies and dance. The discursive history this book traces, then, compels us to rethink the cultural trenches scientific, social scientific, humanities, and arts scholars continue to build up and imagine we are able occasionally radically to trespass. At its most militant, this book argues for a reconsideration of the way dance must continue to be construed across fields; and the way the history of fields themselves must always be taken globally and relationally.

Introduction + 3

In order to articulate the notion of choreomania as a concept, a few things have to be put in place. First, what is a concept? How do concepts relate to the reality they are meant to describe? In order to answer these questions, I engage with a broadly vitalist strand of thinking articulated among others by philosopher of time and memory Henri Bergson (1859-1941) and later by Deleuze and his long-time collaborator the anti-psychiatrist and activist Félix Guattari (1930-1992), all thinkers of the transformative quality of philosophy. For Bergson, a concept is like a photographic still: it temporarily captures an aspect of reality; but reality, Bergson argues, moves more fluidly and quickly than the concept does. Choreomania, as a concept, never quite captures the reality of the events it attempts to describe. My use of ‘choreomania’ is indicative: whereas writers I discuss in these pages employ the term from time to time, they also speak of epidemic chorea, chorea major, and demonomania. Medical language, like other languages, moves, and whereas the history of choreomania is a history of by and large medical ideas about disorderly corporeality—spuriously linked to ‘chorea’ as an individual movement disorder—the broader notion of choreomania I describe here stretches to the outer reaches of psychiatric and sociological history to encompass far less clearly medical movements. This mobile nexus of ideas, this choreozone, is thus what I call choreomania: a history of ideas about an epidemic disorder, a dancing plague, as it shifts across fields of knowledge and geographic terrains. In order further to help articulate the choreomania concept, and the notion of a concept—as well as the history of concepts—as such, I draw from Deleuze and Guattari’s final joint work, What Is Philosophy? (1994 [original French Ed, 1991), in which they argue that the task of philosophy is none other than to articulate concepts. But, they argue, following Bergson, concepts have to be understood as fluid and changeable. Concepts are never fixed. Rather, concepts shift and transform as they border other concepts. The history of a concept, Deleuze and Guattari write, ‘zigzags’.° It passes through what they call ‘planes of enunciation’—areas or zones of speech, thought, and expression. Intellectual history in this view follows what I further call a choreographic trajectory, an intellectual and material zigzag, a history of bodies and ideas moving. The history of ideas is a history that moves in fits and starts. Choreomania, I argue, is an idea that moved quite a lot. In fact, for much of the history of ‘choreomania’, this term did not appear; instead, a range of associated concepts designated erratic and abrupt, as well as highly infectious, forms of corporeality, all of which looked somewhat like dance: ‘chorea minor’, also referred to in neurology as ‘chorea’, ‘Sydenham’s chorea’, or ‘Huntington’s chorea’, as I show further in chapter 3, describes individual jerks and tics, occasionally hereditary, often among small children. ‘Chorea major’ was conceived in medical history as the epidemic form of this individual neurological disorder. It was often described as ‘St. Vitus’s dance’, a term confusingly also used by medical writers to refer to the large movement of dancers taking to streets in the late medieval post-plague world (chapter 2). These same writers used ‘choreomania’ more or less interchangeably with ‘chorea major’ and ‘St. Vitus’s dance’. Further terms included the ‘dancing mania’ or ‘dance mania’, Die Tanzwuth in German, and the dansomanie in French. What arrests my attention is the complex of ideas shifting through this cluster, this choreo-zone in the history of ideas about movement. I use the term ‘choreomania’ therefore as shorthand to designate a broad spectrum of medical, historical, and anthropological approaches to collective disorderly motility, while pointing to the unstable history the term reveals. What interests me is the way this cluster of ideas formed and spread, and how in its many strands, the idea of choreomania—as an epidemic, spasmodic dancing disorder—describes thickly entangled areas of thinking about history, modernity, and the body.

ANOTHER ORIENTALISM

'Choreomania', then, designates at once the object and its critique. In this regard, I have been deeply influenced by Said's work on Orientalism, as a way of thinking about a substantial strand of intellectual and academic life—a complex of disciplines, in the case of Orientalism—and the ideological undercurrents that discursive analysis can bring to light. For Said, Orientalism suggests the idea that the Orient is a singular entity that therefore can be studied. This idea is fascinating and revealing, he argues: in order for the 'Orient' to be construed, as something that the 'West' might study (and dominate), a whole complex of disparate peoples and places have to be brought together and compared. Particularities are flattened; histories romanticized, hyperbolized, and rewritten. People as far away as Egypt, Iran, and China are discussed, in the Orientalist imaginary, as one. So, too, the viewer in Orientalist discourse is largely invisible: the West, for the Orientalist, is not problematic—only the Oriental subject merits an ambivalent shower of blame and praise. Although the rise of whiteness studies in the last decades has attempted to remedy this blind spot in Western intellectual history (and in many respects, this book can be seen as a means to theorize whiteness as a fantasy articulating obscure others), Orientalist discourse continues to pervade foreign policy and popular opinion on a proliferation of border politics and contemporary wars. [My aim with the analysis of choreomania is to articulate ways in which a complex of ideas about awkward and irregular movements are similarly conflated in nineteenth- and early twentieth-century scientific and social scientific fields, from the history of epilepsy and psychiatry to religious convulsions, ecstasies, and ‘jerks’, and from late medieval St. John’s Day dancing to cargo cults. As such, this book reveals a deep suspicion against irregular motility—a preference for smooth, regular, and predictable movements over spontaneous or abrupt corporeal acts. Choreomania, I argue, is not just like Orientalism, as a complex of ideas bringing disparate actions together under one discursive roof; it is saturated with Orientalist prejudices against obscurity, unintelligibility, primitiveness, and Eastern-inflected Dionysianism. In this view, unruliness, childishness, and spontaneity are described in the medical literature as simultaneously animal and ancient, historical and organic. The discursive history of choreomania, then—the history of this idea’s transformation and spread—describes ways of reading bodily motion, and ways this reading itself can be construed as a conceptual act: an act of philosophy determined by the material realities of its authors’ routes. This book thus continues Said’s project of uncovering intellectual blind spots in the learned institutions of nineteenth-century Europe and America. But whereas Orientalism reveals a pervasive prejudice against Middle Eastern and African subjects and the dark, dangerous, and sexually loquacious femininity they were meant to embody first and foremost in the Orientalist academic field, this book reveals pervasive prejudice against spontaneous gestures and the suspect movement of crowds portrayed in medicine and the social sciences. The fields I describe—the history of medicine, neurology, psychiatry, psychology, sociology, anthropology, ethnography, history, and popular journalism—are all influenced by the Orientalist moment. But this book shows that the Orientalist construct can be taken further, to describe a range of nonverbal actions and the imbrication of bodily events in modern science. ‘Choreomania described everything from the moral and mental degeneration of so-called primitive people to the seemingly contagious and mechanistic behavior of male and female bodies. As such, the node choreomania describes suggests a way of thinking about public corporeality as dark, dangerous, and ultimately unknowable, but also comedic and bizarre. The cryptic quality of ‘choreomania’ thus extends the Orientalist spectrum to include erratic gestures and a complex of neurological disorders that further tie the elusive other into a discourse on social politics and medicine, setting whole casts of ‘marginals’ apart. Said’s debt to Foucault is one I also share. In particular, this book shares an affinity with two central concerns of Foucault: the status of the outcast or ‘abnormal’ (often ‘marginal’) person 6, Edward W. Said, Orientalism (New York: Vintage Books, 1994). 7. ‘Whiteness’ is a complex and still not nearly often enough historicized term, in spite of the rise of critical whiteness studies since the early 1990s. On the moving borders of ‘white’ culture, see especially the pioneering work of Vron Ware, Beyond the Pale: White Women, Racism, and History (London: Verso, 1992); Noel Ignatiev, How the Irish Became White (New York: Routledge, 1995); Karen Brodkin, How Jews Became White Folks and What That Says About Race in America (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1998). My usage best approximates what Ware, following John Hartigan Jr., describes as a ‘racial situation’, a basically anti-essentialist view of race that sees the construction and experience of whiteness, blackness, or what have you as being fundamentally relational; this not only historicizes the question Donna Haraway poses to Ware, as she recounts it (‘When did English women first think of themselves as white”), but also situates the fraught question of race in a changing national and international context. ‘Whiteness’ then becomes something not only constructed, but implicit, spectral, and shifting, as well as deeply contextual, mapped onto a host of interrelated political and social concerns, including nationalism, gender, war, etc. See Ware interviewed in Bolette B. Blaagaard, ‘Workings of Whiteness: Interview with Vron Ware’, Social Identities 17.1 (2011): 153-161, 155.

Introduction + 5 and the institution of knowledge. With Foucault, I seek to understand how discourses about otherness emerge in given historical periods, which institutional and intellectual conditions enabled their articulation, and how new fields of knowing were constituted around this stipulated ‘other’ as an object of understanding and eventually biopower. As Said and Deleuze point out, Foucault was interested not only in structures of power and enclosure but also in a conception of life as the excessive, the surplus lurking beyond systems of language, discourse, and idea.® This book seeks to understand how this surplus—this excess vitality—came to be contextualized in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as a dancing sort of disease, a hyperbolic, feminine, and queer sort of expansive gesturality spilling beyond the individual body into public space. What I argue, then, following the historian and philosopher of science Ian Hacking, is that choreomania is not a stable ontological or medical category. Writing about so-called multiple personality disorder, Hacking argues that today’s diagnostic categories cannot be transposed onto past events; we cannot retrospectively diagnose behaviors and beliefs, because these, and the philosophical and affective systems around them, change.® Similarly, I do not diagnose—nor do I aim to re-diagnose—choreomania, for example to argue that it was or was not ‘actually’ one or another type of cultural phenomenon or disease. Instead, this book argues, there were in a sense never any ‘real’ choreomaniacs. There is a vast and rich literature about something called choreomania, and a breathtaking range of events that constitute what I call the choreomania repertoire, from late medieval and early modern St. Vitus’s dancers to tarantati in early modern Italy, eighteenth-century convulsions, modern Abyssinians, American religious enthusiasts, and factory workers. By the twentieth century, millennialist movements in Melanesia and Polynesia multiplied the sites for dance-like ‘disorders’, just as Native American Ghost Dancers were understood by at least one influential government anthropologist to be participating in a variation on the same. In twentieth-century dance halls, tango and animal dance aficionados all enjoyed a dancing ‘craze’ of their own, compared once again in medical and popular literature to medieval dancing epidemics. In all instances, symptomatic resemblance and loose genealogies widened the choreomania family tree, just as the concept of the dancing disease came to be so capacious as to signal almost anything or anyone that moved too much and too erratically. This approach is slightly different from writing the concept of choreomania ‘sous rature’ (under erasure), the figure of speech Jacques Derrida (1930-2004) employs in Of Grammatology (1998 [orig. French ed. 1967]) to describe how some terms have to be written to indicate their problematic aspect as well as their unavoidability as terms for analysis. Rather than merely erase or supersede some words with 8. Edward W. Said, ‘Michel Foucault, 1926-1984’, in Jonathan Arac, ed., After Foucault: Humanistic Knowledge, Postmodern Challenges (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1991), 1-11, 5. Foucault's Nietzschean inheritance emerged most forcefully when he witnessed the Iranian revolution in 1979 and for the first time confronted, Said notes, the ‘entirely collective, involuntary excessiveness which could not be herded under conventional rubrics like class contradictions or economic oppression’ (9). Foucault’s work on madness has been vigorously criticized by historians bent on upholding an empirical approach to the study of the past as opposed to Foucault’s ‘symbolist abstraction’. See H. C. Erik Midelfort, A History of Madness in Sixteenth- Century Germany (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999), 7. See also H. C. Erik Midelfort, ‘Madness and Civilization in Early Modern Europe: A Reappraisal of Michel Foucault’, in Barbara Malament, ed., After the Reformation: Essays in Honor of J. H. Hexter (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1980), 247-266; Arthur Still and Irving Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness: Studies in Foucault's Histoire de la folie’ (London: Routledge, 1992); Colin Jones and Roy Porter, eds., Reassessing Foucault: Power, Medicine, and the Body (London: Routledge, 1998). Whereas these studies decry the broad brushstrokes of Foucault’s writ- ing, they also underplay the philosophical and aesthetic value of the figures of thought he brought to his subjects and the labour of concept formation he contributed to the history of ideas, the only field with which he claimed any real affinity. For a cogent defence of Foucault's work against vitriolic critique by ‘the historians’, see esp. Colin Gordon, ‘Rewriting the History of Misreading’, in Still and Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 167-184. Recent publication in English of Foucault's unabbreviated History of Madness, ed. Jean Khalfa, trans. John Murphy and Jean Khalfa (London: Routledge, 2006), replacing the long popular (and highly contested) much abbreviated version Madness and Civilization (London: Routledge, 1989), as well as his lectures at the Collége de France, have brought new vigour to Foucault studies, and a new appraisal of the rigour of his historiographic and philosophical thought. See e.g. Mark D. Jordan, Convulsing Bodies: Religion and Resistance in Foucault (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2015). Wendy Brown, in Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution (Brooklyn: Zone Books, 2015), represents a new body of writing on Foucault’s interest in governmentality. On the reappraisal of Foucault’s Histoire de la folie prior to its recent unabbreviated translation into English, see esp. Still and Velody, Rewrit______ The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

6 + INTRODUCTION others or, as anthropologist Vincent Crapanzano suggests, put them in quotation marks (a similar but equally failing strategy for ideological critique), key terms—here, ‘choreomania’—can be construed to contain both ideological constructs and their critique. Following Said, I do not just distance myself from choreomania by writing it under erasure or in quotation marks but posit the use of this term for describing a whole complex of desires, imaginings, and practices as well as their critique. In this book, ‘choreomania’ implicates historicity, antiquity, and primitivism, but also incoherence, heightened affect, and excess, to encompass nineteenth-century fantasies of historical and colonial others, and a far greater category of otherness pertinent in cultural critique today. Specifically, choreomania signals an order—and disorder—of expressive affect by which the body politic falls dramatically into disrepair. This book thus reads the way the medical and social scientific language of the dancing disease came about: the institutional, ideological, political, and cultural worlds within which this cast of ‘marginals’ came to be imagined. In this regard, this book can be considered alongside works such as Lamont Lindstrom’s Cargo Cult: Strange Stories of Desire from Melanesia and Beyond (1993), which traces the genealogy of the term ‘cargo cult’ within academic anthropology, particularly in the Pacific region, and its ‘spread far beyond that discipline’. Lindstrom, by his own account, is concerned ‘with the stories we tell about cargo cult, not with their historical and ethnographic accuracy’. Rather than take the notion of the cargo cult as a stable referent used to designate a coherent set of practices and beliefs, he is interested in what narratives of cargo cults say about anthropological ‘desire’. As he puts it, ‘Cargo cults are Melanesian, but cargo cult accounts belong to us’. Similarly, this book tells us about modern scientific desires and imaginaries of dance. Yet my emphasis is slightly different from Lindstrom’s. While tracing the genealogy of ideas about choreomania in medical history first of all, this book also discovers how such a nexus of ideas moves through fields, including colonial medicine, sociology, medical anthropology, and ethnography; this book’s story then is also about interdisciplinary cross-pollination and the movement of ‘desires’. I also stick less closely to the singular label ‘choreomania’, discovering a network of fantasies having to do with incoherence, illegibility, awkward gesture, heightened movement and affect, collective seizures and trances, mass delusions, frenzy, and popular obsessions, which meet in the term ‘choreomania’ but also exceed it. ‘Choreomania’ thus comes to stand in for an interconnected set of discourses and desires articulated across fields in nineteenth- and twentieth-century intellectual life, spilling out into popular culture and sensationalizing journalism. These interconnected discourses reveal shared fantasies according to which the ‘epidemic’ encroachment of bodies on public space and fitful motions come to be seen as two sides of one pathological phenomenon. This book in this regard tells a prehistory of the dance and performance studies fields, excavating literature about disruptive movement imagined to emerge from ancient time to upend modern social and political life. TORQUE The chronological framework covered by this book coincides with what cultural theorist Hillel Schwartz has characterized as the period between 1840 and 1940 when ‘movement transforms’. * As he writes, “between 1840 and 1940, children and adults alike would slowly be rehearsed into a habit of gesturing and a repertoire of ‘streamlined’ gestures.”5 These were “central to the new kinaesthetic—clean, fluid, curvilinear gestures moving from the center of the body outward through uninterrupted but muscularly well-controlled rhythmic impulses.”a This curvilinearity was what10. For a pertinent discussion of Derrida and Crapanzano’s notions of writing ‘under erasure’ and in quotation marks, respectively, see Elfriede Hermann, ‘Dissolving the Self-Other Dichotomy in Western “Cargo Cult” Constructions’, in Holger Jebens, ed., Cargo, Cult, and Culture Critique (Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, 2004), 36-58, 37-38. 11. Lamont Lindstrom, Cargo Cult: Strange Stories of Desire from Melanesia and Beyond (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1993). 12. Lindstrom, Cargo Cult, 12. See also Martha Kaplan, Neither Cargo nor Cult: Ritual Politics and the Colonial Imagination in Fiji (Durham: Duke University Press, 1995), esp. xii-xiv. 13. Lamont Lindstrom, ‘Cargo Cult at the Third Millennium’, in Jebens, ed., Cargo, Cult, and Culture Critique, 15-35, 16-17. 14. Hillel Schwartz, ‘Torque: The New Kinaesthetic of the Twentieth Century’, in Jonathan Crary and Sanford Kwinter, eds., Zone 6: Incorporations (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 71-127, 77. 15. Schwartz, ‘Torque’, 91. 16. Schwartz, ‘Torque’, 91. Introduction + 7 Schwartz calls torque, the kinaesthetic tor- sion of the body according to an axial rotation or twist, as of a coil or spiral unwinding itself. This modern preference for clean, smooth curvilinear motion echoed through the sciences of graphology or handwriting, orature, and modern dance. Paramount in social scientific theories of motional fluidity, Schwartz argues, was the ‘social intelligibility’ of gesture: as a true expression of a soulful impulse, an intelligible gesture suggested trustworthiness, forthrightness, and a wholesome, honest, and expressive civic spirit.1 This was contrary to what Schwartz notes was a concomitant ‘late nineteenth-century epidemic of apparently uncontrollable gesture—an epidemic of tics, choreas, convulsions, aphasias and strangely impermanent but recurring paralyses that left so many women of all classes invalids’.1 This book picks up this minor literature, and draws this second history of mid-nineteenth- to early twentieth-century kinaesthetic philosophy into fuller view, also edging Schwartz’s chronological frame slightly further back by a decade to the 1830s, when medical historian and pioneer epidemiologist J. F. C. Hecker (1795-1850) articulated his theory of epidemic dancing and (indirectly) gestural dislocation. In ‘The Dancing Mania’, Hecker bridged his own historiographical interest in contagion—especially what he was first to describe as the ‘Black Death’—with anecdotal accounts of religious movements in Europe, America, and the colonial world. The awkward, spasmodic, convulsive movements of dancing manias emerged with even fuller force in a fin-de-siécle discourse on hysteria, including female (and colonial) ‘hysteria’: these were the ‘twitches, seizures and paralyses’ or ‘hysterical attacks’ Sigmund Freud (______ THE ARCHIVAL REPERTOIRE
In tandem with (and in counterpoint to) Schwartz’s concept of torque, this book reveals a discursive history of convulsive bodies and crowds traversing the long century between 1830 and the 1940s, and founded in centuries of prior convulsive bodies and crowds imagined by medical and anthropological writers in this period. Performing what I call a brand of exuberant comparativism, these writers collaged and compared histories of convulsive corporeality in often slightly haphazard feats of archival recuperation. This yields what I am calling a morphing, plastic, archival repertoire of gestural events.

As distinct from what Diana Taylor has influentially called the static and hegemonic ‘archive’ of written texts, opposed to a more fluid and bodily ‘repertoire’ of oral and performative events, the archival repertoire comprises a mobile, piecemeal set of archival objects, including written texts, images, and live observations travelling with their writers across the globe.

The archival repertoire is not fixed or hegemonic, though it is written, by and large: like bodily performances, it is subject to constant transformation, imitation, repetition, and recuperation; it is a loose and changing set of references that writers draw up and reimagine.

At the same time, the writers I discuss here, enthusiastically collecting histories of convulsive events, remain persistently opaque in their writing with regard to the gestures themselves. It is rarely clear exactly what the ‘choreomanias’ looked like, or what ‘choreomaniacs’ were doing when they frothed, fell, and raved. But I argue, the relative illegibility of these gestures in medical and ethnographic texts reveals the very phantasmatization of this choreic movement as an epidemic disease. Indeed, the lack of careful choreographic description tells a powerful story in itself: that of the language of approximation, fictionalization, and fantasy of disorderly bodies set in motion as writers recuperated and repeated one another’s narratives, spotting further instances of choreomania: awkward bodies, falling bodies, bodies prey to fits and starts. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Rather than trying to rehearse their attempts to collect case studies, this book tells the story of the discursivization of ‘dance manias’: the language with which the figure of choreomania was roughly drawn. Modernity For the purposes of this book, I define ‘modern’ as that which posits the new in contrast to the old. In sociologist Henri Lefebvre’s (1901-1991) terms, modernity is that which ‘[bids] for knowledge’. ‘By modernity’, he writes, ‘we understand the beginnings of a reflective process, a more-or-less advanced attempt at critique and autocritique’.2 Modernity can be defined as that which turns on itself, and onto the world around it, to articulate, explain, and make intelligible what is perceived to have been previously unknown or unknowable and obscure. In this respect, modernity can be understood as a process of intelligibilization; it is not just a historical period, an art movement, or a political platform, but a motion towards thought, no matter how misconstrued this thought may appear in retrospect. Indeed, modernity continues to construe thinking, in this view; to revise its understandings; to move, in a sense, intellectually forward. As I am positing in this book, this movement ‘forward’ is also a movement back, as scientists and other writers in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries sought to read bodies and movements in the present day with reference to antique lore. They gathered images and anecdotes, narratives, chronicles, and case studies, illuminating the present by way of the past. This scientific backlighting of modern corporealities with a reach to ancient history, and to the fiction of the antediluvian, automatic animality it was meant to uphold, produced an uncanny present, haunted by a felt sense of the past as boisterous other. Modern science looked forward; but as I suggest further in the next chapters, it did so, controversially, by also looking anxiously and inquisitively behind. In this regard, this book is in close conversation with Ramsay Burt’s Alien Bodies: Representations of Modernity, ‘Race’ and Nation in Early Modern Dance (1998), in which he argues that modernity constructs itself in relation to ‘alien’ (often African) others, and that modern dance can be construed as a criss-crossing between European and African, American, and African-American forms of bodily being, all of which become uncomfortable with the rootlessness modernity brings about. ‘Alien’ bodies, for Burt, are uncannily other: they are not entirely at home in their own ‘modern’ selves: they are awkward, foreign, and yet familiar. What’s more, these ‘alien’ bodies represent an uncanny alterity that is not only the dancer’s but also the viewer's: alterity is a shared fascination, ‘inscribed . . . within the most intimate interiority of the self’.” National and racial identity in the interwar years Burt examines (the 1920s and 1930s) are thus tensioned by a contrary motion towards foreignness, primitivism, and exoticism, embodied in Katherine Dunham’s (1909-2006) African-American dance or Josephine Baker’s (1906-1975) ‘savage’ grace. Thus ‘collective identities’ come to be shaped by exclusionary politics as well as the figures of exclusion against which such politics are imagined. Burt’s concern, to rethink narratives of modern dance, proposes to write a history that forages at the live and moving repository of information about kinetic history. See André Lepecki, ‘The Body as Archive: Will to Re-enact and the Afterlives of Dances’, Dance Research Journal 42. The following text is a corrected version of the OCRed text provided:

(2010): 28-48. 21. Henri Lefebvre, Introduction to Modernity: Twelve Preludes, September 1959-May 1961, trans. John Moore (London: Verso, 1995), 1. 22. Ramsay Burt, Alien Bodies: Representations of Modernity, ‘Race’ and Nation in Early Modern Dance (London: Routledge, 1998), 17. Burt borrows from Julia Kristeva, who suggests that we are all first of all ‘foreign’ to ourselves. See Julia Kristeva, Etrangers à nous-mêmes (Paris: Fayard, 1988).

Introduction + 9 periphery of the white European dancing subject, towards conceptual structures informed by discourses and histories of colonialism and decolonization, psychoanalysis and urbanism. This book reads an earlier incarnation of this movement of cultural cross-pollination and ambivalence, of anxious doubling and phantasmatic others, emphasizing the discursive structures within which forms of embodiment are described as alien and uncannily familiar. I argue that nineteenth-century colonial modernity construes itself also in relation to ‘alien’ others: primarily ancient and foreign. But in doing so, this colonial scientific modernity constructs an abstract ‘alien’ subject against which it attempts again and again to counterpose itself. This is not only a dancing subjectivity, but a form of embodiment that spills beyond the disciplinary spaces genealogically inhabited by ‘dance’ practice. Figures of twisting and writhing bodies, impulsive, gregarious, and in disarray, all shape an experience of modernity structured by the repetition of narratives about the antiquity of these uncannily ‘alien’ forms.

Further borrowing from Paul Gilroy, I suggest that ‘modernity’ can thus be construed as looking uncomfortably two ways, forward and back: just as the ‘Black Atlantic’ suggests a trade between American and European shores, crossed by slave ships, Enlightenment ideals, and other paradoxes of the purportedly rational modern world, so too modernity in this book looks forward and back, here and elsewhere, in a dizzying zigzag, what Gilroy terms a rhizomorphic journey that slips continuously between historical regimes. Significantly, scientific modernity in the colonial age construes itself in relation to the other and the ancient in a constant to and fro as nauseating as perpetual sea voyaging.™* Although this book posits an intellectual history extending roughly from the 1830s to the 1940s, highlighting the chronological coincidence of ‘modernity’ with the rise of modern nation states and the institution of modern scientific and social scientific disciplines, ‘modernity’ as a feeling of difference with respect to the past also comes into play in this book as early as the early modern period. Paracelsus, born Theophrastus von Hohenheim (1493-1541), influentially set his ideas about Chorea Sancti Viti against what he saw as his contemporaries’ outdated, superstitious views. In his opinion, they wrongly believed dance manias could be attributed to Satanism and witchcraft. As I show in chapter 3, Paracelsus claimed direct experimental knowledge as opposed to what he saw as his peers’ backward-looking dogma. Modernity in this view is saturated with the past, and as such appositional; it posits itself in contrast to something prior, holding that apposition as fundamental to its own modernist claim. Modernity requires the past—even a highly exaggerated and fictionalized version of the past—against which to set its novelty. Modernity in this sense also privileges a discourse of experimental reason, claiming nearly everything that came before as mere belief. Modernity, and the set of discourses I examine, privilege experimental modes of knowing, an epistemic thrust that is appetitive, that ‘keeps wanting’ to know. The modern epistemic appetite I describe accumulates, seeks, forages, rag-picks. But modernity also articulates its own notions of history and antiquity, against which to define itself. It is this fantasy of history—as restless, exuberant, hypermotional or hyperkinetic, and hyperemotional—that is the subject of this book. So whereas Sloterdijk, André Lepecki reminds us, has argued that modernity is defined by its constant motion and busy-ness, the version of modernity this book explores imagines its own business as rational and purposeful, opposed to the purposeless and disorganized motion of choreomania: a disease always construed as occurring in the past and on foreign shores and affecting allegedly superstitious, pre-modern, aimless subjects even in the present day.”° Anecdotes of dance-like happenings in factories and hospitals—epidemics of jerks, twitches, and falls periodically described among young women—likewise reinforced the scientific discourse positing dancing manias as epidemic corporeal movements spurred on by high affect. Women, colonial subjects, and people from the 23. Burt, Alien Bodies, 5-10. 24. Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (London: Verso, 1993), 3-4. 25. André Lepecki, Exhausting Dance: Performance and the Politics of Movement (New York: Routledge, 2006), 7, 12-14. On Sloterdijk’s notion that any critique of modernity is fundamentally a critical theory of movement and ‘mobilization’, see Peter Sloterdijk, La mobilisation infinie: Vers une critique de la cinétique politique, trans. Hans Hildenbrand (Paris: Christian Bourgois, 2000), esp. 42-48. Originally published as Eurotaoismus: Zur Kritik der politischen Kinetik (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1989). See also Peter Sloterdijk, ‘Mobilization of the Planet from the Spirit of Self-Intensification’, TDR: The Drama Review 50.4 [T192] (2006): 36-43. 10 + INTRODUCTION past all seemed, through the lens of the dancing disease, to suffer from keen sensitivity and an acute capacity for imitation. As mimics, these choreomaniacs—in effect the vast majority of human beings—performed their antiquity and alterity by being imitative, in other words, by engaging in like movements. Not only did they appear similar to one another, but as such their individuality apparently dissolved; they became a crowd, a vital, pulsating mass, a movement. And although women figure prominently in a num- ber of the cases I describe, they were not alone in suffering from the putative dancing disease. Yet its implicit femininity, allying primitive others with ancient, infantile, and irrational bodiliness, made choreomania an Orientalist construct that extended the idea of general dissolution—and dissoluteness—to collective, spontaneous dance. Modernity in this regard is not only simul- taneously curious and haughty about the past, but—to borrow from Said, who borrows from the language of music—contrapuntal. The exile, Said writes, sees himself always ‘against the memory’ of another environment.” The scientific language of modernity sees itself always in counterpoint to ancient histories and what it construes as other, foreign (often non- European) ways of moving; and it is fascinated with disorderly figures of collectivity. This ver- sion of scientific modernity defines itself in rela- tion to a perpetually rehearsed fantasy about the past, which it posits as unknowing, unquestion- ing, automatic, uncontrolled, and swarm-like. Modernity's past is not always or only that of the ancients, individual figures of authority, who may have been surpassed by modern science; rather, modernity's past from this perspective is that of the horde. And yet, as narratives about choreomania show, hordes only crystallize at particular moments, which bring the past into view, highlighting the cyclical, and occasionally wave-like, quality of history's motion.

History, Genealogy, Method

My purpose in writing this book has been to extend the scope of dance studies to cases of unchoreographed movement at the borderlines of dance, where it has been theorized as an epidemic disease. I show that vivid medical interest in history and alterity in the nineteenth century informed and complicated modern notions of the inchoate body politic, which 'dance manias' come to describe. My method is genealogical.

In this regard, I draw from Foucault's concept of genealogy as that which seeks the 'events of history, its jolts, its surprises, its unsteady victories and unpalatable defeats'. In turn drawing from Friedrich Nietzsche's (1844-1900) notion of genealogy (articulated most influentially in On the Genealogy of Morality [1887]), Foucault describes his genealogical method as being opposed to standard writings of 'history', inasmuch as, unlike history, genealogy does not search for origins or first causes.

'History is the concrete body of becoming', Foucault writes, 'with its moments of intensity, its lapses, its extended periods of feverish agitation, its fainting spells; . . . only a metaphysician would seek its soul in the distant ideality of the origin'.

Genealogy, for Foucault, instead signifies a radically embodied historical writing traversing various fields, contexts, and discursive regimes or modes of speech and writing. There is no supra-historical subject, no essence or transcendental object of historical analysis for Foucault; instead, the 'genealogist' considers the past by looking at discrete, interrelated elements of messy, vital, bodied life and the ways they have been described, controlled, and categorized.

But whereas Foucault's genealogical method appears to signal a philosophical interest in regimes of signification—modes of scientific, legal, and political knowledge deployed in everyday life—the vital strain in his description also highlights bodily metaphors and a bodied experience of historical events. History's fits and starts, its 'feverish agitation', suggest the uneven progress of historical events and its aleatory quality, its live processes of configuration and continual reconfiguration.

History, in this view, and genealogy, as its most appropriate method of study, is not only a history of the body as it is imagined through time but also a history by the body; and, most intriguingly, a history that is performed in a bodily way: erratically, spontaneously, fitfully, spasmodically . . . in short, choreographically.

I have taken this corporeal approach to the work of writing a genealogy to task. Shuffling through archival and government records and correspondence, medical compendia, early journals, chronicles, annals, sketches, drawings, photographs, dance manuals, missionary writings, history books, ethnographies, and other objects I hoped might reveal shreds of information about 'choreomania' as it was configured in the last couple of hundred years, I found myself performing a genealogist's dance, proceeding in fits and starts through medical history's often haphazard depictions of the strange and elusive 'dancing disease'. On some occasions, I got up to dance, as when I finally found a description of one of these intangible instances of choreomania: the Ghost Dance, genealogically linked to the paradigmatic St. Vitus's dance by its first and arguably most influential ethnographer, James Mooney (1861-1921). The Ghost Dance involved a shuffling side step to the left. This I could do. But what did the movement reveal? So little; perhaps, that dance 'manias' were also at times calm, peaceable events. What was 'manic' or excessive, as I detail in chapter 9, was the length of time the shuffling was performed; an attendant climate of fear and anger; and the concerted legal and government efforts to suppress this as a wasteful expenditure of time and energy, as fraying archives housed at the Library of Congress revealed.

The Ghost Dance was a collective movement, performed by people in concert; it suggested a heightened affective state, exacerbated by an atmosphere of political tension leading to radical crisis. My own tentative embodiment of the shuffling motion prompted an experience of focus, a concentric gathering of energy, which the narratives and drawings I encountered corroborated, against the grain of official narratives and media illustrations I also read (as I detail in chapter 9). Although it is well known that the Ghost Dance was primarily an anti-colonial resistance movement, attempting to set what I read of these gestures in my body helped me better to confront the chasm between what I knew, poorly, and what I could not possibly know; between a fragile archive and a lost event. Yet in that chasm, lies another story; the story I have sought to tell.

Dance history is always partial, necessarily imperfect; but narratives remain that tell of ostensibly salient events, and those can be traced. To do that work of tracing—to perform that choreographic analysis—may help us grasp what histories have been told; grasp how language shapes our lives, and how it has constituted a site of (choreographic) biopower. Thus we may continue to query 'dance', reimagining its contours—including at the outermost edges of the 'dance' archive.

INTERDISCIPLINARY FORMATIONS: DANCE STUDIES ON THE EDGE

Following Foucault, I have sought to re-entangle the history of nineteenth-century thinking about disorderly bodies in public space within a broadly multidisciplinary field. My intention has been to understand how conditions for the concatentation and dissemination of knowledge about bodily alterity emerged, and how the vicissitudes of individual travels created intellectual chimeras out of ethnographic and scientific observations.

At stake, then, in this book is the history of disciplines, specifically the history of interdisciplinarity as it underpins the contemporary dance studies field. The late sociologist and public arts theorist Randy Martin (1957-2015) reminds us that interdisciplinarity presents a political thrust rooted in a post-1960s multicultural moment, during which contestation, from Black Power and the feminist movements to gay pride, sought to unhinge the disciplinary finality of the old subjects and replace these with heterogeneous, volatile, often politically vulnerable fields of inquiry. Martin also reminds us that, according to political theorist Michael E. Brown, disciplines have always had interdisciplinary foundations. This book seeks to take these claims further, and explore the interdisciplinary foundations to what continues to be a radically interdisciplinary field in the sense Martin proposes. While Martin invites dance scholars to recognize dance's inherent ability to intervene in broader political (and disciplinary) arenas, as a form of action that takes mobilization as its primary thrust, this book suggests that dance studies also has to continue to destabilize itself if it is to maintain its radically interdisciplinary political potential. This resonates with Mark Franko and Annette Richards's call for dance, music, and performance studies to destabilize themselves. [29] Randy Martin, Critical Moves: Dance Studies in Theory and Politics (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998), 189.

*12 + INTRODUCTION by looking back at the past, troubling the seemingly axiomatic ‘liveness’ and ‘presence’ of these fields with a little bit of history.*[10] This is not to say that these fields should necessarily or always ‘do’ history in a strictly material sense, reconstructing past performances, uncovering props and playbills, but that they should also theorize and conceptualize the very historicity they seem always to elude. This book seeks to examine the way historicity—as the affective and intellectual experience of history, its history-ness—comes into play in the conceptualization of dance (and political movement) as that which returns, that which haunts the present from out of the past.

Dance is not just an aesthetic form or force for mobilization, but an interdisciplinary figure, and concept, with institutional histories and schools of training that nevertheless becomes itself continually through repetition. Yet this is a repetition with difference: each reiteration and recuperation of a ‘dance’ cluster—a set of ideas about what constitutes dance, where it resides institutionally, and what it emerges from historically—reconfigures what dance is and might be. It is not sufficient, Martin argues, in response to Foster, to posit periods or modes of making, reading, or writing dance. [11] Instead, the discipline moves. The discipline of dance is not just constituted interdisciplinarily; it is constantly becoming interdisciplinary again. It must, to retain its especially mobilizational quality, continue to move; to falter; to start. It must continue to move jaggedly, in an organized and in an unrehearsed fashion; to reconstitute its congresses and playhouses; to go down back alleys and find dance in the furthest reaches of the social sphere. In doing so, it troubles the boundaries of ‘dance’ and the politico-aesthetic delineation this term inspires.

As such, this book does not showcase ‘dance’ exactly; readers seeking detailed descriptions of jetés, pirouettes, and entrechats may find the pickings slim. Instead, this book describes the emergence of new ideas about spontaneous fitful dancing as a figure of thought, a conceptual node at the heart of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century ways of thinking about history, politics, and corporeality. In this respect, this book performs a discursive analysis, an intellectual history; but also a theoretical intervention into ways of thinking about unruly collective and singular corporealities. This book thus allies itself with histories of thinking about dance in the margins of history and culture. More particularly, this book adds new matter to historiographical and theoretical thinking about anti-dance prejudices in modern thought. Ann Wagner has convincingly shown that the history of American popular culture is rent through with a puritanical, anti-dance (choreophobic) prejudice. *Similarly, Anthony Shay has argued that Islamic ‘dance’—and choreophobia in Iran—can only be construed as such through a broadly Western lens, inasmuch as ‘dance’ only exists as a distinct social and aesthetic category in the West.° The writers discussed in this book do not always call what they look at ‘dance’, but amalgamate epilepsy, chorea, social movements, and processions in a history of epidemic disease implicitly (if not always explicitly) aligning bodily movement with a disorder disrupting the industrial West.

THE MOVEMENT OF ABSTRACTION

This book thus emphasizes gestural migration, not quite the gesture of bodies on- (or off-) stage, but the migration of intellectual gestures—what I call their ‘translatio—across discursive terrains. This has meant leaving the embodied, proprioceptive, kinesthetic experience of a dancing self behind. I have done so not without some apprehension, and of course an alternative history of the ‘dancing disease’ might seek to know how collective movements, upheavals, tics, and unwieldy gesticulations felt to those performing them. But in order to write a history of moving ideas about disorderly dance and movement, I have chosen to privilege a discursive methodology that takes the language of movement itself as its object. In doing so, I have followed a line of reasoning articulated by historian and art critic Blake Stimson as the ‘gesture of abstraction’.

30. Mark Franko and Annette Richards, ‘Actualizing Absence: The Pastness of Performance’, in Mark Franko and Annette Richards, eds., Acting on the Past: Historical Performance across the Disciplines (Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, 2000), 1-9, 1-3.
31. Martin, Critical Moves, 201-204.
32. Ann Wagner, Adversaries of Dance: From the Puritans to the Present (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1997).
33. Anthony Shay, Choreophobia: Solo Improvised Dance in the Iranian World (Costa Mesa, CA: Mazda, 1999).
34. See Blake Stimson, ‘Gesture and Abstraction’, in Carrie Noland and Sally Ann Ness, eds., Migrations of Gesture (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008), 69-83, 70. Mark Franko has influentially argued that embodied movement and écriture, Introduction + 13 Abstraction is a process of describing, categorizing, and ultimately displacing vital events onto a discursive plane. But the paradox of abstraction is that this process shifts and transforms the event itself just as it attempts to capture it. In the discourse on choreomania, dance seems to be nothing but disorganized gesture, heightened affect, irregular motility, and a theatrical predisposition to corporeal and social imitation. Yet in this articulation of inarticulacy, this conceptualization of formlessness, and this abstraction from movement, a different notion of dance emerges. Bodily activity comes into the history of ideas as a site for articulation, forming, and abstraction (as gesture). Medical writing that rejects the possibility of aesthetic form in movements described conversely brings about a concept of movement wherein ‘dance’ emerges as the possibility of taking shape—as the incipient process of conceptualization. Without being returned to the abstract realm of the idea (as if dance had ever been separated from intellectualization in the first place), dance appears on the scene of medical history as the arguably far more productive potential for ideation. In that regard, dance contains within it the seeds of all the disciplines and discursive histories imputed to it by writers keen to take the plunge into this apparent primeval muck. In other words, the very pre-lapsarian, prelinguistic, and inchoate quality of the dancing manias described by medical writers and anthropologists in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries throws up a notion of dance that positions it at the vanguard of intellectualization, and so too science. Hecker, Charcot, Freud: Another History of Hysteria

Besides continuing a rich set of conversations spearheaded by Foucault, Said, Gilroy, Foster, Martin, and Burt, among others, my aim in these pages is to pursue a line of thinking on the relationship between science and dance influentially established by Felicia McCarren and Joseph Roach. In The Player's Passion: Studies in the Science of Acting (1993), Roach plumbed the depths of scientific language and the history of medical theories about actors’ motions and emotions decisively to show that scientific literature is inextricably bound up with theatre and dance. In doing so, he laid the ground for further explorations between philosophy, science, medicine, and performance, opening up dance and performance studies to deep interdisciplinarity. McCarren further offers a groundbreaking analysis of nineteenth-century concert dance and the medical language of madness in Dance Pathologies: Performance, Poetics, Medicine (1998).

In many respects, this book picks up where McCarren left off, offering a parallel history of the discursive links between dance and madness in modern science. But whereas McCarren focuses on stage dance, particularly ballet, this book looks at scientific literature on epidemiology and public space. This book also draws McCarren’s work slightly further back in time, to consider early nineteenth-century literature on epidemic hysteria reaching back to the medieval and early modern periods. In doing so, this book resituates Charcot's experiments in conversation with earlier medical theories emphasizing not just individual disease and feminine complaints, but the epidemic disorders of nations. This book thus contributes to McCarren's work an account of collective, not always female, dance pathologies, and the movement of nineteenth-century thinking about global and transhistorical corporeality.

Charcot stands as a crowning figure in the history of modern ideas about hysteria, and this book aims to respond to a wide array of writing in this field, from Mark S. Micale's influential Approaching Hysteria: Disease and Its Interpretations (1995) and Elin Diamond's Unmaking Mimesis: Essays on Feminism and Theatre (1997) to Georges Didi-Huberman's Invention of Hysteria: Charcot and the Photographic Iconography of the Salpétriére (2003 [orig. French ed. 1982]). Closer still to this book, Rae Beth Gordon's brilliant analysis of the cultural history of 'hysteroepilepsy' in relation to avant-garde (especially cabaret and film) performance in gesture and trace, need not be equated, as deconstruction often seems to suggest; instead, gestures such as those performed by moving (dancing) bodies can be understood productively to occupy space and so to enable action (and thus politics). See Mark Franko, ‘Mimique’, republished with a new introductory note in Noland and Ness, eds., Migrations of Gesture, 241-258. On the concept of the gesture in dance, see also Sally Ann Ness, "The Inscription of Gesture: Inward Migrations in Dance", in Noland and Ness, eds., Migrations of Gesture, 1-30. Susan Leigh Foster was instrumental in laying the groundwork for thinking about the relationship between reading and writing dance as imbricated systems of meaning, after Foucault, Hayden White, and Roland Barthes, in Susan Leigh Foster, Reading Dancing: Bodies and Subjects in Contemporary American Dance (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986). 14. Introduction
Why the French Love Jerry Lewis: From the Cabaret to Early Cinema (2001) and Dances with Darwin, 1875-1910: Vernacular Modernity in France (2009) set the stage for my reading of gestural excess. In the former, Gordon offers a dazzling account of ‘epileptic singers’ in Parisian cabarets and the close relationship between Charcot’s clinic and the artistic avant-garde. Her analysis of comic performance in the late nineteenth century attributes the awkward, jerky performance style so popular in Parisian cafés-concerts to psychiatric and physiological theories of bodily dysfunction, further linking these choreographic trends to a rising fashion for gesticulatory grimaces, tics, and automatisms in early French cinema. Analysing racialized movement, particularly the cakewalk, in Dances with Darwin, Gordon presents a compelling picture of complex relationships between popular entertainment, primitivism, and modernism in the sexually charged Parisian underworld in the fin de siécle. This book adds to these histories a collective slant, foregrounding epidemic dancing and genealogical relations in the medical and anthropological writings circulating at that time. What’s more, this book draws the genealogy on hysteria once again slightly further back, reinscribing it into earlier concerns with national excess and popular revolution. So whereas McCarren and Gordon concentrate their histories on Paris, the epicentre of Charcot’s world, this book describes the circulation of ideas about disorderly corporeality in colonial medical circles as Charcot’s ideas made their way to colonial shores. As such, this book offers a slightly different angle on the scientific study of jagged corporeality, ricocheting far beyond the French capital. I argue that the modern story of ideas about hysteria can be situated half a century earlier than it is most commonly described, and its political undercurrents can be reconsidered. So while the French surrealist poets Louis Aragon (1897-1982) and André Breton (1896-1966) famously declared hysteria to have been the nineteenth century’s ‘greatest poetic discovery’ in an article from 1928, dating this ‘discovery’ to 1878, earlier writing on hysteria—specifically its epidemic, dance-like form, choreomania—describes a far more ancient and collective type of gesture than even Breton allowed. Choreomania describes a distinct subtype of hysteria, convulsive and epidemic; it also presents a potent fantasy of collective disintegration far more politically grievous than the figure of the individual hysteric influential in late nineteenth-century avant-garde and scientific circles. Thus although Gordon has argued that hysteria was occasionally mentioned in the popular press as early as the 1830s as a disorder connected with hypochondria, convulsions, tetanus, and St. Vitus’s dance but was far more widely discussed and therefore culturally significant by the century’s close, this book argues that the 1830s in fact constitute a highly significant chapter in this ancient malady’s modern conceptualization. I show that hysteria went through a rarely acknowledged but highly significant conceptual phase in the 1830s, when it described a far more plural, ecosophical ‘disorder’ linking jerks and twitches, political movement and ecological upheaval.

MOVEMENT’S ‘IMPOSSIBILITY’: REARTICULATING THE FIELD

Why write about choreomania today? The history of this ‘strange delusion’ haunts contemporary social, political, and choreographic thinking. What Lepecki has called 'choreo-politics' and 'choreopolicing' and Foster has described as 'choreographing protest' posit moving bodies in public space, operating according to barely visible choreographic lines. Yet, the dances in these political movements are recognizable as dissensual, organized, agented events in which people wilfully come together to move history forward—or, at least, laterally (typically, in cases they describe, leftwards). For Lepecki, choreopolitics suggests the movement of possibility—the 'not yet' that Hannah Arendt (1906-1975) submits defines our relationship to politics, as she observes that we have not yet learned 'how to move politically'. Lepecki sees this as a challenge and an invitation to think what it might mean to marry the kinetic and the political, to see choreography as a tool for experimenting with manners of moving politically—finding structures of freedom in motion. This means confronting, even staging, the cultures of control that demarcate our daily lives—choreographies of crowd control that enforce these 'choreopolice' mechanisms—thus highlighting a practice of boundary-making and an embodied system of order which may be transgressed, trespassed, or exposed.

For Foster, choreographies of protest describe intelligent bodies engaging in collective action together, whether spontaneously or not; bodies reading other bodies suggest a wilful coming together that enacts grassroots activism. With Lepecki and Foster, attention to the political potential of bodies moving together against structures of disempowerment presents a groundswell of opportunity for writing critical histories of movement and dance, thinking the collective shapes and distributions of order (and disorder) that surround us, and, I further highlight, the discursive histories that articulate these. Indeed, the investment of dance theory and dance history in political movement reaches to the heart of the discipline, where it engages bodily action and events organized (or, conversely, disorganized) to produce meaningful forms of social life.

The typically hyperbolic language of disorganization characteristic of choreomania narratives found in the pages of medical and ethnographic journals and compendia, colonial correspondence and government archives, adds to the urgency of these analyses a murkier, messier tone. St. Vitus's dance, the tarantella, the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard in early eighteenth-century Paris, the Abyssinian tigre-tier, the imanenjana in Madagascar, and other episodes of so-called choreomania perform distinct political movements and public presence. But these movements and presences come to be framed in terms that highlight a lack of organization; they appear to eschew choreographic purpose. Some are not dances at all but dance-like neurological disorders cast as instances of an epidemic dancing disease. Yet in every case, the language of disorder casts moving bodies in an act of mediation: the archival repertoire of corporeal and choreographic disorder reveals a complex history of stories about transgression, revealing the spectre of bodily order against which these choreic bodies trespass. This choreomaniacal concept of movement approaches what Giorgio Agamben has described as movement's ‘impossibility’, its status as the ‘indefiniteness and imperfection of every politics’. For Agamben, the ill-defined, under-theorized, and historically ambivalent concept of movement represents all that eludes political organization.

Although the political meaning of ‘movement’ dates to the first part of the nineteenth century—specifically the French July Revolution of 1830, which pitted the Parti du Mouvement (Movement Party) against the Parti de Ordre (Party of Order)—and although the German political theorist Lorenz von Stein (1815-1890) posited ‘movement’ in opposition to the static state in The History of Social Movements in France (1850), movement, Agamben insists, has more recently become allied to state-sponsored fascist politics. Reading Arendt, he notes that twentieth-century appropriations of the political concept of ‘movement’ foregrounded demagogical and populist organizations whose totalitarian discipline moved far away from the open-ended, non-teleological flux of movement as lack, residue, and imperfection: as the ‘threshold’, as he puts it, ‘between an excess and a deficiency that marks every politics’. In this book, ‘movement’ figures at once as political and as gestural excess, imperfection, and indeterminacy. Movement is that which emerges in the nineteenth-century scientific field as a node within which corporeal actions in the public sphere acquire meaning by virtue of their hermeneutic opacity, their unwillingness to signify, their aesthetic and political deficiency.

André Lepecki, ‘Choreopolice and Choreopolitics: Or, the Task of the Dancer’, TDR: The Drama Review 57.4 [T220] (2013): 13-27, 13. See also Hannah Arendt, Was ist Politik? Fragmente aus dem Nachlass (Munich: Piper, 1993), 13. Susan Leigh Foster, ‘Choreographies of Protest’, Theatre Journal 55.3 (2003): 395-412. Giorgio Agamben, ‘Movement’, in André Lepecki, ed., Dance (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012), 142-144, 144. Agamben, ‘Movement’, 142. Giorgio Agamben, ‘Movement’, 143-144. While Agamben further reminds us that ‘movement’ was long theorized in science and philosophy, at least beginning with Aristotle (384-322 BCE), whose notion of kinesis represented the strategic link between power and action—specifically, power’s acting qua power, its capacity to act—the new political movements of the nineteenth century bring a different sort of urgency to the question of movement in public space, and to what we may construe as biopower. Here, I show, movement comes to be enmeshed in a political sphere, without leaving behind the organic, the biological. Science, philosophy, and politics in the nineteenth century are entangled in a complex of ideas about human aggregates erupting into chaotic, disorderly movement, particularly during times of social revolt cast as disease. In most of the cases I describe, these movements are not construed by their observers in the political sense, as social organization, or as choreographed intercession. Instead, these movements are conceived as excrescences in the human landscape, intimately accompanying historical change, as its corporeal sign and reflection. This change is not only social or political, but ecological: plagues, famines, and floods all serve as the landscapes within which 'choreomanias' erupt. Bodies, in this view, move in tandem with social, political, and ecological upheaval, in what I describe, following Guattari, as an ecosophical conception of movement disorder (construed in a collective, political sense) and of movement disorders (to designate individual conditions).

As a branch of philosophy that considers the entire ecological sphere as grounds within which concepts emerge and transform, ecosophy posits the radical lack of hierarchy between different aspects of mental, social, and environmental movement. Bodies within this paradigm pass transversally across institutions and ideas about 'nature' in a general ecology of thought and action that co-constitutes environments within which ideas like science, politics, and dance emerge and take shape.

In this regard, my work engages with a number of conversations on social and political movement (and movements) at the limits of dance, including Andrew Hewitt's Social Choreography: Ideology as Performance in Dance and Everyday Movement (2005), which emphasizes the way movement aesthetically embodies social order, and Martin's Critical Moves: Dance Studies in Theory and Politics (1998), which understands dance as a social process, a means by which bodies gather, and the ends by which this gathering produces or reveals mobilization.

Whereas Hewitt and Martin both emphasize the broader social and cultural field within which dance emerges as the crystallization or intensification of performative movement, this book reads the discursive history of movement's disorderly exceptions: the way narratives of choreographic unrest create figures of order which they are set against. Disorder is not only positively defined; its description structures a fantasy of orderliness whose disruption choreomanias exemplify.

My approach further offers a distinct view of disability within the dance and performance studies fields, and another history of alternative mobilities founding modern science. So whereas Ann Cooper Albright, Petra Kuppers, and many others have offered groundbreaking work on dance and disability foregrounding identity and social politics of difference in a normative social sphere, this book repositions the question of 'movement disorder' onto broader historical terrain to interrogate ways of thinking and writing about incoordination, disjunction, and eccentricity as crowd conditions embedded into the fabric of sociopolitical life and its imagined prehistories.

In this regard, my work engages with the emerging areas of gesture, movement, and mobility studies, cross-pollinating anthropology, history of science and medicine, performance studies, and theatre and dance, among other scientific, social scientific, and arts and humanities disciplines. These broadly interdisciplinary areas, exemplified by recent titles including Fiona Wilkie's Performance, Transport and Mobility: Making Passage (2014) and Carrie Noland and Sally Ann Ness's Migrations of Gesture (2008), suggest the reconfiguration of disciplines in an academic landscape in which scholars continue to be intellectually restless despite increasing institutional pressures to streamline, to become ever more marketable and paradoxically, ever more disciplinary. On the contrary, the proliferation of new cross-disciplinary fields of study in the last decades suggests the continued reorganization of our ways of thinking about movement and discipline. Yet whereas Noland and Ness's [superscript 44] brilliant work on gesture offers productive ways of reading barely choreographed movement at the limits of dance, their focus on the experience of the body—kinaesthetic sense—differs markedly from my own interest in the historical discourse of disorderly movement in a broadly scientific arena. Noland's emphasis on writing as a gestural act, a form of inscription and therefore movement, nonetheless prefigures what I offer here. Indeed, this book seeks to engage with the problem of writing as movement in a disciplinary, a discursive, and a material sense: this book traces the movement of ideas across centuries and disciplinary terrains, from medieval Latin chronicles to travel diaries and textbook histories of the new colonial nation states. This movement, I show, takes place as medical and other writers carry texts and concepts with them throughout the colonial world. These writers read one another, teach each other's theories, repeat examples they hear of or read about in scientific journals, operating much like Deleuze and Guattari's figure of the orchid and the wasp, cross-pollinating one another's writing, at home and overseas.

This does not mean mobility in itself is good. This book instead works through a field of thought about corporeal dislocations, and their locations and relocations in a shifting disciplinary arena. This book further responds to a recent surge of writing about dance and science, and the scientistic worldview with which much of this writing has been approached. Scientism understands science to constitute the greatest, most objective method and authority, and the most reliable as well as the most socially sanctioned approach to conceptualizing body, mind, disability, difference, dance, and theatre, among other things. In a climate in which the arts have had to fight bitterly for a place in elementary, high school, undergraduate, and graduate education as well as public policy, science, particularly medicine and neuroscience, have served as handy allies to help fund and legitimize otherwise precarious fields. Kinaesthetic empathy, mirror neurons, and body-mind education in particular have significantly reconfigured the way dancers, dance historians, and educators think about the dancing body in motion, allying research in experimental neuroscience with experimental dance practice. Influential writing by Glenna Batson, Dee Reynolds, Deirdre Sklar, Lena Hammergren, Bettina Blasing, and others suggests that scientific research can productively illuminate the way we understand motion on and off the stage, including particularly the way we watch dance.** Without disputing the urgency or cogency of these finds, this book seeks to present a slightly different story, articulating the discursive history and genealogy of dance's broad entanglement with science, tracing very old interactions between ideas about dance, humanistic method, and scientific history. I show how a prehistory of the current 'cognitive revolution' or 'neuroturn'[superscript 45] with which artists and critics have sought to explain creative movement can productively complicate notions of priority and precedence; and thus also trouble the perceived gaps—and seemingly novel bridges—between dance and medical science posited in contemporary popular and academic discourse. Throughout this book, I show that fantasies about dance and locomotion—particularly disruptive locomotion—suffuse scientific writing, enmeshing ideas about history, modernity, and politics with ideas about imitative gesture. Scientific method appears to be far less "objective," systematic, and in this sense "scientific" than aleatory, narrative, and in some respects quintessentially arts-like. Collage, montage, and hearsay constitute the primary methods of choreomania's articulation.

In addition to the mentioned studies, a few other titles are worth mentioning to provide a discursive context and critical genealogy for this work. In "Foules en délire, extases collectives" [Delirious Crowds, Collective Ecstasies] (1947) and "Lenchantement des danses, et la magie du verbe" [The Enchantment of Dance, and the Magic of the Word] (1957), the much-overlooked French historian of religions Philippe de Félice (1880-1964) offers a comparative analysis of dance ecstasies around the world, emphasizing spiritual rapture. His work influenced, among others, Elias Canetti's (1905-1994) now classic Masse und Macht [Crowds and Power] (1960). Both offer insight into histories of gregarious corporeal formations and the implicit power politics spiritual ecstasy enables. Also in the mid-twentieth century, the Swedish pharmacologist E. Louis Backman (1883-1965) compiled a broad array of narratives about religious and popular dances, many from Greek and Latin sources. His deep archival work makes this a useful and much-cited source on dance 'manias', but Religious Dances in the Christian Church and in Popular Medicine (1952) spuriously attributes all such dances to ergotism—a form of rye poisoning—generally over-medicalizing Latin descriptions.

Drid Williams briefly mentions dance manias, including St. Vitus's dance, in Ten Lectures on Theories of the Dance (1991) but does not delve into the complex history of gestural events likened to St. Vitus's dance in medical literature on choreomania. And while Barbara Ehrenreich offers a celebratory account of communal dancing in her effusively upbeat Dancing in the Streets: A History of Collective Joy (2007), she too neglects the long and complex biomedical history of public dances and their extensive pathologization in colonial medical and anthropological literature.

More recently, Gregor Rohmann in Tanzwut: Kosmos, Kirche und Mensch in der Bedeutungsgeschichte eines mitelalterlichen Krankheitskonzepts [Dance Mania: Cosmos, Church and Man in the Emergence of the Idea of a Dancing Disease in the Middle Ages] (2013) and Johannes Birringer and Josephine Fenger in their edited volume Tanz und WahnSinn/Dance and ChoreoMania (2011) point to a rich array of events associated with the medieval 'dancing mania', from Greek concepts of enthusiasm (Rohmann) to choreographic practice (Birringer and Fenger). Both offer useful insight into the myriad ways 'dancing manias' have been figured historically and culturally, but once again largely elude the vast history of colonial representation the discursive history of 'choreomania' also occasions.

From a theoretical and methodological standpoint, Stephen Muecke's short 'Choreomanias: Movements through Our Body', published in the Moving Bodies issue of Performance Research (2003), comes closest to sharing the critical investments I present here: with Muecke, I aim to think about the biopolitical and bio-philosophical histories of dancing crowds, and discourses on abnormality attributed to fitful dancing in colonial medical culture.*® I add to Muecke's brief study a far longer glance at the extended institutional and political genealogies by which the choreomania concept emerged and transformed. I also present Hecker as the under-acknowledged predecessor to the master of bodily fits, Charcot; and, by extension, to Charcot's most famous student, Freud. This view positions choreomania at the base of a whole field of thinking about primitivism, fitfulness, femininity, and taboo.

There are many things this book does not do. It does not go into the vast and by now extremely fraught terrain of possession, with which dance manias may be equated, though I offer alternative readings of possession culture in chapters 8 and 10 in particular, replacing this term with Agamben's in my view more productive concept of ecstasy-belonging, a notion he uses to describe a monarch's special status in a political system, and which I employ to read performative entanglements engaging possession culture in revolt. Similar to Michael Taussig’s notion of medicine as the appearance of 48, this book examines the historical distinction between scientific and some social scientific methods. Sean Cubitt, in ‘Anecdotal Evidence’, presents a study on the differences between arts and humanities methods and scientific methods, published in NECSUS: European Journal of Media Studies 2.1 (2013): 5-18.

Stephen Muecke, in ‘Choreomanias: Movements through Our Body’, Performance Research 8.4 (2003): 6-10, discusses disease in medical discourse through the reification of complex social relations. This enables the author to bring notions of theatricality into full view, as they move onto ethnographic terrain in later chapters. The choreomania concept morphs to reveal an increasingly anti-theatrical concern with feminine and colonial deceit, a concern nearly absent in earlier readings of the ‘choreomaniacal’ Middle Ages.

This book does not attempt a comprehensive account of so-called dance manias worldwide. Instead, it performs a genealogy of the choreomania concept in the long nineteenth century, following the traces of particular writers as they read one another, offer new anecdotes, and continue a history connected, link by link, to narrative precedent.

The book traces the fantasy of movement's surfeit across 'fields': lands and discursive encounters. Following Gilroy's and James Clifford's shared investments in the homonymous interplay between 'roots' and 'routes' in colonial politics and cultural translation, the author traces the 'routes' and returns to imagined 'roots' performed by scientific writers, according to the vicissitudes of their administrative appointments, affiliations, and appetites.

The book proceeds at once roughly chronologically and geographically, moving from Europe through the colonial world to end up provisionally in America. It grounds itself in the proliferation of writings spilling out of and into Hecker's text, particularly the paradigmatic 'dance mania', the medieval St. John's (or St. Vitus's) dance, and the Orientalizing annotations offered by his English translator, Benjamin Guy Babington (1794-1866).

Chapter 1 traces the institutional history of Hecker's writing in 'The Dancing Mania' through various translations, particularly its publication history in the English-speaking world. The rest of the book shows how this history of translation and scientific dissemination decisively enabled multiple additions to and importantly the Orientalization of the choreomania figure and concept in ensuing decades.

Chapter 1 also considers epistemological and methodological problems associated with writing a history of epidemic dance in the literary scientific world of the nineteenth century. Chapter 2 presents the first paradigmatic case of 'choreomania', the medieval St. John's dance (retrospectively described as St. Vitus's dance), further presenting the author's central concern with Foucault's history of 'madness' and the way a history of 'choreomania' extends this to cases of unchoreographed dance at the edges of the social and human sciences. The chapter highlights the Eastern-inflected Dionysianism with which nineteenth-century writers, including Hecker and Nietzsche, viewed the purportedly orgiastic Middle Ages; the author contrasts this with their own reading of Latin chronicles and annals, suggesting that this demoniacal plague, as it was often described, actually constituted a form of social fête and, often, dancing migration. Chapter 3 moves to the early modern writings of Paracelsus on St. Vitus's dance, importantly offering the first practical and theoretical amalgamation of dancing crowds with medical theories of gestural spasms, which would define centuries of writing on the 'dancing disease'. The chapter considers Agamben's notion of purposeless gesture, a term he employs to denote chorea's proximity to dance, specifically its non-narrative, non-teleological aspects, a 'purposelessness' that, later chapters show, would become central to the deployment of criticism against 'choreomania' as movement devoid of (in fact inhibiting) productive labour.

In chapter 4, I turn further to the question of meaningless gesture, specifically as this came to describe early eighteenth-century popular religious practices among the French Convulsionnaires (Convulsionaries) of Saint-Médard, a heterodox group of enthusiasts performing acts of contortion and dissidence in the margins of the nation's capital. I argue that Convulsionaries' effusive poses, however, suggest more than a hysteroepileptic brand of acting out, as Charcot would later contend, and reveal instead a spirit of political contestation resonant with emerging theories of psychiatry emphasizing feminine and queer sorts of gestural and emotional excess.

Chapter 5 takes the notion of excess gesture and pathological contagion further into the terrain of early sociology and the modern theorization of unruly crowds. Beginning with the dramatic upheavals of the French Revolution and their recuperation into early crowd theory, the chapter foregrounds a discursive genealogy linking revolutionary movements and the emergence of nation states with involuntary Jerks' among religious enthusiasts in the American South. The chapter importantly introduces the rise of crowd theory to describe (often disparagingly) the imitative gestures and mimicry particular to large, roused groups of people, a line of theorization that would become increasingly central to later theories of choreomania overseas.

Chapter 6 centres on Charcot and the rise of neurology, as well as (far less often noted in studies of his work) the historiographical aspects—or 'retrospective medicine'—he and a number of his collaborators engaged in at the Salpétriére hospital in Paris, methods that I show would decisively influence the way choreomania, as a putatively ancient disorder, would become translated and exported into medical theory overseas. The chapter argues that Charcot's recourse to ancient images, artifacts, and narratives set the stage for a significant methodological shift in scientific research from laboratory to fieldwork; and, importantly for the discursive history of choreomania I tell here, from colonial medicine to anthropology, hastening the journey of the 'dancing disease' onto colonial terrain.

Part II draws the discourse on choreomania further into colonial territory, and introduces substantial case histories. Chapter 7 turns to the southern Italian tarantella and the Orientalist exoticism imagining southern Italy as a gateway to Africa and the East. The chapter emphasizes comparative methods in medicine and anthropology and the discourse on sex, fakery, and lies that articulated choreomania as a feminine and colonial disorder of duplicity. Woman, Freud wrote, was a "dark continent", like Africa, unknowable and other; as a disorder of colonialism and femininity, choreomania becomes a "dark continent", obscurely ancient and also as such nearly unfathomable. Chapter 8 moves further into Africa and South America, to Madagascar and Brazil, where travelling physicians, including some of Charcot's students, meet live instances of political turmoil they read as yet another example of the dancing disease. Significantly, choreomania now comes squarely to signal the "disorder" of anti-colonial revolt. Drawing primarily from Scottish missionary physician Andrew Davidson's (1836-1918) colonial medical writing on the disease-like protest known as the imanenjana, as well as from the French-trained Malagasy physician Dr. Andrianjafy’s reinterpretation of the imanenjana as a malarial type of neuromotor disease, I argue that choreomania becomes imagined as a disorder of political contestation and regime change, displacing the polite antiquarianism of earlier nineteenth-century readings.

Chapter 9 moves to the American Plains, where a further political movement, the Ghost Dance, highlights cultural contestation in response to widespread repression of Native Americans together with the rise of government-sponsored ethnographic studies. The Ghost Dance, which Mooney likened to St. Vitus's dance, provided him with a phantasmatic link between current events and earlier instances of the so-called dancing mania, positioning Native American dancers in a genealogical line with ancient ecstatics and collective delusion. Perpetuating the Orientalist trope by which antiquity and alterity meet in a convulsive, feverish display of excessive dancing by colonized subjects, the discursive history of the Ghost Dance especially highlights the politics of popular discourse on energetic waste and cultural war.

In chapter 10, I turn to a further set of case histories of choreomania in the South Seas, extending the scope of the "dancing disease" and its purported sightings to the far reaches of Antipodean life, as cargo cults and other liberation movements further complicate the genealogical relations between social bodies in distress and their (obliquely) imagined prehistories. Chapter 11 finally turns to the rise of popular dances in America—the tango, animal dances, and dance marathons—likened in medical literature to medieval dance manias, further entrenching the literature on choreomania in an Orientalist and now an increasingly racist discourse on darkness and the supposed pathological angularity of gestural disinhibition. This final chapter further inscribes the racialized body—increasingly, a black body—into the Orientalist prejudice against obscure and unknowable others.

The coda ultimately brings the discussion on choreomania into the twenty-first century, to reflect on my own methodological moves in tracing this genealogical history of the dancing disease as a history of dance in an expanded field; and Introduction + 21 the implications of this extended genealogy for thinking about concepts of dance imbricated in the geo-choreopolitics of protest. Every study is determined by its author's places and privileges. This book has been written from the standpoint of a woman long trained in classical ballet, modern and contemporary dance, and Argentine tango but also long attuned to the ambivalence and unpredictability of dancing crowds. From the center of a mosh pit at a Nirvana concert in Montreal to a rave in the English Cotswolds, my adolescence and early adulthood were marked by moments I experienced as uninhibited dancing and the intoxication that came with what a good friend and I saw as being high on life. But with these high points came moments of anger and frustration. When a friend of mine was (as I learned subsequently) taken away by police to a psychiatric hospital because she refused to stop dancing at a protest, I was livid. This offense on the part of the local authorities epitomized to me everything that was wrong with political life: the coalescence of forces of law with the forces of capital to camp down on a young woman taking up public space; spirited expression throttled; protest confined. This book attempts to reckon with a few of these issues, horribly incompletely. But I hope to have marked out a small area for reflecting on the meeting point between control, abnormality, and disinhibition, as well as the language of dance where it meets those of political disorder and disease. I hope this work will inspire more studies of dance, psychiatry, and colonialism, and the discourse on imitation that has branded uncontrolled movement as quaint, at best; at worst, as dangerous and unthinking.

PART I
Excavating Dance in the Archive
Obscuritas Antiquitatis
Institutions, Affiliations, Marginalia

I only ever wrote fictions. —Michel Foucault, quoted in Gilles Deleuze, Foucault (1986)

AFFILIATIONS, AUDIENCES, AND INSTITUTIONS
'Every writer on the Orient . . . assumes some Oriental precedent', Said writes, 'some previous knowledge of the Orient, to which he refers and on which he relies'. So too, Said writes, highlighting the institutional ecologies within which such ideas take shape, 'each work on the Orient affiliates itself with other works, with audiences, with institutions, with the Orient itself'.1

The Orient, as an occidental construct stretching from India to Africa and the Middle East, emerges out of pre-existing fantasies about the East assumed by Orientalist writers to be commonly shared, and extends these to produce an evolving fiction without origin or centre, even if the fiction may be concerned with both. This is a fiction that simultaneously draws on geographic regions that are real and arbitrarily connected in the Orientalist imagination; and it spins new imaginaries about this expansive terrain—the so-called Orient—by shifting and spreading the terms of its discourse rhizomatically.

Orientalist works, in this sense 'affiliate' with others to construct the Orient, which they simultaneously rewrite. This chapter examines the discursive and institutional history—the affiliations and the fictions—informing Hecker's work, Die Tanzwuth, which I argue shapes the nineteenth-century emergence of the choreomania concept, though Hecker, I submit, is not alone 'author' of the modern notion of choreomania. Rather, Hecker participated in (and was in many respects at the helm of) a moment in medical science in which the very movement of modernity appeared as a discourse of experimental reason and pragmatic application, but also a literary pursuit, engaged in historiographic antiquarianism. Concepts and figures of thought among medical writers reprised ancient, often mythic tropes: in the case of choreomania, most prominently, Dionysian bacchanals. The following chapter foregrounds the way the choreomania concept emerged in the nineteenth century, out of other literatures and figures of thought, in tandem with a whole set of historical, material, and institutional transformations. This chapter is about method, and how method is determined by institutional configurations, audiences, and the vicissitudes of individual presses and societies, co-determining ecologies of production and circulation.

This chapter argues that 'choreomania' could only emerge as it did in the long nineteenth century, and that it is fundamentally reflective of the modern industrial West. The discursive history of 'choreomania' reveals an emergent set of concerns about collectivity, crowds, and disorder saturating medical and scientific thought, at a time when scientists sought to countermand an economic and political rush to the future with queries about origins, and about the human and ecological past.

'Choreomania' becomes allied with—in many respects, a variation, expansion, and transformation of—Orientalism, a force of plasticity morphing and migrating at the time, and like choreomania concerned with precedent. With Hecker, choreomania became a disorder of collective chaos increasingly mapped onto marginal bodies seeming to impede the rise of modern nation states. 'Choreomania' with Hecker and writers after him signalled all that was primeval and disruptive among groups of people apparently not yet moving rationally or smoothly—not yet demonstrating the modern, curvilinear quality of torque.

The history of choreomania thus describes what Bergson calls the biophilosophical motion of transformism, by which biological entities and thoughts evolve, without a first cause or origin. Concepts and bodies, Bergson argues, unfold over time, displacing a moving centre through acts of invention and reduplication. Concepts thus have no 'history', no origin (even if they may be concerned with these), only present iterations that are continually displaced; in this sense, concepts perform choreographic trajectories, often weaving through discursively or institutionally marginal sites.

This process, I submit, constitutes a 'marginal' function, which we may see in contraposition to Foucault's notion of the 'author' function, by which an author must be understood as an assemblage composed of many parts: editor, publishing house, social and institutional moment, and a whole discursive sphere determined to value such a thing as an 'author', and so to produce the fiction of a subject meant to inhabit that role. The 'marginal' function takes into account such assemblages, and further suggests that concepts move across 'authorial' sites through repetition, recuperation, and translation: translators' footnotes, later editions, and the whole critical apparatus defining and rewriting a work in later iterations shift the site of the work's instantiation. The margin becomes the space within which works migrate and, almost imperceptibly, transform. Writers in Hecker's wake drew fulsomely from his text, sometimes citing him, often not. He was excavating, collaging, and extrapolating from earlier scenes. Choreomania thus arises as writers pilfer from one another, splintering and redirecting vectors of information, recapitulating and expanding on an ever-shifting set of archival scenes. There is no fixed ‘centre’ to the choreomania story; only a perpetually moving and constantly returned-to cast of illustrations, to which more were periodically added. Although Hecker’s writing on St. Vitus’s dance gains the consistency of a paradigm inasmuch as it is by far most often repeated and rehearsed, it does so, I venture, because his writing offers the plasticity and partiality of the example, rather than the rule. The concept of choreomania

2. Henri Bergson, L’évolution créatrice (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2001), 23-44.
3. See Michel Foucault, ‘What Is an Author?”, in trans. Josué V, Harari, Paul Rabinow, ed., The Foucault Reader (New York: Pantheon Books, 1984), 101-120.

26 * EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE is a zone of intensity in the history of nineteenth- and twentieth-century modernity, a clustering of cases that never quite cohere yet grow and morph across continents to describe the disorderly movements of crowds and individual disorders purported to echo and portend these. Knowledge in the story I tell here is thus not disciplined but anarchic: it borrows and steals, overhears, exaggerates, jumps between eras, and performs rash comparative acts. Knowledge of choreomania, or more often knowledge about choreomania, flits between neurological practice, historical speculation, exoticizing aside, and the amateur’s passion for collecting outlandish tales. Choreomania, then, is constructed from discursive bits, assembled and reassembled, moving through disciplinary nodes and losing, or acquiring, new traits on the go. As an idea about bodies spilling out of bounds, choreomania itself spills out of bounds, morphing, recuperating figures of thought—about spontaneity, Dionysus, the Middle Ages, plague—across fields, without stopping for very long at any one. In this sense, this book—rather than showing an increasingly rational scientific mindset in nineteenth-century modernity, what Foucault calls a history of veridiction (véridiction), describing scientific and governmental processes of truth-making (rather than earlier regimes propounding truth or vérité)—offers a history of scientific literature concerned very much with neither.’ Veridiction held little sway for writers on the dancing disease, who offered narratives as if their dramatic power alone suggested the intuitive validity and literary interest of their study. Dramatic narratives—composed of brief and loosely connected scenes of dance-like ferment—constitute this disorder’s primary site of discursive instantiation, its performative coming-to-be. Choreomania became itself through discursive repetition.

SCENES AND SCENARIOS
Although I describe ‘scenes’ and ‘scenarios’, borrowing Diana Taylor’s term, and the distinction between them is slight, it is nevertheless worth noting. A ‘scene’, in the Foucauldian sense I employ, suggests an embodied event without finality or necessarily the implication of repetition. A ‘scene’ is a portrait of actions and events derived from the annals of the past: people engaged in bodily activity, whether or not the exact contours of their motions, intentions, or outcomes may be clearly determined. A ‘scenario’, closely related to a ‘scene’, further denotes what Taylor describes as the quality of repeatability—what she calls the ‘paradigmatic’ aspect that implies ‘a schematic plot, with an intended (though adaptable) end’. Scenarios are social scripts that precede the fixity of a written script, but nonetheless anchor cultural and historical realities in particular modes of narrative and performative interaction. A conqueror once again subjugating a native woman may participate in a ‘scenario’ that predates a script that may later describe it, but which constitutes, by its paradigmatic status, a whole mise en scène telling performance historians of the forms of action that characterized bodily and cultural being in the past. Whereas some of the ‘scenes’ I describe constitute ‘scenarios’ of a sort—repeatable, familiar forms of action that encapsulate historical and cultural realities in a more or less paradigmatic way— I am mostly intent on describing scenes that, when repeated by Hecker and others, become themselves paradigmatic.

The archival repertoire moves scenes along through footnotes, gossip, and asides; and becomes a ‘scenario’ describing medical thought in formation as it comes to be scripted into medical literature. In effect, there never is any textbook choreomania, any hegemonic fixity to the choreographic score; it is never exactly a diagnosis, but remains, through its iterations, a collection and collation of scenic events. Choreomania in this regard was a literary and performative diagnosis: dance manias never gained a ‘truer’ reality than on the medical page and in its margins—margins themselves written by and large overseas, as writers continually recast choreomania as an epidemic of dancing and disrepair recurring offshore. Reconfiguring thus the terms put forward by Taylor, this genealogy—and choreography— suggests an archive of moving bodies; but also, significantly, a repertoire of archival movements and turns.

4. See especially Michel Foucault, ‘Lecture du 17 janvier’, in Naissance de la biopolitique: Cours au Collége de France, 1978-1979, ed. Francois Ewald, Alessandro Fontana, and Michel Senellart (Paris: Editions du Seuil/Gallimard, 2004), 29-51, 34-38.
5. Taylor, The Archive and the Repertoire, 13.

Obscuritas Antiquitatis
27 ARCHAEOLOGY, GENEALOGY, CHOREOGRAPHY
This book thus takes Foucault’s notion of the discursive formation out of the realm of archaeology and genealogy into what I describe as choreography, a system of motion and transfer. Archaeology and genealogy are two overlapping methods Foucault presents, primarily in Les mots et les choses: Une archéologie des sciences humaines [The Order of Things] (1966) and Larchéologie du savoir [The Archaeology of Knowledge] (1969), as well as Surveiller et Punir [Discipline and Punish] (1975) and his essay ‘Nietzsche, la généalogie, lhistoire’ [‘Nietzsche, Genealogy, History’] (1971) to describe his work quarrying the past as a set of layers or strata, relations and conversations, not moving teleologically towards increasing rationalization or better governance but comprising their own more or less coherent logics (their discourses). Hecker’s essay “The Dancing Mania” engages such a choreographic motion. His essay appeared in multiple editions after its initial publication in Berlin in 1832, including translations into Dutch, French, and Italian. Also immediately translated into English by the London-based Sydenham Society’s Orientalist treasurer, B. G. Babington, Hecker’s essay marked the first of the Sydenham Society’s publications, distributed to all its members. A third English edition of Hecker’s text, significantly, became available for the general public in 1859, the same year as On the Origin of Species by Charles Darwin (1809-1882). The work of Charles Darwin, "On the Origin of Species: The Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life," was concerned with origins and presented a teleological progression. Hecker's work, "The Epidemics of the Middle Ages," was translated into English and consisted of three essays: "The Black Death," "The Dancing Disease," and "The Sweating Sickness." In 1859, a short essay titled "Child-Pilgrimages" was added, which the editors considered valuable as it was the first and only English translation of Hecker's work.

Hecker's work on dancing manias gained popularity through various media outlets, including magazines such as the Penny Magazine of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, Fraser's Magazine for Town and Country, Chambers’s Journal of Popular Literature, Science and Arts, Popular Science Review, St. James’s Magazine, and Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine. His depiction of dancing manias spread nearly verbatim and informed general reference works such as the Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge (1888).

Hecker's monograph, "Die Tanzwuth, eine Volkskrankheit im Mittelalter," was first translated into Dutch and published in 1833. The French translation, "Mémoire sur la chorée épidémique du moyen Age," was published in 1834, followed by the Italian translation, "La Danzimania, malattia popolare nel medio-evo," in 1838. Hecker's three essays were first collected and translated into English in a single volume, "The Epidemics of the Middle Ages," published in 1835. The work was reprinted twice before being released for the general public in the standard 1859 edition. In 1865, Hecker's trio of essays was re-edited in German and published as "Die Grossen Volkskrankheiten des mittelalters: Historisch-pathologische Untersuchungen." The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

605 (1841): 346-348; 'A Dancing Epidemic', Chambers's Journal of Popular Literature, Science and Arts 20.1040 (1883): 760-762; 'General Considerations on Epidemic Diseases', Chambers's Edinburgh Journal 296 (1849): 132-136; and "The Dancing Mania', Penny Magazine of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge 8.488 (1839): 439-440, all of which rehearse Hecker's writing with little or no variation, except to note his work's currency and familiarity to the modern reader. 'Mental Epidemics', Fraser's Magazine for Town and Country 65.388 (April 1862): 490-505, further makes reference to the familiarity of the St. Vitus's name (494).

10. See e.g., Philip Schaff, ed., A Religious Encyclopedia: Or Dictionary of Biblical, Historical, Doctrinal, and Practical Theology. Based on the Real-Enzyklopädie of Herzog, Plitt and Hauck, 3rd ed., 4 vols., vol. 1 (London: Funk and Wagnalls, 1891), 602. This encyclopedia appeared in numerous versions throughout the latter half of the nineteenth and early twentieth century, from Johann Jakob Herzog's (1805-1882) original German edition, the Realencyklopädie für protestantische Theologie und Kirche, published in 28 volumes.

For the general English reader able to procure a copy of Hecker's text in its 1859 edition or to learn about it in popular magazines, choreomanias constituted a new sort of historical curiosity, weird and wonderful. Described in nearly comical terms in popular journals, Hecker's depiction of dance maniacs emphasized physical eccentricities and emotional fervor, characteristics folded into an increasingly fashionable discourse according to which epidemic contagion was typical of modern life. General and scientific interest in popular epidemics was growing.

Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, by popular historian Charles Mackay (1814-1889), published in London in 1841 and 1852, reprinted in 1856, and again in multiple further editions in the century and a half to follow, catalogued every sort of common mania for the general reader, from the 'tulip mania' to witchcraft delusions, attributing all these to human beings' apparently universal propensity for gregariousness and imitation. Although Mackay omitted dance manias in his compendium, a new foreword in 1932 by the American financier Bernard M. Baruch (1870-1965) did not fail to make the link.

The cycling epidemic was a further copycat disorder alluded to with a mixture of humour and gravity in the popular press. Like the dance mania, it portrayed excess locomotion among its enthusiasts, particularly worrisome when these were women. In the case of choreomania, however, epidemic dancing motions significantly went nowhere. They erupted as excess energy and affect rather than as the ability to escape constrained quarters and become thus independent. Choreomaniacs, unlike cyclists, seemed instead to lose their capacity for independent motion. Movement of every sort was becoming, more than ever before, an object of study and overarching principle uniting philosophy, politics, and science. In the words of physiologist Claude Bernard (1813-1878), movement fundamentally defined behaviour. In studies conducted by Etienne-Jules Marey (183______ The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

"Movement, in Marey's terms, 'is the most important act, in that all other functions employ it to actualize themselves.'"* This biological and aesthetic principle extended to the political realm. For anarchist philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809-1865), movement defined all of politics and economics: 'Le mouvement est; voila tout' he proclaimed in Philosophie du progrés [Philosophy of Progress] (1853); 'Movement is; that is all.' Life could be contained in the principle of motion. But whereas modern concepts of movement typically emphasize forward progress (and, in Proudhon's case, political progressiveness), a twenty-two volumes between 1853 and 1868, to The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge, published in thirteen volumes between 1908 and 1914. The English version by Philip Schaff (1819-1893), titled A Religious Encyclopedia... , based on Herzog's German editions, appeared in three editions between 1882 and 1891. Following publication of the third edition, in four volumes (the first of which is detailed above), the text became commonly known as the Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia. I will refer to it as such throughout.

11. Bernard M. Baruch, 'Foreword', in Charles Mackay, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (London: L. C. Page, 1932), xiv.
12. T. Pilkington White, "The Cycling Epidemic', Scottish Review 29 (1897): 56-74.
13. Etienne-Jules Marey, Du mouvement dans les fonctions de la vie. Leçons faites au College de France (Paris: Germer Bailliére, 1868).
14. Marey, Du mouvement dans les fonctions de la vie, vi.
15. Cited in Hannah Arendt, On Violence (San Diego: Harcourt, Brace, 1970), 26. See Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Philosophie du progrés: Programme (Brussels: Alphonse Lebégue, 1853), 39 (not 49 as in Arendt). See also Joseph Proudhon, CEuvres completes de P.-J. Proudhon, 26 vols., vol. 20 (Brussels: A. Lacroix, Verboeckhoven & cie., 1850-1871), and Joseph Proudhon, Philosophie du progrés, suivi de La justice poursuivie par Véglise, nouvelle édition (Brussels, 1868), 30. Arendt slightly misquotes Proudhon, adding an exclamation mark for emphasis, but the sentiment is accurate. Proudhon's Heraclitean anarchism takes all movement, change, transformation, 'progress' (which he opposes to 'tradition') (106), as the foundation of life and politics: 'Tout ce qui existe... est nécessairement en évolution; tout coule, tout change, se modifie, se transforme sans cesse: le mouvement est la condition essen- tielle, je dirais presque la matiére de Vétre et de la pensée. II n'y a rien de fixe, de stable, d’absolu, d’invincible, que la Loi méme du mouvement, c’est a dire, les rapports de poids, de nombre, de mesure, suivant lesquels toute existence apparait et s’effectue’ (90). Movement—manifest as relation (‘rapports’)—is the natural state and only law (30-31, 90); it is the first principle (‘fait primitif’) (27); throughout his work______ These moments of disturbance constituted the ripples, breaks, and surges coming up to haunt—symbolically to disorganize or disorder—a forward-moving present. On a technological plane, the introduction of the electromagnetic telegraph in 1833, compounded with the increasing speed and expanse of train travel and the inauguration of the underground metro system in London in 1863, meant that Europe and its allies were ever more in motion, stimulating the industrial revolution that would lead Karl Marx (1818-1883) to suggest in the Grundrisse (1857) that speed—time—would conquer space.© Marx described a capitalist regime driven to geographic expansion but even hungrier for rapid motion. Circulation, including the circulation of money and capital, defined the new era, in a system of flows connecting people and objects in relationships of power characterized by locomotion, though as I show, potentially unproductive forms of movement were typically branded as suspect. Hecker’s depiction of a dancing disease was timely. As Gilroy, Roach, and Gordon have variously pointed out, the languages of music, theatre, film, and, I add, dance—all quintessentially concerned with movement and time—underpinned the modern era, just as modern science and popular culture sidelined these as by-products, wasteful to the industrial man and woman engaged in an ethic of work, with little room left for play.© Yet social dance boomed at the time the choreomania diagnosis circulated. As dance historian Molly Engelhardt has shown, enthusiasm for rapid and racy ballroom dancing soared just as Victorian morality was seething from the effects of the cholera epidemics of the 1830s and 1840s. Contagion and insalubriousness seemed to threaten public life everywhere, not least among dancing groups. The medical notion of miasma, or polluted air, exacerbated already negative opinions about, and fascination for, groups of men and women rubbing shoulders in the dark and dirty dance halls of London.© Bodies bumping against and wriggling with one another seemed embarrassing and risqué, just as bodies moving chaotically in public space worried observers who were writing themselves, for the most part, right out of these scenes, as their somewhat disdainful hosts and raconteurs. With the emergence of germ theory in the mid-nineteenth century, established by Louis Pasteur (1822-1895) in the 1860s, confirmed by microbiologist Robert Koch (1843-1910) in the decades following, concepts of miasma were revised, and the invisible workings of public space and interpersonal contact and communication became even more mysterious, host now to infinitesimally small creatures circulating directly between people, unknown to their carriers. In this context, crowds of people contaminating one another seemed socially disruptive. Added to this were continued colonial expansion and crisis; the explosive appearance of neurology on the medical scene; unprecedented levels of scientific exchange; renewed interest in antiquity; and the emergence of anthropology, to produce a zone of intensity within which ‘choreomania’ emerged.

LITERARY PROCLIVITIES: EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ANTIQUARIAN LITERATURE
Hecker's writing seized the imagination of his contemporaries not only with its urgent interest in contagiousness and disorderly public movement but also with the literary and dramatic interest it afforded readers of all sorts. A far more comprehensive work on St. Vitus's dance would appear in 1844 by the German physician Ernst Conrad Wicke, numbering nearly six hundred pages to Hecker's mere eighty, complemented by horizontal affiliation. In this way, art, life, and politics are always in medias res, in the middle of things; the radical democracy this entails repudiates all religious and biological fixity or teleology. In this respect, Proudhon’s work foreshadows Deleuze’s anarchic mathematico-aesthetic critique of ontological and political fixity and hierarchy; see esp. Gilles Deleuze, Différence et répétition (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1968).

16. See Karl Marx, Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy, trans. Martin Nicolaus (London: Penguin, 1993), 539.

17. See esp. Gilroy, The Black Atlantic; Joseph Roach, Cities of the Dead: Circum-Atlantic Performance (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996); Gordon, Why the French Love Jerry Lewis.

18. Molly Engelhardt, Dancing out of Line: Ballrooms, Ballets, and Mobility in Victorian Fiction and Culture (Athens: Ohio University Press, 2009), 112-139. On miasma, see also Allan Conrad Christensen, Nineteenth-Century Narratives of Contagion: ‘Our Feverish Contact’ (London: Routledge, 2005).

30 - EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE clinical observations and an extensive analysis of the tarantella and the beri-beri (a dance-like degenerative neurological condition now attributed to B vitamin deficiency).' But Hecker's impassioned, elusive, and allusive prose left connections loose, leaping across eras and drawing historical events in sketch form, leaving his readers to imagine a landscape rife with boisterous outbursts of a dancing plague. The idea Hecker put forward was enticing: scenes of people frothing, falling, raving, jerking their bodies, twisting their faces, screaming, hallucinating, and imagining the end of the world. It was capacious enough to enable and invite new scenes to be added exuberantly to it by writers in his wake.

The objects Hecker had at his disposal to carry out his research were as motley as they were rare: ancient medical treatises, Latin chronicles, case studies culled from medical journals, and the occasional traveler's tale. In compiling his narratives, Hecker presented a compelling case of comparative medical history emphasizing dramatic forms. The anecdotal quality of his writing suggested historical progression mattered little: his scenes jumped between eras, emphasizing the Middle Ages but also drawing from classical precedent and gesturing towards early modern, Enlightenment, and modern occurrences of 'choreomania' in Germany, Italy, France, America, and Abyssinia. Human upheavals illustrated one principle: underlying modernity was a spectacularly disinhibited primeval age. He was rewriting medical science, and putting histories, crises, and epidemics at the heart of this renewed field.

In a preface to the 1888 edition of The Epidemics of the Middle Ages, the professor of English Literature at University College London, Henry Morley (1822-1894), one of the earliest professors of English literature in Britain, stressed Hecker and Babington's family histories in medicine, which he also shared, and their strong penchant for literary and historiographical undertakings. Hecker was the first chaired professor of the history of medicine in Europe, a position he held in Berlin until his death in 1850. He had, in Morley's terms, a 'special genius for this form of history. It was delightful to him—and he made it delightful to others... . He studied disease in relation to the history of man, made his study yield to men outside his own profession an important chapter in the history of civilization', and stimulated scientific interest in epidemic history with his literary and historiographical flair. Morley impressed upon his readers Hecker’s wide contribution to encyclopedias and medical journals, as well as Hecker and Babington’s important roles in the medical profession. Babington had been enlisted as a physician at Guy’s Hospital in London from 1840 to 1855, after serving seven years in India as a midshipman upon graduating from Cambridge University as a physician. Babington also contributed to the study of epidemics, lending his attention to the epidemic of cholera of 1832 and serving in public health administration.

For Hecker, natural disasters catapulted nations into new eras. Historians of medicine had to take plagues centrally into account if they aspired to understand human life: “Were it in any degree within the power of human research to draw up, in a vivid and connected form, an historical sketch of such mighty events [as plagues], after the manner of the historians of wars and battles, and the migrations of nations,” Hecker wrote, “we might then arrive at clear views with respect to the mental development of the human race.” It “would then be demonstrable, that the mind of nations is deeply affected by the destructive conflict of the powers of nature, and that great disasters lead to striking changes in general civilization.”

The German pathologist Rudolf Virchow (1821-1902), influenced by Hecker, argued that epidemics were ‘nodal’ points in the progress of history “[characterizing] periods of political and intellectual revolution.” Disease, especially epidemic disease, suggested ‘major disturbances’ of individual and mass life. Although “19. Ernst Conrad Wicke, Versuch einer Monographie des grossen Veitstanzes und der unwillkiirlichen Muskelbewegung, nebst Bermerkungen iiber den Taranteltanz und die Beriberi (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1844). 20. Henry Morley, ‘Introduction’, in J. F.C. Hecker, The Black Death, and The Dancing Mania, ed. Henry Morley, trans. B. G. Babington (London: Cassell & Company, 1888), 5-8, 6. 21. Morley, ‘Introduction’, 7-8. 22. Hecker, The Black Death, 1. 23. Hecker, The Black Death, 1-2. 24. Rudolf Virchow, Die Einheitsbestrebungen in der wissenschaftlichen Medizin (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1849), 46; cited in George Rosen, Madness in Society: Chapters in the Historical Sociology of Mental Illness (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1968), 195. See also Rudolf Virchow, Disease, Life, and Man: Selected Essays, trans. Lelland J. Rather (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1958). 25. Virchow, Die Einheitsbestrebungen, 46, cited in Rosen, Madness in Society, 195.

Hecker was not the first physician to take interest in epidemic history—Hippocrates (460-370 BCE) wrote influentially about epidemics in Of Airs, Waters, Places, circa 400 BCE—he sought to reinvigorate epidemiology in the present day. Medical history in general had to be restored, Hecker argued, gesturing in his inaugural ‘Address to the Physicians of Germany’ to the rarity of this pursuit in his time. Epidemics, for Hecker, held a vastly underestimated potential for medical research and, by extension, for human history. “Epidemics leave no corporeal traces,” he wrote, yet in them “the whole spirit of humanity powerfully and wonderfully moves.” In an extended metaphor comparing the work of historical epidemiology to intrepid world travel, Hecker described a landscape of “barren deserts” revealing “inexhaustible mines,” in which whole portraits of “organic collective life” lay fallow. Medical history, in Hecker's exalted vision, constituted an unexplored landscape of adventure and exotic discoveries. Epidemic history revealed 'convulsions' of the 'human frame' less concrete, but more revealing, than any religious relic or geological stone. With this metaphor, Hecker sought to excavate nothing less than the ancient histories of affective and corporeal life, what I am describing as the extended sphere of movement and dance history, a choreozone dissolving boundaries between movement, medicine, and social science.

Medical interest in the past was not new, as historian of medicine Nancy Siraisi has argued of antiquarian and historiographic interest among Renaissance doctors. But a surge of writing in the nineteenth century heralded new spheres of scientific debate, provoking Nietzsche, by 1874, to bemoan the 'antiquarian' mode of histori-cization by which writers idolized the past as that which could be 'preserved' and 'revered'. 'History', Nietzsche wrote, had itself become a fever. Antiquarianism was in vogue, not least in medical science, though many scientists argued forcefully that they needed to look forward, not back, if they were to advance in their research. And although many scientists abjured the sort of historiography Hecker championed, popular culture in the nineteenth century was saturated with fashions in antiquarian collecting and display, aided by a rapid increase in colonial spoils and the rise of medical museums and anatomy theatres, after the physician Sir Hans Sloane (1660-1753) opened the British Museum in London with his own artefacts.

Throughout the nineteenth century, new museums of every sort opened their doors to ever greater numbers of middle-class visitors, and fresh efforts in archaeology revealed even more extraordinary histories than earlier generations had imagined. Medicine, Hecker thought, participated centrally in this rush to excavate the past. And the special purview of epidemic history was its reach to what was most intangible of the past: everyday bodies moving—in Hecker's view, excessively, extravagantly, noxiously—in concert.

HISTORY'S RETURNS: CONTINUING EARLIER CHOREOMANIAS BY OTHER MEANS
Hecker's account of the relationship between natural upheavals and ancient histories situated dance manias at the heart of modern medical research. History, medicine, and dance, in this formulation, formed an inalienable trio, a discursive node within which the history of humanity unfolds. But this history was as vexed as were live medical bodies. Medical writers gestured enthusiastically towards the past and the other, just as they recoiled from the same. This dual fascination and revulsion for ungainly, uncontrolled movement made choreomania a dance of captivating and suspect alterity, 'affiliating itself' with a complex of ideas about social aggregation in modern political life. R. J. Hollingdale (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 57-123, esp. 72-77. 32. Nietzsche, ‘On the Uses and Disadvantages’, 60. 33. Samuel J. M. M. Alberti, Morbid Curiosities: Medical Museums in Nineteenth-Century Britain (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011). 32 +* EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE Orient emerges in the nineteenth century as a set of ideas related to imperial practice, but also significantly as a continuation of earlier Orientalisms by other means. The Orient is not new in the nineteenth century; but the particular complex of institutional practices and ideas that emerge at that time shift the terms of its articulation. So, too, with choreomania, histories of thinking about collectivity, excess, and plague were already extant; but the terms of their recombination in Hecker's work suggested a new sort of biopolitical and ecosophical disorder that could be exported (and translated) to cases of unruly collective action overseas. With Hecker, choreomania became a disorder of epidemic proportions, ancient yet recurring in the present day. Cases multiplied, as did the repetition of what increasingly constituted a standard set of case studies, including the late medieval St. John's and St. Vitus's dances first and foremost, the Italian tarantella, the eighteenth-century Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, the Abyssinian tigretier, and more, as I detail in the coming chapters. Emphasizing spontaneous acts of conulsive imitation, Hecker depicted scene after scene in which people copied one another and supposedly tapped into corporeal exercises right out of Grecian antiquity, especially Dionysian ones. Although some cases border what we may understand as aesthetically recognizable dance, most cases were dance-like at best, constituted by an implicit fantasy of Dionysian frenzy. The Jumpers of Cornwall, a utopian religious group founded in 1760, offered Hecker a portrait of ecstatic religiosity characterized by frenetic bodily postures recalling, he thought, ancient bacchanals. Jumpers, Hecker wrote, '[worked] themselves up into a state of religious frenzy, in which they have scarcely any control over their senses'. They employed 'certain unmeaning words' and corporeal exercises, including '[jumping] with strange gestures'. They repeated these 'with all their might, until they are exhausted', collapsing into unconsciousness. 'Women who, like the Maenads, practice these religious exercises', he noted, 'are carried away from the midst of them in a state of syncope [sudden loss of consciousness], whilst the remaining members of the congregations, for miles together, on their way home, terrify those whom they meet by the sight of such demoniacal ravings'.** Frenetic gesture coupled with a theatrical tendency towards imitation made religious enthusiasts into 'dance maniacs' in Hecker's view. Their state of fury was exacerbated, he argued, by imitation, an automatic, animal process provoking docile individuals pathologically—and epidemically—to mimic those who were most excited among them. "There are never more than a few ecstatics', Hecker noted, 'who, by their example, excite the rest to jump, and these are followed by the greatest part of the meeting, so that these assemblages of Jumpers resemble, for hours together, the wildest orgies, rather than congregations met for Christian edification'.* The 'total loss of power over the will' Jumpers evinced produced 'an actual disease of the mind', Hecker added, conceding that its effects varied. The Bacchic ecstasy that swept some Jumpers into a beatific state of rapture dragged others to despair. Jumpers, like Shakers, active in England and the United States from the late eighteenth century, and Quakers, a sectarian religious group active as early as the seventeenth century, believed in the exercise of bodily rigours (specifically music and dance) to attain spiritual states; and in the corporeal manifestation of religious ecstasy in everyday bodily acts. This typically produced quaking and shaking motions—hence their evocative names—but only in the nineteenth century came systematically to be described in epidemiological terms. With Hecker, all motions inspiring imitation among people could be attributed to choreomania, a condition that simultaneously epitomized and served as a paradigmatic example of this quintessentially imitative—and theatrical—pathology. Hecker provided scenes which, when juxtaposed, added up to constituting recognizable scenarios. His genealogical method—collaging accounts alongside one another—invited writers to extend the scope of choreomania with new portrayals of pathological sympathy. Choreomania appeared not only as an epidemic occurrence of chorea, such as the French physicians Louis-Jacques Béguin (1793-1859), and others, had previously suggested in their Dictionnaire des termes de médecine, chirurgie, art vétérinaire, pharmacie, histoire naturelle, botanique, physique, chimie, etc. (Dictionary of medical, surgical, veterinary, pharmaceutical, natural, botanical, physical, chemical, etc., terms) (1823), after the French physician Etienne-Michel Bouteille’s (1732-1816) treatise on chorea, and other chorea treatises from the early 1800s. With Hecker, choreomania became a capacious dance-like epidemic, encompassing spiritual and religious dimensions, liable to excite anyone disposed to fanaticism. Variations on the theme of dance-like epidemic contagion and imitation multiplied, largely inspired by Hecker’s work.

Whereas some writers tried to fold Hecker’s capacious concept of choreomania into existing medical theory, others sought to leave the literary scope of the diagnosis to do the work of scientific illustration. The British physician and soon-to-be president of the Royal College of Physicians, Sir Thomas Watson (1792-1882), described the "extraordinary affections" and exalted gestures of choreomaniacs in his Lectures on the Principles and Practice of Physic, delivered at King’s College London in 1836-1837.

Watson tied choreomania into a history of instrumental music and theatrical dance, suggesting that "when music is performed in [the choreomaniacs'] hearing, the movement becomes an actual dance." For Watson, choreomania explained and enacted classical art, specifically ancient performance and what was coming to be known as world literature.

"When crowds are collected together," Watson wrote, "the dancing mania is apt to spread from person to person by a sort of imitative affection, realizing the fable of Orpheus, and giving origin (it may be presumed) to those romantic legends met in the literature of most ages and countries, of universal, involuntary, and unceasing saltation, at the sound of a magic pipe." At the origin of world literature, for Watson, was an incoherent, involuntary jumping motion, a dancing disease. Dance manias were an ancient disorder, he argued, at the heart of the twin sciences of medicine and art.

The poetic figure of Orpheus in Watson's account illustrated and almost proved this strange disease. But it did not quite institute what Foucault called a nineteenth-century regime of veridiction, or truth-making, rather than truth. Watson was concerned with descriptive processes: like Hecker, reliance on literary and dramatic scenarios illustrated and suggested, rather than verified, medical observation.

Described in nearly metaphoric terms, choreomania emerged in Watson's account as if it were not quite an actual dance but unchoreographed movement that became dance in proximity to music. This seemed strange and hardly believable to Watson, yet ancient legend, he submitted, accounted for such phenomena, enshrining them in world literature. Neither history nor popular lore explained the disease, but ancient myth helped to contextualize what appeared as a medical conundrum and to illustrate its clinical aspects. Whittaker, J. Hocknell, J. Meacham, and Lucy Wright (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1859), 90-93.

Thomas Watson, Lectures on the principles and practice of physic; delivered at King’s College, London, 2nd ed., 2 vols., vol. 1 (London: John W. Parker, West Strand, 1848), 657-676.

Watson, Lectures on the principles and practice of physic, 669.

Watson, Lectures on the principles and practice of physic, 669. See also Jean Fogo Russell, ‘Dancing Mania’, in K. E. Russell, Festschrift for Kenneth Fitzpatrick Russell; Proceedings of a Symposium Arranged by the Section of Medical History, A.M.A. (Victorian Branch) (Carlton, Victoria: Queensberry Hill Press, 1978), 159-197, 163.

The ‘two cultures’: dance between science and art

That literature and science were closely allied in the nineteenth century is now a commonplace in studies of the period, as recent works by Engelhardt, Janice Caldwell, Laura Otis, Anne Stile, Gowan Dawson, Nicholas Dames, Allan Conrad Christensen, Josephine McDonagh, David Amigoni, and others have shown. Otis has pointed out many writers’ training in the scientific laboratory as well as in literary method. Yet the use of theatrical or choreographic language to explain scientific case studies has far less frequently been addressed.

Warwick Anderson points out the American Bureau of Health activities in the 1920s as a ‘distant theater for the rehearsal and performance of white American male virtue’ in the Philippines. In Colonial Pathologies: American Tropical Medicine, Race, and Hygiene in the Philippines (2006), Anderson argues that twentieth-century medical and hygiene development projects sit on a continuum with earlier colonial histories, all of them concerned with asserting white (male) cleanliness against the possibility of contamination afforded travellers by variously ‘differentiated’, germ-ridden, and degenerate natives: Filipinos implicitly threatening to these American medical men’s hardy masculinity on account of their purportedly premodern excremental practices and other forms of biosocial spillover.

The uneven biopolitical and biosocial negotiation of (body) borders between Americans and Filipinos reasserted the Americans’ sportiness and, implicitly, their social, scientific, and biopolitical superiority. In this way, American hygiene workers exercised colonial biopower in a theatre of negotiations in which spill rather than spasm was at stake.

In Hecker’s case, nearly a century earlier, dramatic narratives of contorted bodies spilling into public space did so on account not of body fluids or particles (excrement, germs) but of the choreographic process of contagious gesture and imitative behaviour. Hecker’s writing, initially drawn up for a readership of medical practitioners and (he hoped) a new generation of medical historians, performed an implicit appeal to readers to understand, as if of their own capacity for intuition, the self-evidence of the scenarios depicted. This method did not only draw out literary comparisons, but employed literary flourish and dramatic tableaux to sensationalize scenes of dancing mayhem, grounding them in poetic, rather than administrative or (as in the Filipino case) ‘laboratory’, method and truth. Hecker’s contemporaries, including Darwin, the English biologist Thomas Henry Huxley (1825-1895), and other scientific littérateurs, like Hecker typically adopted literary conventions. Gillian Beer has shown that Darwin used narrative devices in his writings—particularly the "plot"—and Caldwell has argued that pre-Darwinian writers borrowed from the Romantic materialist trope to meld self-expression and individual consciousness with natural philosophy. Dawson has drawn links between Darwin's respectable persona and the complex sexual underworld with which his work was entwined. Roach has argued that acting theories fundamentally drew from physiological understandings of the body and natural philosophy to explain theatrical emotion. But the spectacle of uncontrol depicted in Hecker's work gave it an especially stagy air, as if choreomania emerged on medical history's stage as a freak show, lining medical curiosities up from across eras pell-mell.

Laura Otis, 'Introduction', in Laura Otis, ed., Literature and Science in the Nineteenth Century: An Anthology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), xvii-xxviii. See also Laura Otis, Membranes: Metaphors of Invasion in Nineteenth-Century Literature, Science, and Politics (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999); Anne Stile, Popular Fiction and Brain Science in the Late Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012); Nicholas Dames, The Physiology of the Novel: Reading, Neural Science, and the Form of Victorian Fiction (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007).

Warwick Anderson, Colonial Pathologies: American Tropical Medicine, Race, and Hygiene in the Philippines (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2006), 6. Anderson, Colonial Pathologies, 7. Gillian Beer, Darwin's Plots: Evolutionary Narrative in Darwin, George Eliot and Nineteenth-Century Fiction, 3rd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009). Janice McLarren Caldwell, Literature and Medicine in Nineteenth-Century Britain: From Mary Shelley to George Eliot (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008). Gowan Dawson, Darwin, Literature and Victorian Respectability (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010). Joseph Roach, The Player's Passion: Studies in the Science of Acting (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1993).

The volume of recent works that foreground nineteenth-century links between literature and science reveals continued anxiety among contemporary scholars to show that the division between these worlds was not always so. Indeed, the notion of the 'two cultures' divide articulated by chemist, novelist, and critic C. P. Snow (1905-1980) in 1959 already gestured towards an intellectual world in which the distinctions between arts and sciences were not so strictly drawn. As cultural theorist Stefan Collini has argued in his introduction to the re-edition of Snow's pivotal text, Snow in fact sought to bring science up to the standing literature enjoyed, and even to surpass it, in the name of social and political progress. Technology in Snow's view would bring the poor of the world up to a standard of living possible only through the proper administration of natural resources honed by scientifically trained politicians. Literary intellectuals, 'Luddites', as Snow called them, were too backward, obsessed with history, nostalgic, and moored in the trap-pings of privilege. Although there was no room in Snow's vision for a culturally and intellectually informed scientific literature, his debate, reprised by critics F. R. Leavis (1895-1978), Lionel Trilling (1905-1975), and others, pointed to a trend towards splinterization between science and art informed by a complicated past in which scientific and literary modes of inquiry and expression were not so cut off. And indeed, if by the 1890s the president of an Oxford college could exclaim to a visiting don that ‘we don’t talk to them’, that is, mathematicians, seated on either side of his unsuspecting guest, this was far less true of the fifty or hundred years prior, during which the repercussions of the Encyclopédie of philosopher Denis Diderot (1713-1784) and mathematician Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1717-1783) and other Enlightenment efforts at intellectual synthesis had woven the arts and sciences closer together, rather than further apart.*® In Roach’s terms, motion and emotion were twin terms characterizing human and mechanical life, doubling the theatrical and rhetorical arts and all aspects of philosophical and physiological doctrine. Writing in The Player’s Passion, Roach argues that ideas of organism (or organicism) and vitality saturated Romantic thought, following Enlightenment efforts to mechanize—indeed to mathematize—the ‘passions’, conveniently joined to the body, since René Descartes (1596-1650), in the pineal gland right in the centre of the brain. So, too, notions of spontaneity and automatism took a turn in the nineteenth century with the emergence of theories attributing spontaneous action to the unconscious and what Roach notes as its ‘physiological counterpart’, the subconscious, theories fundamental to Darwin and, later, Freud’s work.*° But with Hecker, spontaneous action—bodily automatism as well as uncontrollable emotion—occur as if genealogically from out of ancient time, as a biological and ecosophical force. In this sense, Hecker’s concept of human vitality exceeds the individual; human bodies serve as conduits to biohistorical and geological operations which are manifest, epidemically, far beyond what Freud would later describe as ‘primal urges’ erupting within the strictures of human civilization.*! Taken in this regard, Hecker’s writing on choreomania straddles a heightened period of disciplinary change, where vitalism signals not so much a concentration of spiritual and physiological forces, or yet a psychological impulse, as an ecosophical meeting of historical and corporal intensities. Choreomanias came to be theorized with Hecker as exercises in reverberation: as a repetition of past forms, just where these broke down into formlessness again.

OBSCURITAS ANTIQUITATIS: ANTIQUARIAN MEDICINE AND ‘HISTORICAL FEELING’

As a choreographic approach to history—and genealogy—this book emphasizes scenes of corporeal undoing, the dislocation and relocation of bodies on an imagined historical stage, and the gesture of their abstraction into medical literature. Hecker in particular captured the attention of readers at a time when the popularization of scientific ideas countermanded specialization in medicine and the arts. Likewise, a whole cast of medical men swimming upstream of the tendency towards purely practical research gravitated towards Hecker’s writing in droves. If there is one institution to whose efforts the spread of Hecker’s concept of the dancing disease may be attributed, it was the Sydenham Society, a powerhouse in disseminating medical literature in the age of empire. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

First conceived in the 1840s in London, when 'antiquarian feeling was widespread and, as [diarist Arthur J.] Munby [1828-1910] put it, "everyone was interested in the history of everything,"' the Sydenham Society served as a clearing house for new ideas, many translated from the ancient or the exotic. The 'historical feeling' Munby describes, evinced throughout London, provided an impetus for the founding of interest-specific societies whose purpose was 'to reprint specialized out-of-print works whose appeal was too limited for a commercial publisher'. The English Historical Society and the Camden Society, both founded in 1838, and the Parker Society, created in 1841 to publish writings by founders of the English Reformed Church, were run by elected committees on behalf of an annual membership.

The Sydenham Society 'followed exactly the same plan; but on transposing that plan to a medical context', Munby remarked, it was forced to face a 'fundamental difficulty': 'for better or for worse, most medical men differ from historians in being concerned chiefly with problems of the immediate present rather than with accounts of the historical past'. This 'conflict of interest' between historical curiosity and clinical use emerged 'without ever being resolved'. It was arguably the chief, though not the sole, cause of the Sydenham Society's dissolution after fourteen years.

Writing nearly half a century later in 'Science and Culture' (1880), Huxley was still lamenting the unfortunate invention of the term 'applied science', whose supposed opposition to 'pure' science was not applicable in the real world; the distinction neglected the real relationship between the two.

The Sydenham Society, founded in 1843, had been designed to expand medical knowledge by looking to the past and the foreign. It declared that its mission was to meet 'certain acknowledged deficiencies in existing means for diffusing medical literature, which are not likely to be supplied by the efforts of individuals'. It would publish books that were (1) rare or expensive, including standard British works whose reprint would contribute to their dissemination; (2) ancient or early modern, requiring a reprint and/or translation; (3) especially voluminous, and which could benefit from publication in digest form, whether British or by foreign authors; (4) translations of Greek and Latin authors, and works in Arabic and other Eastern languages, 'accompanied, when it is thought desirable, by the original text'; (5) translations of 'recent foreign works of merit'; and (6) 'original works of merit, which might prove valuable as books of reference' but might not otherwise be published because of their poor commercial prospects. The Sydenham Society also vowed to disseminate these widely. Hecker's collected essays on medieval epidemiology were the first such 'recent foreign works' to be published, appearing in volume 1 of the Sydenham Society publications in 1844. Babington, who was treasurer of the Society, had 52. On the emergence of publishing societies and the dissemination of scientific information in Britain and elsewhere, see esp. C. C. Booth, 'Medical Communication: The Old and the New. The Development of Medical Journals in Britain', British Medical Journal 285 (1982): 105-108, and David A. Kronick, 'Medical "Publishing Societies" in Eighteenth-Century Britain', Bulletin of the Medical Library Association 82. The following text has been cleaned up and corrected:

(1994): 277-282. For a history of the Sydenham Society and the debates surrounding its usefulness to the medical community, see William B. Ober, “The Sydenham Society (1843-1857): Rise and Fall”, Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine 41.2 (1974): 294-305, and G. G. Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies: A History and Bibliography of the Medical Classics Published by the Sydenham Society and the New Sydenham Society (1844-1911) (Acrise, Kent: Winterdown Books, 1985). For a broader history, see also Geoffrey Cantor et al., Science in the Nineteenth-Century Periodical: Reading the Magazine of Nature (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004). For a history of the Jean-Baptiste Bailliére publishing house, see J.-B. Baillie, Histoire de nos relations avec Tacadémie de médecine, 1827-1871. Lettre addressée 4 MM. les membres de l'Académie pour servir de complément au Bulletin de Académie de médecine . . . (Paris: J.-B. Bailliére, 1872). See also Christian Régnier, ‘J-B. Bailliére (1797-1885), The Pioneering Publisher Who Promoted French Medicine throughout the World’, Medicographia 27.1 (2005): 87-96.

53. A. N. L. Munby, The History and Bibliography of Science in England, delivered at the Eighth Annual Zeitlin & Verbrugge Lecture in Bibliography, University of California, 1968, 2; cited in Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 1.

54. Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 1.

55. See also Ober, ‘The Sydenham Society’, 294.

56. Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 1.

57. Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 1.

58. Thomas Henry Huxley, Science and Culture, and Other Essays (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1882), 26.

59. In Ober, ‘The Sydenham Society’, 295.

60. Ober, “The Sydenham Society’, 295. Obscuritas Antiquitatis +» 37 translated Hecker’s essays on the Black Death, the dancing mania, and the sweating sickness in 1832-1834 when they first appeared in German, but this 1844 re-edition enabled them to gain a new, more widespread readership among the society's members. And this membership was not inconsiderable. The Society counted over sixteen hundred medical practitioners in its first year and over two thousand the year after (among a total of about eighteen thousand medical practitioners in Great Britain at that time);*' lend- ing and library use increased readership further. Although by 1857 membership had declined to under seven hundred, prompting the Society’s closure, already forty ‘scarce and valuable med- ical works’ and ‘scarce editions of works of real value’ had been reprinted or translated into English for dissemination. The French were well represented in early translations, boasting works by the pioneer psychiatrist Philippe Pinel (1745-1826), among others. Nonetheless, criticism of the Society emerged with force, suggesting that antiquity was still a contested epistemic field in medical practice. Thomas Wakley (1795-1862), editor of the influential medical journal the Lancet, made a number of scathing remarks with respect to the Society’s scope and mission: ‘[antiquarians] wear eyes in their polls, in order to see back- wards; but men of science require those organs forward, that whoever retrogrades they may advance. If there be one class______ The New Sydenham Society was created to address the issues that led to the dissolution of the first Sydenham Society. It focused on translating and publishing contemporary works from other European nations, fostering a scientific internationalism in medical circles during the fin de siécle. Founded shortly after the first Sydenham Society's dissolution, the New Sydenham Society was younger, with one of its co-founders, Dr. Jonathan Hutchinson [1828-1913], being only 29 years old at the time. The New Sydenham Society strove to better respond to its membership's needs, addressing complaints about delayed publication, poorly managed funds, and works with no real value to a practitioner-majority readership.

From 1844 to 1857, the Sydenham Society published 29 titles or 40 volumes, but only 19 were considered of practical interest. The Lancet's accusations of obscuritas antiquitatis were answered with structural reorganization, including an annual meeting held in tandem with the annual meeting of the British Medical Association in a different town each year. This change dissolved complaints about the cramped offices on Frith Street in Soho being too small to accommodate more than half a dozen members—always the same overpaid ones.

Despite these debates and challenges, the two societies effectively changed the face of medical literature and its dissemination in the nineteenth century. In the Sydenham Society's 14 years (1844-1857) and the New Sydenham Society's 53 years (1858-1911), nearly 240 volumes were published, expanding the scope of medical history and medical literature in the English-speaking world considerably.®

Medicine was now ancient and modern; its modernity was constituted by its reach to the past and to the foreign. Similar comparative and historiographical initiatives were undertaken in France, with the emergence of the J.-B. Bailliére publishing house in 1821, dedicated to printing significant works of medical history as well as new medical theory reaching readers locally and internationally. Not only was interest in the past debated; comparativism was also on the rise. With the expansion of colonial travel and new interest in comparative pathology, colonial outposts became new sites for the production of medical knowledge, just as writers repeated, rearticulated, and added to paradigmatic case studies. These writers, 61. Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 3. 62. Dr. Ferguson Branson of Sheffield, in a statement suggesting the founding of a society of medical literature by himself and Drs. Joseph and William Bullar, of Southampton, whose letter was printed in the Lancet, 7 May 1842; cited in Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 1-2. 63. Thomas Wakley, Lancet 2 (1841-1842): 285; cited in Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 2. 64. Meynell, The Two Sydenham Societies, 3-6. 65. Meynell notes that, although the New Sydenham Society's membership rose from 1,949 in 1859 to 2,850 in 1860 and then to 3,000 in 1861, the outbreak of the U.S. Civil War saw membership drop by about a quarter. By 1862, only fourteen hundred The translation and annotation of choreomania created marginal spaces that gave rise to other versions of its geo-choreopolitical stakes. The term 'trans-latio' denotes passage, transfer, and shift, as detailed in Chapter 3. This transformative version of scientific history produces knowledge that is not created 'here' and then exported 'there', but rather shifts and refracts a host of mutually imbricated conditions and imaginaries.

The discursive history of choreomania reveals a genealogical and choreographic process by which concept formation occurs in expansive imaginal spaces, as it plays out in relation to real places and sites. The travelling physician confronted with new scenes maps them onto narratives and images known to him, shifting the discursive realm around and within which he rearticulates them, often as if mere additions to the old.

The history of ideas and institutions, specifically the history of ideas about the dancing disease in this case, performs a series of translatios from one discursive realm, one field, to another. These translatios purport to be merely expanding the scope of scientific study, merely migrating. Choreomania moves radically through such processes, from an antiquarian curiosity to a description of anti-colonial revolt.

Choreomania emerges as an ancient excess of motion- and emotion-hovering on the other side of the emphatically, placidly modern. While Foucault highlighted the disciplinarization of knowledge leading up to the nineteenth century, I argue that disciplinarization could only occur in collusion with a contrary motion: a rhizomatic dispersal, fragmentation, and recombination of epistemic centres.

Although for Foucault modern centres of power were erecting ever stricter police states characterized by institutions of corporeal and public control (the prison, the asylum, the school), medical and anthropological writers were also reading one another, as Taussig enjoins us to do, tactilely, with distraction. They intuited ideas about dance and engaged in non-systematic modes of knowledge production, thumbing through fragments in annals and chronicles, chancing on anecdotes and histories.

Medical and anthropological writers compared and contrasted cases of political upheaval, drew up taxonomies of fitful bodies, and in this regard produced structures of disciplinary power inasmuch as their judgments on erratic, fitful corporeality cast these as aberrant and ill. But their opaque writings were also characterized by almost Borgesian lists of seemingly unrelated events, jumbled descriptions, and hearsay.

The writers I discuss in these pages collected, collaged, interpolated, and imagined choreomanias, glossing one another's observations and archival finds. Returning consistently to Hecker's essay, they repeated, with variations, what he collated in his eccentrically organized and in many respects unfinished text.

The history of choreomania is a history of passages or translatios by which ideas about disorderly collectivity move across disciplines, geographies, and eras. What results is a discursive zone of intensity describing an entangled set of concepts eluding the exactness of definition. There is no definitive concept of the dancing disease, only a web of interrelated case studies. This chapter and the next argue that Hecker's narratives, particularly his vivid description of the St. John's or St. Vitus's dances, become paradigmatic in the sense that Agamben puts forward. The paradigm, Agamben writes, is the heightened example, that to which all further examples of a particular sort refer. But the paradigm, paradoxically, becomes paradigmatic by repetition. It is, Agamben writes, reprising philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn (1922-1996), 'simply an example, a single case that by its repeatability acquires the capacity to model further examples and attitudes.'

Agamben writes: 'the paradigm goes from the particular to the particular.' It does not describe rules or principles; it does not become more 'true' because of its adoption as a model. It only retains its status as such until it is replaced by another often repeated example or trope. In this sense, choreomania is nothing more than, but also as much as, the imbricated set of examples or 'scenes' that make it up.

In the next chapter, a closer look at Hecker's reading of the St. John's and other 'epidemic' dances reveals the fantastical incursion of Grecian bacchanals onto the medieval stage, a fantasy reprised by Nietzsche in his ambivalent discussion of the Middle Ages. Hecker's paradigmatic example then gains a genealogy of its own, linking it to earlier ideas about disorder and dissent characterizing Europe's purportedly darkest age.

Madness after Foucault: Medieval Bacchanals

Eras of greatest material and moral distress seem to be those during which people dance most.... —Philippe de Félice, L'enchantement des danses et la magie du verbe (1957)

FOUCAULT NEVER wrote the history of the 'Orient' that the initial preface to History of Madness [Folie et déraison. Histoire de la folie à l'âge classique] (1961) promised, though his work carved out a rich space of thinking about madness's discursive coming-to-be, the language and institutions that made 'madness' a thing—an object of scrutiny, language, and biopower—whereas it had been only, he argues, undifferentiated, inarticulate stuff. Madness, for Foucault, was, before the advent of self-styled 'reason', an equal player on history's stage, a set of experiences not less than any others, a series of alternative modes of being with or alongside 'truth', before 'truth' became construed and co-opted as that which reason deploys and unreason ('déraison') decries.

This book, and this chapter in particular, seek with Foucault to tell the story of a madness before 'madness' came to be described; but also with Foucault to tell the history of this telling. The one cannot be conceived without the other; so, too, the telling leaves more traces for the historian—or genealogist—rendering the told a far trickier and more elusive beast. What this book also argues, however, is that dance—specifically, dancing manias—complicate the history of 'madness' Foucault outlines, and so too the history of madnesses more generally. This book excavates a series of proliferating narratives about the 'dancing disease', revealing a fantasy about origins, such as Foucault suggests the 'Orient' represents (as in the epigraph to this book). But this fantasy also construes primitive, 'Oriental', history in plural, pre-individuated—and significantly in corporeal, dancing—terms. The choreography of this fantasy tells the story of dance's origins and of dance as origin: that which phantasmatically constitutes the modern rational self's other, prior, beastly self—the self perpetually threatening chaotically to re-emerge as spectacle. This is spectacle as a show of origins that might engulf those watching, though they may attempt to abstract themselves, as moderns, from the rumbling horde.

NARRATIVE ENDS, MYTHIC BEGINNINGS: DANCE HISTORY

The book then is about a fantasy and paradox: dance, it seems, has no origins. But it has a history of narratives about origins. In the European tradition, Susan Leigh Foster reminds us, these narratives tell of dance's emergence from the festivities of the ancient Jews (according to Jesuit chronicler and choreographer Claude Francois Menestrier [1631-1705]); or, in the formulation of the French encyclopédiste Louis de Cahusac (1706-1759), from the primeval womb: body breathing, eyes fluttering, arms opening and closing, feet stepping.

The first of these origin narratives suggests a genealogical ascendance from the ancient Egyptians and the Jews to the Greeks, and from there, we may presume, to Europe and America. The second approach is physiological, describing dance as innate action of the human body, a process as essential as breath. Choreomania narratives draw from both types of fantasy, attributing dancing plagues simultaneously to the practices of ancient revellers and to the automatic mechanisms of the human body. Hovering between culture and nature, primitive practice and bodily impulse, 'choreomania' appeared to its nineteenth-century observers to participate both in history and biology. In this regard, choreomania represents a biohistorical concept, where biohistory denotes, in Foucault's terms, 'the pressures by which the movements of life and the processes of history interfere with one another'. 'Movements of life' in this view are so entangled in one another that 'life' and 'history' become indistinguishable. Biohistory further underpins the history of biopower, which Foucault understands as a morphing set of systems and ideas that govern life forms through institutions of knowledge; these institutions determine concepts of normality and normativity, as well as discursive practices: ways of seeing and saying 'truth'.

This chapter argues that choreomaniacs appear in Hecker's ecosophical account not so much to deviate from but rather intensely to echo their surroundings. They do not represent a history of 'dangerous individuals' such as Foucault has described but appear and recur on history's stage as eccentric protuberances: as strange as but also as natural as a hurricane or a tornado. Hecker wrote his story of medieval dance manias in relation to another, now far better known plague, what he may have first termed the Black Death, in a trio of works titled The Epidemics of the Middle Ages (1859). As I showed in the last chapter, this comprised an essay titled "The Black Death', a second titled "The Sweating Sickness', and a third titled 'The Dancing Mania', as well as, eventually, a fourth short essay titled 'Child-Pilgrimages' (1832). The Dancing Mania: A Medieval Phenomenon

Hecker's "The Dancing Mania" posited mass dancing as a medieval phenomenon with roots in ancient Greece and Rome and echoes throughout the ages. Hecker considered the dancing mania as a "medieval" phenomenon, irrational and superstitious, different from the gentle organic account of dancing offered by de Cahusac. Dance manias, in Hecker's writing, were biohistorical excrescences far removed from enlightened civilization or linear historical progress.

This chapter focuses on Hecker's fantasy and traces his writings, drawing out a history of late medieval European corporeality. The chapter also seeks to reveal the history of dance in Latin chronicles and annals, suggesting semi-structured choreographic formations.

Foucault's perspective on madness and dance manias

Foucault articulates "madness" as intangible and indescribable, the primordial other against which scientific modernity construes its rational, "reasonable" self. "Madness" becomes the set of experiences categorized scientifically, legally, and philosophically in opposition to Enlightenment clarity. In Foucault's work, individual madmen and madwomen appear to lack reason, but they participate in a "mad" condition that strays confidently from a verifiable and generally held "truth." As an example, Foucault offers the Encyclopédie entry for ‘Folie’ (madness), which suggests that when one strays from reason without knowing it, because one has no ideas of one’s own, one is an imbecile; when one strays from reason, knowing it, because one is enslaved to a violent passion, one is weak; but when one strays from reason with confidence, 5. Few studies of medieval dance exist, due to the paucity of sources. Where these do exist, they tend to focus on late medieval courtly practices and music, though some recent studies have emphasized ecstatic rapture and ritual. See e.g. Karen Silen, ‘Elisabeth of Spalbeek: Dancing the Passion’, in Lynn Brooks, ed., Women’s Work: Making Dance in Europe before 1800 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2007), 207-227; Robert Mullally, The Carole: A Study of Medieval Dance (Farnham: Ashgate, 2011); Ann Buckley and Cynthia J. Cyrus, eds., Music, Dance and Society: Medieval and Renaissance Studies in Memory of Ingrid G. Brainard (Kalamazoo, MI: Medieval Institute, 2011); Luisa del Giudice and Nancy van Deusen, Performing Ecstasies: Music, Dance and Ritual in the Mediterranean (Ottawa: Institute of Medieval Music, 2005); John Stevens, Words and Music in the Middle Ages: Song, Narrative, Dance and Drama, 1050-1350 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), esp. 159-198. Margit Sahlin, in Etude sur la carole médiévale: Lorigine du mot et ses rapports avec léglise (Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksells, 1940), offers a detailed etymological analysis of the term carole—widely used to denote joyous popular dancing—and a useful historiographical account of popular dance practices in relation to (often at odds with) the Christian church, including pre-Christian practices associated with St. Vitus and St. John. Frances Eustace with Pamela M. King, in ‘Dances of the Living and the Dead: A Study of Danse Macabre Imagery within the Context of Late-Medieval Dance Culture’, in Sophie Oosterwijk and Stefanie Knéll, eds., Mixed Metaphors: The Danse Macabre in Medieval and Early Modern Europe (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars, 2011) 43-71, esp. 45-46, highlight the challenges of dance (specifically choreographic) history in the Middle Ages. 6. ‘Unreason’ (déraison), lan Hacking points out, is an elusive but pervasive notion in Foucault's work, nearly absent in the English editions of his writing, though fundamental to his original aim. Foucault originally published Folie et déraison. Histoire de 1a folie à Vage classique [Madness and Unreason. History of Insanity in the Classical Age] in 1961, effectively his doctoral thesis, supervised by Georges Canguilhem, and supported by philosopher Jean Hyppolite (1907-1968). A heavily abridged version soon came to be known—and widely celebrated as well as decried—in English as Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason, first published in the United States by Pantheon Books in 1965, and republished in the United Kingdom by Tavistock in 1967. This in parts faulty translation by Richard Howard reprised and slightly enlarged Foucault’s own radical 1964 abridgment, also published by Plon, and which, Hacking points out, not only cut almost half the original nearly seven-hundred-page text but also downplayed the term ‘déraison’, leaving only Histoire de la folie prominently visible on the cover page, with Folie et déraison inset as subtitle. See Michel Fouca______ Histoire de la folie à l'âge classique (Paris: Plon, 1964). Foucault's unabridged original book, republished in a newly prefaced 1972 edition (partially following bitter controversy with Jacques Derrida) as Histoire de la folie à l'âge classique, recently became available in English in a new translation, as History of Madness, ed. Jean Khalfa, trans. Jonathan Murphy and Jean Khalfa (London: Routledge, 2006). The new full English translation recovers both prefaces and ancillary material. Hacking offers a brilliantly detailed analysis of the complicated abridgements and retranslations of this work in English and French, in Ian Hacking, ‘Déraison’, History of the Human Sciences 24.4 (2011): 13-23. See also Hacking’s foreword to History of Madness (2006), ix-xii. For further discussion of this complex history of abridgements and re-editions, see also Arthur Still and Irving Velody, ‘Introduction’, in Still and Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 1-16; and Colin Gordon's pivotal essay ‘Histoire de la folie: An Unknown Book by Michel Foucault’, first published in History of the Human Sciences (1990), republished in Still and Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 19-42. On Foucault’s prolonged dispute with Derrida, leading to the new preface, where Foucault defends his work as constituting a moment in time, an ‘event’ not requiring retrospective apologies or retractions, see also Michel Foucault, ‘My Body, This Paper, This Fire’, in History of Madness (2006), 550-574; Michel Foucault, ‘Reply to Derrida (“Michel Foucault Derrida e no kaino”),’ Paideia 11: Michel Foucault, 1 February 1972, pp. 131-1477, reprinted in History of Madness (2006), 575-590; and Gordon, ‘Histoire de la folie’, 35-37. Except where otherwise indicated, I refer to Foucault’s standard unabridged Histoire de la folie (1972).

7. Foucault writes: "deduces madness." In Foucault, Histoire de la folie, 241. "e Xville siécle pergoit le fou, mais déduit la folie." (The eighteenth century perceives the madman, but Madness after Foucault + 43 firmly persuaded that one is being reasonable, then one is mad.° The mad, in the classical age (widely referred to as the ‘age of reason’), are not individually so, by their own reckoning, Foucault argues; they are mad—significantly, they are perceived to be mad—in relation to a concept of reason that others hold for them. This is different from déraison, according to which individuals might wilfully refute concepts of ‘reason’. Madness in this sense is relational but also objective; it is determined by the purportedly rational observer, who claims, rightly or not, to possess the barometer as to what ‘reason’ constitutes.° As Foucault’s work on discipline further argues, after Canguilhem’s work on normality and normativity, myriad societal structures determine how the objectification of ‘reason’ comes to play out, largely as a complex and nearly imperceptible web of subtly coercive and normalizing measures, institutional and discursive. With choreomania, a slightly different structure of madness comes into play. In the nineteenth-century epidemiological formulation this book foregrounds, choreomania comes to denote a type of madness in which individuals neither believe themselves to be reasonable and rational (contrary to the supposedly truer perceptions of their peers), nor do they merely deviate from accepted behaviors, as ‘dangerous individuals’ who must be cast aside, locked up, or otherwise forcibly cured______ Choreomaniacs, in Hecker's ecosophical account, amplify their era gesturally, by imitating its tremors and quakes. Dance maniacs enter their condition by proximity, which Hecker calls 'imitation-compassion-sympathy' - a cluster of principles denoting multiplication, compounded with relapses over time. Choreomaniacs were contagioned by a surge of historical and ecosophical factors. 'Imitation-compassion-sympathy' unites human beings in what Hecker refers to as 'the general body' and, in his preface to "The Black Death", the 'organism of the world'.

Choreomania was, Hecker argued, an organic event of epic proportions, neither individual nor social but a 'convulsion which in the most extraordinary manner infuriated the human frame'. Choreomaniacs became disorderly by surrendering to a collective impulse, spectacularizing the dissolution of individual subjectivity - a movement originating from out of a doubly primordial place: ancient history and biology, wrapped together in a general ecology unfolding over time.

Choreomanias in nineteenth-century scientific literature constitute a form of madness on account of their scale. While individual choreomaniacs appear strange and deluded, they were notable in the terms of nineteenth-century historical epidemiology due to their capacity to multiply. Choreomanias were not isolated exceptions or deviations but magnifications in intensity as well as scale.

In this respect, the history of choreomania is an ecosophical conception that tells a set of ideas about epidemic madness as that which collectively exaggerates a 'primitive' form of being that is triggered by the crises biohistory brings about. 'Choreomaniacs' were theatrical, representing an ecological crisis by their contorted body postures, and in doing so, they showed their era's imagined primal self to itself. As the author argues in later chapters, this conception sets the stage for Freud's notion of a (typically colonial and childlike) primitive self erupting during times of crisis, symptomatically. Choreomania thus becomes the collective disorder that theatricalizes modernity's sense of crisis.

Specifically, choreomania theatricalizes the human-scale ecological crisis that returns. The author does not just with Foucault write a 'history of bodies' as opposed to a 'history of mentalities'; they also seek to capture the ecological crisis that returns. "Mentalities" themselves are entangled in bodily acts. (44) EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE

intellectual and discursive processes by which abstraction from historical scenes produces new bodies of knowledge and truth—new fictions—which are material and mobile. Knowledge moves—it performs a kinetic act, where 'kinesis' denotes passage, transfer, and repetition. In the terms of Sren Kierkegaard (1813-1855), the Greek concept of 'yivpoi' (kinesis) signals the modern category of 'passage'.10 Kinesis suggests a structure of repetition that implies priority—something happened before repetition could take place—and novelty. With repetition comes difference: the same thing is never, in this Heraclitean formulation, repeated exactly the same way. Choreomanias recur, in medical literature, with a measure of difference. So, too, the discursive formations that fashion them into fictions suggest discursive returns to prior sources and historical conceptualizations: in this chapter, a nineteenth-century return to medieval sources and specifically the imagined 'bacchantic' reality this medievalism purportedly revealed. Choreomanias then pose a particular challenge relative to other types of 'madness' interesting for the history of ideas about dance, inasmuch as they reveal a complex node of fantasies about collective bodily movement and the public performance of disorder and distress. As temporal and spatial excrescences—public theatres of excess—choreomanias represent the choreographic embodiment of crisis. As such, the 'madness' of these events is not constitutional—it does not belong to individual bodies—but conjunctive, circumstantial. Choreomanias are the 'mad' theatricalization of a historical moment in time, a clash of temporalities and cultures. The madness in them is relative, performative: it shows a more global crisis where individuals signalling or signifying difference (as madness) do not. Significantly, as McCarren has argued of nineteenth-century dance, this madness spills out of the collective body politic as dance—in this case, disorganized and pullulating.

Choreomaniacs differ from other types of madmen and madwomen in other respects. They were not representative of the 'Danse des Fous' (the 'Madmen's Dance') Foucault mentions in his brief treatment of medieval folly in the opening chapter of History of Madness; or the figurative round dance Erasmus of Rotterdam (1466-1536) portrays in his playful In Praise of Folly (1509), in which a whole litany of professions parade their petty foibles in turn (none of them literally dancing). Nor were choreomaniacs exactly allied with later depictions of the danse macabre or Dance of Death portrayed in harrowing and occasionally humorous woodcuts by John Lydgate (1370-1451), Guyot (Guy) Marchant (active 1483-c. 1505) and Hans Holbein the Younger (1497-1543), among others, or in a 1424-1425 danse macabre mural in the Parisian cemetery of Les Saints Innocents. These slightly wry but always sobering skel- etal dance-like rounds, like the medieval fools Foucault depicts, represent a particular sort of vice: foolish ignorance, individuals not knowing that their end has come." Highlighting late medieval and early modern literature and portraiture in works by Jéréme (Hieronymous) Bosch (1450-1516), Sebastian Brant (1457-1521), Pieter Bruegel (or Brueghel) the Elder (1525-1569), and others, Foucault shows medieval fools travelling through everyday life in its margins: concretely but also figuratively, they travelled 'liminally', on rafts set adrift at the outskirts of society—not a suggestion that they lived a free and easy existence; but that they Søren Kierkegaard, La répétition, trans. Jacques Privat (Paris: Editions Payot et Rivages, 2003), 60-61.

16. On the nineteenth-century rediscovery of danse macabre prints and engravings, see e.g. Marie-Dominique Leclerc, ‘Réemplois, avatars, redécouverte’, in Marie-Dominique Leclerc, Danielle Quérel, and Alain Robert, Danser avec la mort: Les danses macabres dans les manuscrits et livres imprimés du XVe au XXe siècle (Lyon: Musée de l'imprimerie, 2004), 22. The bibliography on the danse macabre is vast. Early influential historiographies include Valentin Dufour, Recherches sur la Dance Macabre peinte en 1425 au Cimetiére des Innocents [sic] (Paris: Bureaux du Bibliophile Français, 1873), in which the author notes that danse macabre iconography seized the early part of the century's imagination 'passionately' (i). See also Georges Kastner, La Danse des morts: Dissertations et recherches historiques, philosophiques, littéraires et musicales (Paris: Brandus, 1852). Eustache-Hyacinthe Langlois, in Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque sur les danses des morts, 2 vols. (Rouen: Librument, 1851), convincingly argues that danse macabre portraiture represents actual theatrical dance practices playfully executed by living people, an observation rarely remarked on in contemporary scholarship (vol. 1, 116-160); Langlois's iconographic analysis of fifty-four visual representations of the danse macabre appears in Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 2. Gabriel Peignot, in Recherches historiques et littéraires sur les danses des morts et sur l'origine des cartes à jouer (Dijon and Paris: Lagier, 1826), is widely acknowledged to have set the modern literature on danses macabres in motion. Among recent scholars noting choreographic forms, Sophie Oosterwijk suggests that danses macabres typically involved a chain of dancers, but that human life was also typically represented in a circle or semicircle depicting the ages of man, from birth to death. In Sophie Oosterwijk, ‘Dance, Dialogue and Duality in the Medieval Danse Macabre’, in Oosterwijk and Knéll, eds., Mixed Metaphors, 9-42, 29. Madness after Foucault + 45 appear to have been set on a perpetually directionless course.'' Neither are these fools fully cast out, like the Bacchic-type dancers Plato (c. 428-347 BCE) wanted expurgated from his Republic;* they are benignly and perpetually peripheral. Choreomaniacs, in contrast, tear through town. They appear mad on account of their sudden, explosive emergences, their seemingly involuntary—'organic'—outbursts on history's stage. In this regard, choreomaniacs constitute a class of people temporarily united by their folly rather than a general and terminal condition relegating them to a state of perpetual passage. In this sense, too, choreomaniacs were not engaged in the carnivalesque Mikhail Bakhtin (1895-1975) famously described in his work on Francois Rabelais (1494-1553): for Bakhtin, carnival signals the temporary disruption—the upturning—of everyday life, vividly reminding participants of alternative realities, opposed to official cultures.'® Carnivals significantly take place at prescribed moments of the year yet in their chaotic, upside-down quality succeed in infiltrating popular consciousness, stimulating a revolutionary potential. The choreomanias this book describes perform a topsy-tur______ Choreomaniacs, furthermore, present a slightly different cast of symptoms and problems pertaining to madness from hysterics, hypochondriacs, and other types of ‘maniacs’, who by the eighteenth century were generally understood to suffer from excess fluids (including menstrual fluids) or a disorder of the internal spirits.2? Although in many respects, choreomanias displayed characteristics of ‘mania’, including moving too much, and too spontaneously, they did so periodically rather than constitutionally. Hysterics in particular, Foucault remarks, were thought in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries to suffer from excessive, uncontrollable motions, including especially spasms and convulsions, while melancholics were understood to suffer from a deficiency of motion, internally and externally manifest.

In Dance Pathologies, and in ‘The “Symptomatic Act”’ (1995), McCarren points out that madness appears in the (generally female) hysteric's body as an excess of motion, which is then translated into dance—as its quintessential sign. Concomitantly, dancers, she argues, typify madness, in nineteenth-century medicine, by symptomatizing ‘madness detoured’.”” So while dance in the nineteenth century for McCarren epitomized madness, choreomania signals a particularly nineteenth-century fantasy about madness as the collective amplification of excess gesturality: a collective hyperbole. But excessive motion translated into a mania for dance also signaled a complicated type of psychiatric 17. Controversy surrounding the correct translation and interpretation of Foucault’s image of medieval madness, in terms of his employment of the well-rehearsed image of the raft, and his statement that the mad led an ‘easily wandering existence’, is ongoing. Foucault wrote: ‘Les fous alors avaient une existence facilement errante’, which I would render: “The mad then, one might readily presume, led something of a wandering existence’ (Histoire de la folie, 22). He was not implying that their existence was easy, only that they plausibly led a wandering one (standard critiques suggested Foucault too romantically posited that madmen and madwomen in the Middle Ages enjoyed an untroubled life). See esp. Still and Velody, ‘Introduction’, 1-16, 6-7; Gordon, ‘Histoire de la folie’, 32-33; Allan Megill, ‘Foucault, Ambiguity and the Rhetoric of Historiography’, in Still and Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 86-104, 86-92, who emphasizes the purposeful ambiguity Foucault employs not only as a stylistic flourish but as a fundamentally philosophical stance. Dominick LaCapra, in ‘Foucault, History and Madness’, in Still and Velody, eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 78-85, points out historian H. C. Erik Midelfort’s well-rehearsed critique of Foucault’s medieval historiography. Midelfort notes that ‘there is only one known instance of a madman’s having been set adrift on a boat, and it is quite possible that the intention was to drown him’. In Midelfort, ‘Madness and Civilization’, 247-266, 254; cited in LaCapra, ‘Foucault, History and Madness’, 79. See also LaCapra, ‘Foucault, History and Madness’, 85n1; H. C. Erik Midelfort, ‘Reading and Believing: On the Reappraisal of Michel Foucault’, in Still and Velody eds., Rewriting the History of Madness, 105-109. Midelfort draws on an earlier critique of Foucault's figure of the raft scenario or Narrenschiff in W. B. Maher and B. Maher, ‘The Ship of Fools; Stultifera Navis or Ignis Fatuus?,,______ 7 (1982): 756-761. For a convincing defence of Foucault's not quite so literal use of the raft image, see esp. Gordon, ‘Rewriting the History of Misreading’, 173-176.

18. Plato, Laws, trans. E. A. Taylor, in The Collected Dialogues of Plato, Including the Letters, ed. Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002), 1225-1503, 1385.

19. Mikhail Bakhtin, Rabelais and His World, trans. Héléne Iswolsky (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1984). Bakhtin’s notion that carnival liberates revolutionary potentials has been widely refuted.

20. Excess fluids significantly ‘moved’ hysterics, in opposition to the heavier, more stagnant tendencies among melancholics, suggesting to Foucault that this area of medical study might be described as a ‘medicine of movement’ (‘médecine du mouvement’). Foucault, Histoire de la folie, 357.

21. Foucault, Histoire de la folie, 352, 357.

22. Felicia McCarren, “The “Symptomatic Act” circa 1900: Hysteria, Hypnosis, Electricity, Dance’, Critical Inquiry 21.4 (Summer 1995): 748-774, 753.

46 EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE disorder known in the nineteenth century as monomania. Choreomaniacs, who did not necessarily individually lack ‘truth’, or stray from it, and who were not always or necessarily ‘unreasoning’, became, it seemed, possessed with one thing: dancing, and the complex of hallucinatory and convulsive agitations that purportedly came with it. Thus the term applied to them: monomaniacs, nineteenth-century psychiatry’s way of describing aberrant obsessions with singular things. But whereas monomaniacs, I suggest further in chapter 4, were disorderly, inasmuch as they emoted and gesticulated too much, in excess conformity with their surroundings, medieval choreomaniacs also complied excessively with past (and foreign) forms of religiosity, clinging to practices becoming outmoded after the Black Death. As such, these dancers further represented excessive, radical resistance to change—and to modernity. So while physicians throughout the classical age and into the nineteenth century understood mania and melancholy to be closely allied, a reflection Freud among others would further a few decades later, and while Hecker underscored the spectacularly convulsive aspect of dance manias, he also significantly sought a far more elusive etiology (or disease origin). ‘Etiology’ (or ‘aetiology’) is the science determining the source of a disease, whether its organic location (head, heart, liver, nerves, etc.) or a disruption of functional processes: in early modern medicine, for instance, an excess or deficiency of ‘humours’ (discussed in the next chapter). Remarkable with choreomania in Hecker’s account was the basis of this hyper-motile, manic ‘epidemic’ not so much in bodily functions as in ancient history. The dancing disease, in Hecker’s biohistorical conceptualization, emerges as if from out of the past, as a disease of archaic surfeit. Choreomaniacs appear where there is a fault line in civilization, a rupture and an opening, out of which they seem to spill. Calling the 1370s ‘dancing mania’ an ‘extraordinary mental disorder’, following on the heels of the worst pandemic in human history, Hecker argued that it exacerbated an already prevailing spirit of superstitiousness made worse by the stresses plague had brought about. Dance manias in this view were organic and historical excrescences signalling the theatricalization______ In this sense, choreomaniacs were not just madmen or madwomen floating by on a nef, or raft. Their disorder was kinetic in another sense. They passed through, leaving spectators aghast in their wake. Reconfiguring the terms put forward by McCarren, madness in choreomania signals excess movement passing through social space as event. What’s more, this is event played out as crisis: specifically, the crisis of modernity, where the past appears to emerge in and nearly to engulf modernity itself. Choreomaniacs thus swarm: they represent a disorder of teeming multitudes tapping into prior states of being, theatricalizing the sudden emergence of a disin- dividuated horde representing, in Hecker’s words, the ‘extravagances’ of the past."

Their 'Bacchantic leaps' and 'wild dance', as they went 'screaming and foaming with fury', presented a spectacle of ancient uncontrol to contemporary eyewitnesses and later readers. As I will sug- gest at the end of this chapter, Nietzsche would in turn alternately celebrate and decry these archaic movements in his rarely noted remarks on St. John’s and St. Vitus’s dance, further link- ing early Christian history with the imagined excesses of a bacchanalian past.

A CONTEXT OF CRISIS: DANCING AMID FLOOD AND BONES
Historians Tison Pugh and Angela Jane Weisl argue in Medievalisms (2013) that every age has uses to which it puts the figure of the 'medieval', from the barbaric and the courtly to the magical and ribald. Hecker portrays the medieval world as a canvas on which to project the most dis- orderly states of civilization not yet privy to Enlightenment rationality. Choreomaniacs, as biohistorical eruptions, were primitive and child- like: spontaneous, unpredictable, and volatile, prey to abrupt, inelegant movements that could with the hindsight of modern science and a gen- eralist's interest in world history be described as aberrant and ill. They were quintessentially bacchantic, uncontrolled, and foreign but para- doxically also unusually responsive to the traumas and crises of their age.

With vivid prose, Hecker described the first assemblages of choreomaniacs appearing in Aix-la~-Chappelle (Aachen) in 1374: 'united by one common delusion', '[exhibiting] to the public both in the streets and in the churches the following strange spectacle', 'they formed circles hand in hand, and appearing to have lost all control over their senses, continued dancing, regardless of the bystanders, for hours together in wild delirium, until at length they fell to the ground in a state of exhaustion. They then com- plained of extreme oppression, and groaned as if in the agonies of death, until they were swathed in cloths bound tightly round their waists, upon which they again recovered, and remained free from complaint until the next attack'. Hecker's hyperbolic language emphasized an irrational dancer caught in an uncontrollable urge to move. The cloths—and the staffs used to tie them— were employed, he surmised, to relieve the pain- ful abdominal distension that 'followed these spasmodic ravings'. The bystanders coming to the choreomaniacs' aid resorted to 'thumping and trampling upon the parts affected' to relieve the dancers' discomfort, while they, 'insensible' to external stimuli, 'were haunted by visions, their fancies conjuring up spirits whose names they shrieked out'. Some saw rivers of blood; others saw the heavens open up 'and the Saviour enthroned with the Virgin Mary'. These hallucinations suggested to Hecker that 'the religious notions of the age were strangely and variously reflected in their imaginations', stimulated by the excitement that widespread death and disaster had provoked in the wake of the Black Death.

The social and historical context for the dances was grim. The Black Death had devastated between half and two-thirds of the population of Europe in the mid-fourteenth century, giving rise to spectacular displays of flagellants and to what Hecker called the 'dancing malady'. Grain prices had surged in the years preceding the Black Death, spurring on waves of peasant revolts in what historian Charles Briggs has described as a 'plague of insurrection' continuing into the sixteenth century, epitomized in the notorious English Peasants' Revolt of 1381, which brought festering tensions to a head.

But upheavals were erupting everywhere. Heightened insurrections between 1355 and 1382 were exacerbated by repeat wars, including the fourteenth- and fifteenth-century Hundred Years War, and pestilence. In this period, millions of people were displaced, without work or food, while populations of entire towns and villages were slashed by more than half. Gilles li Muisis (le Muisis or le Muiset) (1272-1352), an abbot at St. Martin's in the Pyrenees town of Tournay, described the countryside as gutted: 'travellers, merchants, pilgrims, and others who have passed through it declare that they have found cattle wandering without herdsmen in fields, town, and waste lands; that they have seen barns and wine-cellars standing wide open, houses empty, and few people to be found anywhere'.

'In many different lands', li Muisis noted, 'fields are lying uncultivated'. Wolves roamed freely, entering open homes; ravens, kites, vultures, and field mice roamed the countryside. The Black Death had devastated between half and two-thirds of the population of Europe in the mid-fourteenth century, giving rise to spectacular displays of flagellants and to what Hecker called the 'dancing malady'. Grain prices had surged in the years preceding the Black Death, spurring on waves of peasant revolts in what historian Charles Briggs has described as a 'plague of insurrection' continuing into the sixteenth century, epitomized in the notorious English Peasants' Revolt of 1381, which brought festering tensions to a head. Cohn Jr., Cultures of Plague: Medical Thinking at the End of the Renaissance (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 35. Jacques Le Goff cites demographic analyses demonstrating a rise in the population of Europe from nearly 15 million to over 54 million in the 750 years prior to the Black Death (between c. 600 and c. 1348). Further studies showed that the population of Europe reached nearly 73 million in 1300. In Jacques Le Goff, Medieval Civilization, 400-1500, trans. Julia Barrow (London: Folio Society, 2011), 62.

Gilles le Muisit, Chronique et annales de Gilles le Muisit, abbé de Saint-Martin de Tournai (1272-1352) (Paris: Librairie Renouard, 1906), 85-87; cited in George Deaux, The Black Death 1347 (New York: Weybright and Talley, 1969), 110.

Deaux, The Black Death, 110.

48 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE appeared, settling in to live with humans already starved for food and shelter.** Historian David Herlihy (1930-1991) has argued that in some of the more remote towns of England and Italy, up to 70 or 80 percent of the population was wiped out in the last decades of the fourteenth century.*® According to French historian Jules Michelet (1798-1874), in his classic Histoire de France (1833-1841), medieval chronicles related that between five hundred and eight hundred people died daily in Paris and Saint-Denis at the height of the Black Death in 1348.” Ecological upheavals wreaked havoc, curbing centuries of population expansion, as new waves of floods and drought continued to demolish crops and livestock in the plague’s wake.

According to the Chronicle of Liége (1403), floodwaters overtook entire villages in 1373 and 1374. In January 1374, the waters of the Mosel ran so high they reached church altars and filled streets and market squares; villagers had to navigate through the town in rafts. The Kélner Jarbuch reported that on 11 February 1374, the Rhine rose so high that horses drowned in the streets, and this continued until Easter. According to a further chronicle, waters rose so high above the walls of Cologne that boats passed right over them. There, too, inhabitants had to navigate in rafts." This was the context in which the dancing upheaval arose.

It had seemed that the world was coming to an end.” Survivors were ecstatic, and evinced a sense of urgency, gaiety, and occasionally despair. Many abandoned themselves to raucousness encouraged by municipal decree: as during plague times in Rome, when a policy of lectisternium mandated merriment through municipally sponsored feasts, so too in late medieval Europe, from Boccaccio and Machiavelli to Berni and Pepys, plague time was described as an occasion for dissolution.*? Physicians had prescribed flight from plague-ridden towns to curb contamination, and a culture of countryside revelry blossomed. Gender rules shifted, as women who would not have bared their bodies to the opposite sex now, Boccaccio wryly noted, freely sought help for ailments from anyone willing to offer it. Mourning practices fell into disarray, and funerals became occasions for jauntiness rather than lament.“ Every sort of practice was called on to counteract the prevailing spirit of catastrophism. Historian Pierre Champion (1880-1942) in La Galerie des Rois [The Gallery of Kings] (1934) noted that dancing was among a regular cast of popular pastimes during periods of heightened death and disaster: ‘during the plague, the grand’mort raged in Paris in 1348 . . . people dance______ Thus, at least they may giddily forget their sorrows. The Grandes chroniques de France [Great Chronicles of France], compiled between the thirteenth and sixteenth centuries, similarly tells of two monks who, riding through Paris in 1348, witnessed a scene of great merriment purportedly engaged in to ward off death. They saw men and women dancing to the music of drums and bagpipes, and having a great celebration. The monks asked them why they were making so merry, to which they replied: “We have seen our neighbors die and are seeing them die day after day, but since the mortality has in no way entered our town, we are not without hope that our festive mood will not allow it to come here, and this is the reason for why we are dancing.”

Later, the monks discovered that a hailstorm had killed some of the villagers and scared others into flight, suggesting that the dancing had not helped. The chronicle's editor, Jules Viard (1862-1940), posits that the chronicle may have been written by an eyewitness who would have participated in the dancing, revealing some sympathy for the dancers. The German composer and folklorist Franz M. Béhme (1827-1898) further points out in his two-volume history of German dances, Geschichte des Tanzes in Deutschland (1886), that 'plague dances' (Pesttänze) in 1349 might be equated with practices among the so-called Wertheimer, who were said to dance around a forest pine tree until the Black Death left their small town; similarly, in the countryside outside Basel, there was still at the time of his writing in the late 1880s a large field called the 'witch's mat' (Hexenmatte) because, he notes, according to popular belief, the Walpurgis dances were held there. Remainders of 'plague dances' existed elsewhere: every seven years, Bohme recorded, in memory of those surviving the plague, the Metzgersprung (or butchers' leaping) was performed by armed butchers in Munich; the Schafflertanz (or barrel-makers' dance) and Echternach Spring procession (which will be treated further in chapter 6) constituted similar remainders, some dating to later plagues. In their own time, the plague dances were common enough to generate a whole repertoire of popular songs, so that by 1350 in Bern 'more than a thousand armed men' gathered in a dance of their own, mocking the masses of mad people ('GeiBlerfahren') who had passed through town not long before with 'ridiculous dance songs' ('GeiBlerlied') ('travestirenden Tanzliede').

One of the dance songs commonly cited is given in a late fifteenth-century Cologne chronicle as 'Here sent Johan, so so, vrisch ind vro here sent Johan', which may be translated as 'Here is Saint John, so so fresh and happy, here is Saint John!' Some confusion seems to have arisen in regard to this song. The monk Petrus de Herental (c. 1322-1390), to whom I will return, submitted in an extended poem describing the events that the dancers were calling out names of demons: 'Frisch, Friskes'. This may be a misunderstanding of 'vrisch' (suggesting lightness or joy), demonizing the dancers' worship.

There was little to keep survivors from expressing vivacity. Though bouts of plague recurred for a few hundred years after the Black Death reached its peak in 1348-1350, the fourteenth-century plague signalled a shift in social mores. In the last decades of the fourteenth century, a surge of new fashions arose, emphasizing bright colours and pointed shoes: anything to signify jollity, carefreeness and, for many, a survivors' high. According to an early seventeenth-century copy of the fourteenth-century Cologne Limburg Chronicle (1617), 'when the deaths, the processions of flagellants, the pilgrimages to Rome and the slaughter of the Jews were at an end, the world began to live again, and to be joyful, and people put on new clothes'. Taken in this light, the dance 'manias' seem rather benign. According to cartographical analysis by the German physician Hellmuth Liebscher, dancing flocks appearing in 1373-1374 moved roughly from east to west, forking towards the north and south. These dancers first appeared in Swabia, England, and the Netherlands and then spread The following text is cleaned up and separated from wrongly appended words. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

49. See Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 143, 146; also Paul Frédéricq, ‘De secten der geeselaars en der dansers in de Nederlanden tijdens de 14de eeuw’, in Mémoires de l'académie royale des sciences des lettres et des beaux-arts de Belgique, vol. 53 (Brussels: Hayez, October 1895-June 1898), 1-62, 49; Bohme, ‘Tanzwut im Mittelalter’, 42.

50. 'Darnach, da das Sterben, die Geiselfarth, Romerfarth, Judenschlacht, als vorgeschrieben stehet, ein End hatte, da hub die Welt wieder an zu leben und fréhlich zu seyn, und machten die Manner neue Kleidung'. In Deaux, The Black Death, 216. Fashion seems to have been quite a point of contention—revelry and reviling—from at least the middle of the fourteenth century. Hecker notes that possessed dancers, among other 'enemies of fashion', showed fury against the new trend towards 'extravagant . . . love of dress'. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 82n1. The Belgian historian Paul Frédéric (1850-1920) notes that shoemakers were temporarily forbidden to make colourful shoes following the 1370s dances ('De secten', 51).

The Limburg Chronicle, or Festi Limpurgenses, is attributed to Tilemann Ehlen von Wolfhagen (c. 1348-1420), dating from the first decade of the fifteenth century; it chronicles the history of the Rhineland between 1336 and 1398; publication by Johann Friedrich Faust in 1617 was followed by various German editions in the nineteenth century, including by Arthur Wyss for the Monumenta Germaniae historica (1875).

On 50 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE to Hainaut, Flanders, Brabant, the Lower Rhine, Cologne, Utrecht, Tongeren, and Aachen; and then south to Franconia, Metz, and Strasbourg. About a year later, they were in France, and again in Hainault and Holland.*' By 1381, the 'dancing plague' had reached Augsburg, In 1428, a couple of isolated episodes were reported in chronicles and annals: women were seen dancing in Zurich, and a monk was said to have danced himself to death in the cloister of St. Agnes in Schaffhausen.” In Strasbourg, in July 1518, the dancing 'epidemic' re-emerged with force.

Backman has convincingly pointed out that many dancers may have come from Bohemia, proceeding along traditional Hungarian pilgrimage routes, gathering ever-larger numbers of enthusiasts along the way. Pilgrimages typically involved dancing and song, prompted in Backman's view by the heightened excitement rip- tling through towns and villages in the wake of the Black Death and massive demographic upheavals that had displaced millions.** But every sort of petty troublemaker and free spirit seems to have joined in the throngs, as well as a motley crew of religious enthusiasts, anti-clerical revellers, and traditional feast-day celebrants, offering an ever more public appearance of revelry and debauchery to puzzled observers and peers.

FLAGELLNTS, LEPERS AND CHOREOMANIACS Choreomaniacs were among a cast of eccentrics thus marking this period. Slightly more familiar to the contemporary reader, flagellants offered dramatic performances of penance and cele- bration in public space as they moved through vast swathes of Europe, like choreomaniacs often half-clothed, offering bystanders scenes of religiosity that bordered on heathenism and______ The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Cohn Jr. has pointed out, noblewomen cast off their jewels to join in the throngs, suggesting not only the poor were among them.™ Writing over a century earlier, Michelet employed a biohistorical and ecosophical set of images, describing bands of flagellants in ecstatic fury moving through towns as if blown by the wind of divine wrath. Comparing flagellants to a fever, he set them in contrast to the glacial egoism of all those who locked themselves up to feast in egotistical luxury.°° The Flemish historian J. M. B. C. Kervyn de Lettenhove (1817-1891) similarly noted catastrophic pestilence and spectacular displays among flagellants who performed their religious penance by thrusting themselves to the ground in a cross shape and rising up three times to whip themselves, while villagers gawked at the spectacle.** French historian Etienne Delaruelle has described this as a rapresentazione sacra, a theatrical representation designed to show Christ's flagellation to all those gathered to watch.°” In Hecker's account, flagellants carried iron-tipped scourges and beat or whipped themselves until they were bleeding, singing sacred songs and performing dramatized acts of penance in town squares—'welcomed by the ringing of the bells', as 'people flocked from all quarters, to listen to their hymns and to witness their midsummer dances, see Ehlen von Wolfhagen, Die Limburger Chronik, Eingeleitet von Otto H. Brandt. Mit 17 Abbildungen und Anhang (Jena: Eugen Diederichs, 1922), 47-48; Frédéricq, 'De secten', 41. 51. Hellmuth Liebscher, Ein kartographischer Beitrag zur Geschichte der Tanzwut, M. D. diss. (Leipzig University, 1931), 16; cited in Rosen, Madness in Society, 198. 52. See also Backman, Religious Dances, 235-242; Midelfort, A History of Madness, 33; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 90. 53. Backman, Religious Dances, 230-231. See Rosen, Madness in Society, 198-199. John Stevens notes that a collection of songs in Catalan and Latin, in the fourteenth-century Llibre Vermell de Montserrat, suggests in a prefatory note that 'from time to time over a long period pilgrims keeping vigil in the church of the Blessed Virgin of Montserrat have been eager to sing and dance, even in the square by broad daylight. And in that place they should not do any singing unless the songs are decent and devout'. Dancing and singing in town squares, even raucously, seems then to have been a relatively common practice, though frowned upon. In Stevens, Words and Music in the Middle Ages, 182. See also Eustace with King, 'Dances of the Living and the Dead', who further suggest that Perkin Revelour in Chaucer's 'The Cook's Tale', in the Canterbury Tales, cannot resist dancing (II. 4370-4380) (49). 54, Samuel K. Cohn Jr., 'The Black Death and the Burning of Jews', Past & Present 196 (2007): 3-36, 11-12. 55. Michelet, Histoire de France, vol. 4, 220-221. 56. J. M. B. C. Kervyn de Lettenhove, Histoire de Flandre, 1304-1384, 6 vols., vol. 3 (Bruxelles: A. Vandale, 1______ Madness after Foucault's "History of Madness" and the concept of "choreomania" are linked to the performance of processions, which were an integral part of medieval culture. Kathleen Ashley, a cultural historian, suggests that processions were the most widespread and versatile public performance mode until the 17th century, yet they have received little scholarly attention. Processions allowed civic negotiation of official scripts and created a "contact zone," a term coined by Mary Louise Pratt to describe complex, often asymmetrical encounters.

Ashley further argues that processions enabled the dramatic arbitration of difference, but choreomaniacs offered a less harmonious processional drama. They created zones of contact and friction, often disrupting public space and bringing out existing tensions. Choreomaniacs tumbled and tore through public space, theatricalizing difference, described as "demonic," as well as community, rearticulating the terms by which community was construed.

Choreomaniacs, in temporarily joining together revellers and separating out recalcitrant witnesses and hosts, suggested temporary zones of realignment, in which social groups were not just ritually performing difference but actively, disruptively, and often uninvitedly, asserting it. Choreomanias, then, suggest a medieval space of disruption and interference, for which lively foreign dances and songs serve as the choreopolitical sign.

Meanwhile, lepers had already transformed the urban landscape in plague time, which Foucault described as a nascent biopolitics of exclusion. Lepers were cast out of town and, more forcefully, life itself. As Foucault outlined, lepers were ceremonially deposed of their belongings and sent to a peripheral location, tantamount to social death. They were ostracized, made marginal, with no return: lepers had, for all pragmatic purposes, been made before their actual death socially to die.

Foucault describes this process as a great orgiastic fantasy of plague, a time when all laws disappear, and an occasion for the total exercise of biopower. In plague time, urban space was "exhaustively sected," a practice Foucault argues determined further regimes of sequestration and marginalization well into the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries, and continuing to define political practices of marginalization in the 20th century.

Choreomaniacs, described in the 19th century as a brand of medieval "mad," were slightly different. Some sequestered themselves in large encampments outside town, while also at other times conspicuously infiltrating churches and town squares. These celebrants and carousers offered viewers a different sort of contagious spectacle. They contagioned one another and threatened to contagion viewers swept up into their enthusiastic rounds, but they also remained, like the flagellants, theatrical. They came through town and showed themselves effusively as an event. Unlike flagellants, however, dance maniacs offered a portrait of hyperkinetic enthusiasm spurred on by a dubious cast of devils: they were foreign, outsiders, passing through and performing the intrusion of archaic alterity into public space. THE TRIALS OF INTERPRETATION: MODERN MEDIEVAL IMAGINARIES

Readers from at least the seventeenth century offered a number of compelling accounts of these medieval scenes of debauchery and demonism, alternately ascribing them to psychiatric disorders and to organic illness; but also suggesting the dancers were engaging in ancient ritual practices. In his Abrégé chronologique de ‘histoire de France [Abridged Chronology of the History of France] (1696), Francois Eudes de Mézeray (1610-1683) suggested dancers in the Netherlands went around naked, spinning and running, dancing and singing so vehemently they fell to the ground from exhaustion. Calling this a ‘manic passion or frenzy' (‘passion maniaque ou phrénésie’), de Mézeray suggested they would have died from overexertion and bloating if contemporaries had not tightened their stomachs with strips of cloth. Further suggesting that bystanders watching the dancers could catch their frenzy, de Mézeray noted perfunctorily that they were generally believed to be possessed, and exorcised; their dance was also popularly (‘vulgairement’) known as the dance of St. John. De Mézeray suggested this dancing was a sort of psychiatric disease, contemporaneous with other conditions, notably famine and the mal des ardents or St. Anthony's fire (also known as ergotism). But he did not equate the dancing with ergotism, as subsequent authors have done, suggesting instead that the dancers were merely exhausted from their efforts. I tend to agree with this view, but further to argue that bands of dancers traveling through towns and villages in the wake of the Black Death constituted a theatre of suspect alterity, intensifying xenophobic tendencies during this period and a heightened sense of modernity that these more ancient practices threatened to undermine.

Historian Jacques Le Goff (1924-2014), articulating a well-rehearsed stance among historiographers, called the post-plague dances mental illnesses, to be classed alongside epilepsy and ergotism, noting that malnutrition and physical frailty prepared men and women's minds for spectacular hallucinations. Those living at the time were not so quick to dismiss this as disease. Many eyewitnesses saw the dances as strange—often suspect—phenomena barely marginal to regular life; others saw the dancers as devil-worshippers; physicians attributed them to hot blood, but did not otherwise become involved in regimes of castigation or cure. More convincing than accounts of mass madness and poisoning are those suggesting the dances were plausibly village rounds, made more conspicuous during this period of cultural change. As French historian Eustache-Hyacinthe Langlois (1777-1837) pointed out, in his Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque sur les danses des morts (Historical, Philosophical and Pictorial Essay on the Dances of Death) (1851), the late Middle Ages were marked by regular village fêtes, ambulatory events (‘fêtes balladoires’) taking place on, among other occasions, the eve of the feast of St. John. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

John. As he points out, this type of popular celebration was increasingly described in heavily chastising terms as a ‘procession du diable’, a diabolical procession inverting Christian worship, insulting Christ according to every possible detail. The dancers’ crowns of flowers (serta) derided his crown of thorns; their outstretched arms insulted his posture on the cross; the rouge (belletum) on their faces parodied the veiling of his face; and their head movements, accompanied by high-pitched cries, parodied the expiration of the divine redeemer. They performed high leaps in a circular formation, with Satan purportedly at its invisible centre. As Langlois remarks, these villagers did not dance any less on account of such inflammatory accusations—associated, I will suggest further, with witchcraft, paganism, and plausibly Jewish dances, which typically involved high leaps and rounds.® For Langlois, these paroissiens (villagers) were simply engaged in traditional forms of divertissement—the fétes patronales des paroisses (village saints’ day celebrations)—which for centuries had marked the Feast of Fools, of the Innocents, and of the Ass, taking place in cemeteries as well as in regular places of worship. The clergy, Langlois notes, were no less guilty of taking part in what he wryly calls these ‘infames_ saturnales’ (infamous Saturnalia), which he notes at times degenerated into mayhem (and possibly, he implies, sexual mis-chief).%* Accusations against dancing colorfully and spiritedly were designed to quell popular displays of immoral behavior: the later development of the epidemiological, toxic, and 61. De Mézeray writes: ‘Deux grands fléaux, . . . la famine et le mal des ardents, qui, le plus souvent, prenoit en Aisne, tourmentent la France, l'Italie et Angleterre, cette année 1373. Il courut aussi, principalement dans les Pays-Bas, une passion maniaque ou phrénésie, inconnue à tous les siécles précédents. Ceux qui en estoient atteints, la plus part de la lie du peuple, se despouilloient tout nuds, se mettoient une couronne de fleurs sur la teste, et se tenant par les mains alloient dans les rues et dans les églises, dangant, chantant et tournoyant avec tant de roideur, qu’ils tomboient par terre hors d’haleine. Ils s’enfloient si fort par cette agitation, qu’ils eussent crevé sur l'heure, si on n’eust pris le soin de leur serrer le ventre avec de bonnes bandes. Ceux qui les regardoient trop attentivement estoient bien souvent pris du mesme mal. On crut qu'il y avoit de lopération du diable, et que les exorcismes les soulageoient. Le vulgaire le nomma la Danse de Saint-Jean’. Francois Eudes de Mézeray, Abrégé chronologique de Thistoire de France, vol. 3, pt. 2 (Amsterdam: Abraham Wolfgang, Prés de la Bourne, 1688), 92; cited in Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 179-180. See also Frédéricq, ‘De secten’, 49-58. 62. Le Goff, Medieval Civilisation, 249-250. 63. Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 171-172. 64. Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 172______ So while I have found no further evidence that choreomaniacs specifically danced leftwards (or stepped with the left foot), it was well-established at the time that a clockwise dance beginning with the left foot led straight to hell. Jewish dances, such as the hora, typically perform a circular motion towards the right, beginning with the left foot—leading me to posit that ‘choreomanias’ may in some cases have constituted Jewish dances. To passing observers anxious to stamp out all signs of suspect alterity and excess archaicity, the mixture of Jewish—plausibly Bohemian—and pre-Christian traditions rendered all figures of boisterous, high-leaping rounds pestilential.

For Langlois, the involution of Christianity in these carnivalesque displays were typical ‘gothic’ (high medieval) expressions, not shameful, and indeed quite ‘normal’, if the borderline between normality and abnormality is the mark of madness. Reprising Gabriel Peignot’s (1767-1849) pioneering research on danse macabre iconography, Langlois remarks that convulsive movements deriving from plague may further have given rise to strange disorderly postures. As in regular expressions of chorea, in which individuals involuntarily perform dance-like movements, typical dances and celebrations may have become mixed in with plague-borne convulsive postures, resulting in the danse macabre iconography familiar at the time, and in which Death dances with Life.

Death and plague had become objects of fascination in the early nineteenth century, intensifying retrospective glances on a time when plague, life, and death were already performing gruesome rounds. Langlois suggested he first encountered a strange convulsive dance of death while riding by a ‘horrible spectacle’ of ‘violently agitated’ people offering a barely living ‘portrait of death’. In these accounts, convulsive dancing and death occur in the margins—under the cover of night, in footnotes, whispered as an aside.

Langlois, like Hecker, saw in these figures of corpse-like rounds in the countryside at night a reflection of his own age, choleric and plague-ridden, catapulting him into earlier centuries to seek an explanation for this theatre on the ancient scene of biohistory. But the challenges of writing such a history of inarticulacy and obscurity were great; as art historian and composer Jean-Georges Kastner (1810-1867) pointed out in Les Danses des Morts: Dissertations et Recherches historiques, philosophiques, littéraires et musicales [Dances of Death: Historical, Philosophical, Literary and Musical Dissertations and Findings] (1852), ancient chronicles juxtaposed to contemporary events hardly enlightened the reader and observer.

In Alsace, Kastner remarked, a sort of St. Vitus’s dance still reputedly existed at the time of his writing—hazily remembered by village elders. The movements of the body were so violent, so exaggerated, he wrote, that the dancers struck the ground with their knees and elbows. The ‘analogy’ between convulsive dances and diabolical rounds, Kastner suggested, produced the appearance of a connection between current events and myth. This apparent connection could be attributed, he argued, to the fact that individuals suffering from real nervous affections or psychiatric disorders causing them to perform extravagant movements were typically likened to demoniacally possessed or bewitched persons. This false attribution was not aided by 66. Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 165. See also Eustache-Hyacinthe Langlois, ‘Lettre de M. C. Leber a M. E.-H. Langlois sur lorigine de la danse macabre ou danse des morts’, Paris, 25 July 1833, in Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 1-80, 12-13; Peignot, Recherches historiques et littéraires, xxviii-xxx. Peignot further tentatively highlights the relationship of the Danse des Morts (Dance of Death) to the 1347 plague epidemic and reports of dances in 1373; he suggests the first depiction of a Danse des Morts dates from the following decade, in 1383, but does not take the chronological conjecture further (xxviii). He also suggests a distinction between the generic term ‘Danse des Morts’ (Dance of Death) and the late medieval iconographic tradition of the danse macabre, which he posits followed the dramatic depiction of a ‘Danse des Morts’ in the Parisian Cimetiére des Innocents (1424) (xxxii), though these categories overlap significantly. Interestingly, Kastner suggests the exact opposite—though highly correlated—causality, suggesting joy becomes illness and dance becomes death for those struck with the ‘chorysantisme’ of St. John and St. Vitus; with the malediction of the heavens, dances transform into convulsions, as dancers turn away from God and towards the devil: ‘danser, c'est mourir!’ (‘to dance is to die!’). In Kastner, La Danse des morts, 14.

67. Langlois, Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 165n1. 54 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE the fact that the individuals themselves often believed that they had participated in satanic rites. Significantly for the history of ideas about disorderly movement and the choreopolitics of crowd control this book outlines, orderly dan- cing meant an orderly society; conversely, dis- orderly dancing—conceived as round dances plausibly beginning with the left foot, involving involuntary, jagged angularity—suggested that religion, state, and society were in disarray. In this view, choreomaniacs’ boisterous appear- ances suggested broader biohistorical disrup- tions, intensifying fourteenth-century opinion that the world was coming to an end.

OF SAINT’S DAY CABALS AND FEASTS: MEDIEVAL SCENES OF ‘READING’

Contemporary accounts suggest the dancers offered strange sights to bystanders; but also that they were at the helm of a popular move- ment wrapping many up into an exultant dance. Some accounts suggest they amplified traditional St. John’s Day practices going out of favour with the church; others imply that the dancers were strange, incomprehensible foreigners intruding into public space, but no less galvanizing on that account; others still suggested that the dancers were demonic and pestilential. In general, the dances and dance-like celebrations wrapped into the nineteenth-century choreomania repertoire seem to have constituted a motley cast of the- atrical events, marginal and heretical in some cases but no less popular and certainly far from mad. Singing, feasting, and dancing were sub- ject, in the fourteenth century, to as much praise as blame. Dancing in particular was popularly viewed as having caused the plague, by its asso- ciation with licentiousness and sinfulness that had brought on God’s wrath. But dancing, as I noted, was also frequently indulged in to ward off further malignity and keep revellers’ minds off the general atmosphere of bleakness and des- olation. Dances in Metz seem to have provoked amusement, a welcome break in everyday life and not a particularly disorderly or diseased one______ Yet according to the Metz Chronicle, a sad occurrence was described in Metz in 1374, when 1500 people from various professions engaged in continuous dancing for nine or ten days, depicted as a helpless fate. The chronicler portrayed the dancers as victims, troubled by their strange sorrow. The narrative suggested a vibrant town, with the dancing engaging people from all age ranges and classes, prompting them to set aside their everyday responsibilities for a while. The Metz chronicle implied the dancing was primarily local, but other chronicles mentioned the dancers' strange speech and demeanour, such as their high leaps, crowns of flowers, and other unusual accoutrements. They were seen as outsiders, gathering some to their ranks and having others watch.

Petrus de Herental, in his life of Pope Gregory XI, noted a "mira secta" or a strange, admirable, or noteworthy coterie of men and women appearing in Aachen from all over Germany in 1375, proceeding to Belgium and France. They were believed to be possessed by demons, wearing wreaths in their hair, dressed in only a towel and stave. They held each other's hands, leaped into the air, and shouted incomprehensible names throughout markets and church precincts, seemingly oblivious to the ogling of bystanders. Herental provided an anonymous poem circulating at the time, suggesting the dancers begged wherever they went and were granted some charity.

The poem, which Hecker 68. Kastner, La Danse des morts, 62-63. 69. Eustace with King, 'Dances of the Living and the Dead', 43-71, 48. So, too, in the sixteenth century, dance and choreographic practices highlighted the scripted, notated—and specifically geometric—aspects of movement, signaling to practitioners and audiences that bodies operated in space according to patterned, and thus legible, theorizable procedures. See Mark Franko, Dance as Text: Ideologies of the Baroque Body, rev. ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), esp. 15-30. Franko points out that 'frenetic or uncontrolled movement' in early seventeenth-century ballet also suggested unrequited love and a highly feminized state of madness (99). Similarly, popular festivity described by Bakhtin as carnivalesque occurred according to 'non-geometric', often complex, and potentially dissonant formations (64). 70. Cited in Backman, Religious Dances, 211. 71. The term 'secta' designates a group in Latin, but also suggests a path, method, or principle. These dancers were viewed as constituting a tightly knit coterie, sharing a way of life and quite literally a trajectory. Madness after Foucault + 55 reproduces in an appendix to 'The Dancing Mania', suggests the dancers enjoyed a relatively nomadic existence but were seized en route by clerics eager to exorcise their putative demons, compounding an already strange sight with the spectacle of religious exorcism. The dancers Herental's poet describes loathed the colour red and screamed, 'hating' the priests and cavorting throughout the night. But they were soon cured by the church, in a dramatic resolution that purged this modest urban crisis of its interlopers. The choreomaniacs were entertaining and outlandish, but also incidental: they represented a digression from and distraction in the fabric of everyday life, even as they spectacularized a state of crisis. From a benign, festive eruption of dancing to a contorted expression of apparently genuine pain, the dancing ‘plague’ provoked not only awe, wonder, and bemusement, but also reprobation. The dancers sorely irritated some: they had become a familiar sight, a spectacular excrescence but a grating one. The fourteenth-century chronicler Jean d’Outremeuse (Jean des Preis) (1338-1400) complained in La Geste de Liege that ‘the Devil in hell was their master’. They called out loudly to St. John the Baptist, clapping their hands, leaping, striking the ground with their feet (‘trippoit’), cloth tied tightly around their stomachs with a staff, provoking all who heard them to ‘[tremble] with fear’. ‘In the churches they behaved in their usual manner, as also in towns and places round Liege and in the diocese generally. Some of them returned to Liege, shouting and bawling and making such a din that it seemed the world was coming to an end’. Like rats, ‘the country was full of them’. Des Preis added that ‘pregnant women and others were so distressed that they died and their bodies were carried away’. The ‘attacks’ were so great that ‘in their homes and in secret people could not help dancing. All this I saw indeed’, he wrote, underscoring his privileged eyewitness status, ‘and much more also’.

Thankfully, he concluded, they had been driven out of town. According to the Chronicle of Liége (1402), dancers in Liége jumping high before church altars terrified all those who viewed them. The stigma and metaphor of plague that color des Preis’s narrative transpires through other accounts, anticipating the epidemiological language that would come to dominate accounts of the dancers in the next centuries. As travelers—and notably, often, as foreigners—dance maniacs provoked apprehension, bringing an unwanted din to what were already difficult times. Des Preis’s contemporary, the fourteenth-century chronicler Johannes de Beke (Jan Beke or Beka) described in his Dutch chronicle a ‘strange plague’ spreading from Bohemia along the Rhine and reaching Maastricht, as men and women clad in wreaths went dancing through villages, passing in and out of churches until they fell to the ground, exhausted. They were eventually divested of their evil spirits through exorcism. Another chronicler called this a ‘daemoniaca’. On the relative normality of public nudity in the Middle Ages, see also Norbert Elias, The Civilizing Process: Sociogenetic and Psychogenetic Investigations, ed. E. Dunning, J. Goudsblom, and S. Mennell, trans. E. Jephcott (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000), 138-139.

Jean d'Outremeuse played, according to Stanislas Bormans, a somewhat legendary role in the history of Liége. His chronicle is double: on the one hand the Myeur des histors serves as a prose compilation of the history of the world; on the other hand La Geste de Liege is tens of thousands of verses (many lost) offering a poetic rendition of the history of the bishops of Tongres and Liége. Apocrypha regarding the author's birth render the mystique even greater. See Stanislas Bormans, 'Introduction et Table des Matiéres', in Jean des Preis (dit d'Outremeuse), Ly Myeur des Histors, Chronique, ed. Stanislas Bormans, 7 vols., vol. 7 (Brussels: F. Hayez, 1864-1887), i-ii, xxxiii-xxxv. On the St. John's Day dancers, see vol. 6 (1880), 697-698.

Eugéne Bacha, ed., Chronique Liégeoise de 1402 (Brussels: Librairie Kiessling, 1900), 359. See also Alfred Cauchie and Alphonse van Hove, eds., Documents sur la principauté de Liége (1230-1532), 2 vols., vol. 1 (Brussels: M. Weissenbruch, 1908). The leaping seems to have been quite ambivalent: according to Frédéricq's account, dancers alleged that Christ was watching over them from heaven, where there was a place reserved for them; that was why they jumped so high (possibly either to reach heaven, or more likely to prove their worth) ('De secten', 50).

Johannes de Beka, Canonicus Ultrajectinus (Utrecht, 1643); cited in Backman, Religious Dances, 198. See Johannes de Beka, La Traduction Frangaise de la Chronographia Johannis de Beka, ed. Willem Noomen (The Hague: Uitgeverij Excelsior, 1954).

Exorcism was practiced to stun the dancers into submission. Radulphus de Rivo (d. 1403), a deacon in Tongeren in the Belgian province of Limburg, claimed in his history of the bishops of Liége that an anti-clerical dancing 'sect' (or society) had set out to murder canons, prelates, and vicars but had been stopped in its tracks when the dancers were brought before priests to be cured. He recounted a few episodes of curing by exorcism, including one at the Church of St. Mary in the convent of St. Lambert: after hearing the first words of the Gospel of St. John, the dancers were freed of the demons that tormented them and restored to a sane state of mind ('Demonum liberati sobriz menti resti- tuti fuerunt'). And while much excitement in the wake of the Black Death had complicated the clergy’s status in popular opinion—the clergy themselves were widely singled out for failing to save themselves or their constituencies from death and disaster in the plague years (thus discrediting their privileged status in the eyes of God), and many were thought to have caused the plague on account of their loose morals and ‘whoring’ (‘Presbyteris concubinarijis’), the choreomaniacs’ status in popular opinion was no less ambivalent. In De Rivo’s account, contemporaries attributed their wild dancing to crude ignorance of religion (‘cras- sam ignorantiam’), countermanded, thankfully, he thought, by a new regime of divine grace that would quell the mayhem and allow the dancing chaos to be subdued. Calling the choreomaniacs a ‘devilish sect’ (‘sectze Diabolicz’), De Rivo suggested that many contemporaries attributed this strange dancing to the priests’ immorality. ‘The priests themselves were scapegoated. But while some priests were lax, the dancers at least were zealous. St. John the Baptist came widely to be referred to as their patron saint: dancers calling out to him were apparently relieved of their abdominal pains. It is not implausible that dancers, coming from further east into western Europe, practiced dancing associated with rituals mapped onto the figure of St. John. Saints in early Christianity served doubly to foster new and assimilate older practices; they performed focal points in the translation—what I call the ‘translatio—between pre-Christian calendrical festivities and the increasingly tentacular Christian regime.

77. Reference is made to a ‘daemomiaca pestis’ of ‘dansatores’ in July 1374, in Jo. Pistorii, ‘De chorisantibus’, Rerum familiariumque Belgicarum Chronicon magnum (1654); cited in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 144.
78. In de Lettenhove, Istore et Croniques de Flandres. See also Backman, Religious Dances, 212.
79. See Ram Ben-Shalom, ‘Medieval Jewry in Christendom’, in Martin Goodman, Jeremy Cohen, and David Sorkin, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Jewish Studies (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 153-192, 176. On fourteenth-century Jewish pogroms in Bohemia, including the pogrom of 1389, which might have propelled ‘dancers’ (in effect Jewish refugees) into flight towards Germany and the Low Countries, see esp. Miri Rubin, Gentile Tales: The Narrative Assault on Late Medieval Jews (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1999). On Jewish settlements prior to the mid-fourteenth-century pogroms, see also Dean Phillip Bell, Jews in the Early Modern World (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2008). Cohn Jr. gives a detailed account of mass persecution of Jews during the 1348-1350 plague, following accusations of well poisoning, in “The Black Death and the Burning of Jews’.
80. De Rivo's account appears in Radulphus (also Radulpho or Radulphi) de Rivo, Decani Tongrensis, gesta pontificum Leodiensium ab anno tertio Engelberti a Marcka usque ad Joannem de Bavaria, in Jean Chapeauville (Joannes Chapeavillus) (1551-1617), ed., Qui gesta Pontificum Tungrensium, Traiectensium, et Leodiensium, 3 vols., vol. 3 (Leodii: Typis C. Ouvverx iunioris, 1612-1616), 1-67, 19-23. De Rivo describes the dancers alternately throughout his account as devilish and admirable or noteworthy, first calling them an ‘admirab______ For a brief biography of de Rivo, see Jean Chapeauville et al., Contribution à Vhistoriographie liégeoise, ed. René Hoven (Brussels: Classe des lettres, Académie royale de Belgique, 2004), 186-187.

De Rivo, decani Tongrensis, 23.

De Rivo, decani Tongrensis, 20.

De Rivo, decani Tongrensis, 20, 23. Madness after Foucault + 57

So whereas many witnesses attributed the dancers’ frenzy to demonism, suggesting these anti-clerical revellers were being punished with pain for their sins, the dancing ‘sect’, taking St. John at its helm, staged a choreozone in the crossfire between prior forms of religious worship and the Christian church. Dancing boisterously represented an eruption of ancient forms of ritual worship not yet fully harnessed to more modern structures of public display whereby bodies, as vessels of the soul, had to be ordered and subdued.

FESTIVAL ECONOMIES: THEATRICALITY AT THE OUTSKIRTS

Some bands of dancers, tired of being chased away from the villages they passed through, sought the privacy of peripheral sites, where they set up makeshift tents, building huts with leaves and branches from nearby forests. A grassroots market culture thrived as they were followed by crowds of enthusiasts, swelling their ranks into the thousands like a veritable pop festival.

According to the Cronica quorundam Romanorum regum ac imperatorum [Chronicle of Early Roman Kings and Emperors], composed in the fourteenth century, a blossoming economy emerged to support the dancing ‘company’, gathered as if to fulfil a ‘sacred vow’. As for the Metz chronicler, this chronicler’s terms were reproachful: he called the dancers’ fate ‘sad’ and ‘pestilential’ (‘pestilens et miseranda societas’).** Before seeking refuge in campsites, the dancers had ‘wandered about on saints’ days and holy days’, the chronicler notes, ‘when there were large gatherings in public places, particularly in churches when Mass was being celebrated. They would be smitten by the Devil with an attack of frenzy, so that the very service was disordered’. The ‘strange restlessness’ that they had evinced had ‘made an unseemly show for the people, for they left their homes and dwellings, their friends and parents and strolled about the streets and the markets, joining together in groups. They put wreaths and bands on their heads like crowns, and then held hands and danced mightily, like choreomaniacs, throwing their feet in the air. With arms outstretched they clapped their hands above and behind their heads’.** Another account suggests the dancers congregated on the steps in front of churches, at times troubling the church ceremonies, or dancing unbidden in church and town squares.* As the Cronica quorundam Romanorum regum ac imperatorum suggests, ‘when they had wea- ried themselves with leaping and dancing and such like exercises, they suddenly rushed wildly from place to place, screaming fearfully, raging like beasts over the land, and complaining of the most terrible internal pains’.®’ But in spite of these pains—provoked, plausibly, by famine A Chronicle of Early Roman Kings and Emperors (‘Cronica quorundam Romanorum regum ac imperatorum’), cited in Backman, Religious Dances, 207. Backman, who slightly misrenders the title as Chronica quorundam regum et imperatorum Romanorum, is working with a fifteenth-century copy of the manuscript held at the library of Hamburg (Hist. 31b, Pap. Fol.), remarkable for the length and wealth of detail provided, as well as its apparent contemporaneity with the events. This is the second part of two manuscripts (the first is known as Chronica aliquorum summorum pontificum), read together since an authoritative fifteenth-century German edition as Die KéIner Weltchronik, now available in reprint in Monumenta Germaniae historica, scriptores rerum Germanicarum, new ser., vol. 15, Die Kélner Weltchronik 1273/88-1376, ed. Rolf Sprandel (Munich: Monumenta Germaniae Historica, 1991). The passage on the choreomaniacs appears 116-118. The phrase ‘pestilens et miseranda societas’ appears on page 118.

In Backman, Religious Dances, 206; Frédéricq, ‘De secten’, 49. See Sprandel, Die Kélner Weltchronik, 116-117. Although Backman writes ‘like choreomaniacs’, the Latin is ‘ad instar chorsancium’, an odd construction which appears to be either a manuscript corruption of choreancium—from the Latin choreare or chorizare, meaning to dance or to dance a round, deriving from the Greek root ‘chor-’, also meaning chorus or dance; or, more plausibly, a neologism on the chronicler's part (not unusual at the time) or the chronicler's record of jargon circulating in the day. If the latter, this suggests that the dancers were novel enough to warrant their own vocabulary; more interestingly, this vocabulary did not persist in the literature of the period, also suggesting the events were seen as quite extraordinary, something nearly all chroniclers noted. I am grateful to Daniel Hadas for clarification with regard to the Latin anomaly. For more on the hazy etymological roots of ‘choreomania’, see also Kélina Gotman, ‘Chorea Minor, Chorea Major, Choreomania: Entangled Medical and Colonial Histories’, in Johannes Birringer and Josephine Fenger, eds., Tanz und WahnSinn/Dance and ChoreoMania (Leipzig: Henschel Verlag, 2011), 83-97.

86. Langlois, ‘Lettre de M. C. Leber a M. E.-H. Langlois’, 15n1. 87. Backman, Religious Dances, 206-207. See Sprandel, Die Kélner Weltchronik, 117. 58 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE and malnutrition—the dancers were engaging in what appears to have been regular folk practice. According to the Limburg Chronicle, ‘people began to dance and rage, and they stood two against one, and they danced in one place half a day, and during the dance they fell down on the ground, and let their bellies be stamped on. They believed that thereby they would be cured [of their pains]’.*° Dancing two against one (or, in alternate descriptions, two by two) was a common folk dance formation, suggesting the dancers were engaged in a boisterous féte, intensified to provoke its own spectacle of contest and crisis. Theatricality played no small part in the events. As some chroniclers suggested (and as later medical historians would increasingly insist), some participants may have feigned illness in order to be granted the sort of charity normally afforded beggars and other mendicants. As outcasts, the dancers were folded into the structures of charitable tolerance that characterized late medieval Christianity, according to whose logic beggars deserved shelter and______ The Chronica quorum-dam Romanorum regum ac imperatorum suggests that some revellers displayed unusual acting talents or outright imposture: ‘as among men the false is often found side by side with the true’, so, too, the chronicler suggests, ‘it happened that even in these terrible times many pretended to be suffering from the sickness, some to obtain the alms which Christians bestowed on the sick, and some from mere folly (‘durante commocione plurimi dictam passionem simulantes’).

The dancing was in this chronicler’s terms an occasion for simulating other dancers’ passio, a term denoting passion, affect, and event; it was also, when simulated, benign madness and, significantly, theatre. Dancers did not only purportedly feign dramatic contortions for monetary gain; they also seemed, in the eyes of some, to be spreading a dissolute and parasitical lifestyle. Besides showing histrionic displays of uncertain sincerity, they reputedly engaged in rampant sexuality. The Cronica commentator adds that some joined the dancers’ company for the sake of loose living with the women and young girls who shamelessly wandered about in remote places under the cover of night.

One hundred unmarried women, in one account, became pregnant as a result of these events. One may wonder whether they did so willfully—or whether ‘behind the scenes’ of this dancing history lies, as Jody Enders suggests of medieval theatre in this period, an unwritten history of rape.

The archives reveal glimpses of revelry, cast through the eyes of literate chroniclers who likely, we may presume, aligned themselves with the institutions of the Christian church. Reading against the grain of their narratives, we can only imagine scenes of mayhem noteworthy enough to have made it into the year’s account. ‘Normal’ in this respect, the festivities were also viewed with a chastising glance from scribes sitting, sometimes bitterly, in the sidelines, irked at the image of libertinism the dances—and general climate of upheaval—appeared to represent. Magnified through the lens of nineteenth-century historiographers reading these chroniclers’ lines retrospectively, the dancers come to represent the The Limburg Chronicle interestingly notes that women and servant girls who became pregnant by keeping shady company bound their bodies tightly so that they might appear thinner, suggesting another reading of the cloth bindings (‘Und wann daf sie tanzeten, so banden und knebelten sie sich um den Leib hart zu, dap sie desto geringer waren’). Von Wolfhagen, Die Limburger Chronik, 47. 93. On the spectrality of rape in medieval chronicles and annals, see Jody Enders, ‘The Spectacle of the Scaffolding: Rape and the Violent Foundations of Medieval Theatre Studies’, Theatre Journal 56.2 (2004): 163-181.

Madness after Foucault + 59 public appearance of an orgiastic antiquity on the scene of late medieval ‘modernity’, as medieval writers attempt to write themselves away from the archaic excesses of their own age. The dancers are thus doubly contrapuntal: in their time, they appear foreign and inexplicable; but in the nineteenth century, they contain the strangeness of another era amplified by the orgi- astic archaicity the Middle Ages had come impli- citly to represent. It is not implausible some dancers may have simulated pains in order to be granted the char- ity normally afforded beggars and other mendi- cants, employing the excuse of the feast day and charitable structures of social and religious tol- erance to rush around in a state of celebratory exultation. After a day’s dancing and cavort- ing, they may have shown admittedly strange and comical contortions to justify the public exercise. Some may also have genuinely expe- rienced painful abdominal distension from the mixture of feasting and fasting, and heightened rapid breathing, we may surmise were involved. So while medieval physicians attributed the dances to passionate temperaments, and priests attempted to exorcise participants of their demons, to nineteenth-century observers, the appearance of possession made the dancers sus- pect as ‘mad’ people spreading not just the real- ity but also the pretence—the theatre—of this dancing madness epidemically.™ To these later readers, the dancers swept others up into their heathen rites, stalling history’s progress with their disorderly scenes. Choreomaniacs repre- sented the fantasy of an eruption of ancient life onto the scene of modernity to jolt and to thwart it. This fantasy, indebted to antiquarian research but also to the nineteenth-century imagination of a bacchanalian Middle Ages, posited choreo- maniacs as ‘mad’ inasmuch as they represented the amplifications, the distortions—and in this regard, as I argue further in chapter 4—the ges- tural exaggerations of an earlier time.*® POPULAR DANCING VERSUS THE CHURCH: CONTESTED GROUNDS Religion played no small part. Dance maniacs signalled at once the antiquity of pre-Christian practices and their (heretical) exaggeration. Yet in this regard, choreomaniacs only amplified the religious movements—and movement—of their age. The tradition of dancing boisterously on feast days, for charity or a sacred cure, was old, providing a regular occasion for entertain- ment. Yet the part dance played in church wor- ship was declining in the centuries preceding the late fourteenth-century dance outburst noted by chroniclers across Europe. Dancing in churches, long a standard practice in early medi- eval Christianity, as well as in early Jewish and Roman traditions, had been formally outlawed at the Council of Wurzburg in 1298. A string of anti-dance laws dotted this period, prompting 94.

French historian Jean-Michel-Constant Leber (1780-1859) highlights the dancers’ appearance of madness (‘comme s'ils eussent été fous’), and the priests’ exorcism ‘as if they [the dancers] had been possessed by demons’, though Leber also notes contemporary physicians attributed the d______ Les danseurs de Saint-Weit datent de l'année 1374. On vit avec étonnement, dans plusieurs pays allemands, sur les bords du Rhin et de la Moselle, des gens qui dansaient comme s’ils eussent été fous, pendant la moitié du jour, et deux a deux. Ils tombaient ensuite par terre; on leur marchait sur le corps, et on les regardait alors comme guéris. Ils couraient d’une ville à l'autre et s’asseyaient devant les églises. Le nombre de ces danseurs s’accrut tellement, qu’on en a vu à Cologne jusqu’à cent cinquante. Les médecins attribuaient ces danses à un tempérament fougueux, d’où résultait des indécences et des abus réels; mais les prétres les exorcisaient comme s’ils eussent été possédés du diable.

Langlois, ‘Lettre de M. C. Leber à M. E.-H. Langlois’, 15n1. 95. Bohme est également indicatif en ce regard. Calling the medieval ‘dance mania’ (‘Tanzwut’) a mass commotion, he described men and women ‘appearing in bacchantic exuberance’ (‘bacchantischer Ausgelassenheit’), twirling and jumping wildly, and contorting their bodies shamelessly in front of their spectators; this was an outbreak of ‘demonic movement’ (‘Ausbruch der damonischen Bewegung’) which trumped both medical and priestly attempts at intervention (“Tanzwut im Mittelalter’, 40). Bohme also interestingly calls the whole string of dances running through the late fourteenth to early fifteenth centuries a ‘Spuk’, a nearly untranslatable term approximately rendered ‘spook’ or ‘haunting’ (or more generally a horrible episode), further suggesting the dancers were possessed, disturbingly, by a spirit from the past or otherworld (‘Tanzwut im Mittelalter’, 41).

96. Backman provides an exhaustive account of religious dances in the early Christian church, although as noted previously he claims rather outlandishly that these dances were all attributable to ergotism. On the Council of Wiirzburg, see Backman, Religious Dances, 9. Stevens notes church denunciations against dance and song occurred frequently between 589 (when the first Council denunciations were noted) and the seventeenth century; as Sahlin points out, the apocryphal Acts of St John, which antedates the year 150 ck, includes mention of a ring dance performed by Christ’s disciples around him, as instructed by him (Sahlin, Etude sur la carole médiévale, 137-139; Stevens, Words and Music in the Middle Ages, 179). See also L. Gougaud, ‘La danse dans les églises'’, Revue d'Histoire Ecclésiastique 15 (1914): 5-22, 229-245, who suggests that some dancers (notably in Echternach, a case I discuss in chapter 6) must have been so possessed by piety that their extravagant gestures should be understood as genuine expressions of 60 = EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE dance enthusiasts increasingly to resort to dan- cing in private or to relegate dancing to popular fétes ever further removed from the regular exercise of religious worship. So while early medieval chronicles were littered with episodes of church dancing, suggesting that terpsichor- ean outbursts had long formed a central part of everyday life, by the fourteenth century, dan- cing had increasingly come to be associated with bawdy, insalubrious activities steeped in sexual mischief. Choreomaniacs in particular seemed to participate equally in regimes of religion and pleasure, misdemeanour and the everyday: they claimed allegiance to a saint (St. John), under- scoring their religious affiliation, but danced in excess, boisterously. As such, their expression of religious enthusiasm seemed suspect to observ- ers,______ Choreomaniacs constituted an archaic hold-over, a public eruption and interruption, and a sign of resistance to change. The midsummer St. John’s Day fires had long served as an occasion for play: this was a time to engage in the Nodfyr, a pre-Christian practice of leaping through or over smoke or fire to be protected from ill health for the following year, one the church had tried anxiously to stamp out or at best to recuperate into the Christian fold.®” The earliest ‘choreomanias’ suggested a battle of wills between recalcitrant celebrants and the doyens of the church. An ‘oft-repeated tradition’®* from the eleventh century suggests dancing was at the heart of battles for power. Eighteen men and women reputedly disrupted a Christmas service taking place in a church in Kolbig (or Kélbigk) near Bernburg by ‘dancing and brawling in the churchyard’. The priest, Ruprecht, inflicted a curse on them in retaliation, according to which they would have to continue dancing without respite for a year. When the curse was lifted at the intercession of a couple of well-disposed bishops, the dancers, now knee-deep in the earth and nearly starved to death, reputedly fell into a deep sleep for three days. Four died, and the rest complained of tremors in the limbs for the rest of their lives. Alternative accounts suggest they wandered through the countryside and were subjected to continuing tremors.°® This story, Hecker noted, was ‘related with astonishment and horror such (245); Sahlin, in Etude sur la carole médiévale, 137-142, further argues that the church, wary of rivals, doubly combatted and sought to assimilate dance practices and rites associated with pre-Christian worship (139, 143-186).

97. See Pierre Riché, ‘Danses profanes et religieuses dans le haut Moyen Age’, in Robert Mandrou, ed., Histoire sociale, sensi-bilités collectives et mentalités: Mélanges Robert Mandrou (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1985), 159-167, 160; Ruth Harris, Lourdes: Body and Spirit in the Secular Age (New York: Viking, 1999), 102-103; Sahlin, Etude sur la carole médiévale, 164. Sahlin, after Bohme, further suggests that dances invoking St. Vitus derived from those performed in honour of the Slavic sun god, Swantewit (Etude sur la carole médiévale, 164n2), though Bohme is at pains to point out that the Slavic name Swante-wit (designating the sun. god) has nothing to do with St. Vitus’s dances. See Bohme, Geschichte des Tanzes in Deutschland, 162. Maurice Vloberg, in Les fétes de France: Coutumes religieuses et populaires (Grenoble: B. Arthaud, 1936), 149-164, notes that epileptics so often called to St. John the Baptist for help that their disease came to be known as the mal de Saint-Jean (160). On the pre-Christian elements of increasingly Christianized village fétes and the ambivalent role dance in particular played in these, see also Eugéne Cortet, Essai sur les fétes religieuses et les traditions populaires qui s'y rattachent (Paris: Ernest Thorin, 1867), 211-231; and A. Fournier, ‘Vieilles coutumes, usages et traditions populaires des Vosges provenant des cultes antiques et particuliérement de celui du soleil’, Bulletin de la Société philomatique vosgienne 16 (1890-1891): 137-205, 148-153.

98. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 90.

99. Hecker______ The following text has been cleaned up and corrected:

German by E. E. Metzner, 1972', Speculum: A Journal of Medieval Studies 50.3 (1975): 522-525. Gregor Rohmann, 'The Invention of the Dancing Mania: Frankish Christianity, Platonic Cosmology and Bodily Expressions in Sacred Space', Medieval History Journal 12 (2009): 13-45, argues that the dancing in the Kolbik (or Kélbigk) legend can be traced to early medieval Platonic cosmology, which proscribed dancing in sacred spaces. See also Riché, 'Danses profanes et religieuses dans le haut Moyen Age', 162-163. Stevens, in Words and Music in the Middle Ages, suggests the Kélbigk dancers were engaged in a round dance, specifically a carole (which Stevens describes as a courtly and a popular dance-song, which may or may not always have been danced in the round) (161, 164-166); see also Gougaud, 'La danse dans les églises', 229-230. Eustace and King note that the story re-emerges as a Middle English exemplum describing the 'hoppyng' dancers of 'Colbek' in Robert Mannyng's Handlyng of Sinne ('Dances of the Living and the Dead', 52-53). Langlois describes the same story, noting it took place outside the church of Saint-Magnus, in Saxony (also the location of Kélbigk), further suggesting this may have served as a model for later danses macabres (Essai historique, philosophique et pittoresque, vol. 1, 181, 183). Kastner dates this event around 1025, in Magdeburg, describing the eighteen men and fifteen women as 'larvae or ghosts insensitive to the needs of man' ('comme des larves ou des fantémes insensibles aux besoins matériels de l'homme'); they wore out neither their shoes nor their clothes, nor did they suffer from hunger or from the elements (La Danse des morts, 64, 64-65n5). The seventeenth-century historian Johann Christoff Beckmann (1641-1717) called this episode somewhat unusually a 'melancholischer Zufall' (melancholic occurrence or accident) and 'so zu nennende Tanz-Tollheit' (so-called dance madness), somewhat softening the language of rage and fury suggested by the slightly more truculent "Tanzwut". Johann Christoff Beckmann, Grundliche Fiirstellung etlicher in Hn. D. Madness after Foucault + 61 throughout the middle ages' so that when any 'exciting cause' for a similar type of 'delirious raving' and 'wild rage for dancing' occurred, the legend was harkened back to as precedent and warning. According to musicologist John Stevens (1921-2002), these rebellious dancers may, however, simply have been engaged in a carole, a typically festive round dance; depictions, including the seventeenth-century woodcut by Johann Ludwig Gottfried (1584-1633), suggest moral reprobation but nothing like the frenzy Hecker suggests (fig. 2.1). Still, the legend—with its didactic message—implied that the dancers were insubordinate; they danced outside the church, not yet surrendering to the routines of a relatively more placid church service. The story intimated not only popular conflict regarding the right mode of worship but a lesson about sites and types of choreographies that should be engaged in. Choreographies across scenes of so-called choreomania varied, as did their interpretations; while leaping was a sign of indecorousness, round dances such as this one held an equally ambivalent place in the annals of the dancing disease. So, too, pilgrimages represented an occasion for rowdy display. So just as Hecker noted the coincidence of some choreomanias with the height of midsummer, particularly______ Pilgrimages in particular constituted a contested ground. For Hecker, one of the earliest dance ‘manias’, after Kélbigk, took place in 1237 in Erfurt, when over one hundred children reportedly danced and leaped all the way to Arnstadt, then fell to the ground, giddy with exhaustion. Child pilgrimages such as this one provoked a fantasy in their own right, immortalized in the story of the Pied Piper, reprised in nineteenth-century literature by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832) and the Brothers Grimm (Jacob Grimm, 1785-1863, and Wilhelm Grimm, 1786-1859), among others. Pilgrimages, normally associated with orderly procession, became fantasized as sites of uncontrol; movement, travel and displacement, including migration; and obsessiveness bordering on collective 'mania'.

A further so-called dancing mania took place on 17 June 1278 on the Mosel Bridge in Utrecht, involving two hundred participants (homines chorizantes) who reputedly danced so hard the bridge fell, causing many to meet their watery deaths. Hecker attributed this to 'fanaticism', pointing out that according to legend, the dancers were punished for their cavorting when a priest passed by carrying a host. But the episode occurred, significantly, on 17 June, in the lead-up to St. John's Day, when men and women would have been engaged in tripudiae, a well-established religious practice historian Pierre Riché suggests involved dancing while carrying relics en route to a sacred site to fête the saint and, surreptitiously, out of habit, the summer solstice.

Stevens further suggests tripudiae often involved some license, including, according to a report from a nunnery near Rouen in 1261, 'immoderate foolery and scurrilous songs'. Further reports suggest the clergy frequently sought to contain and limit such behaviors, as they did in the case of the dancing mania in Erfurt in 1237. This was done by imposing strict rules and regulations on the pilgrimages, which were otherwise occasions for license and uncontrol. On medieval processions more generally, see especially Ashley and Hiisken, eds., Moving Subjects. On the occasions of the feasts of St. John, of St. Stephen, and of the Innocents, these processions took place. Stevens, Words and Music in the Middle Ages, 180. Additionally, see Sahlin, Etude sur la carole médiévale, 152-153.

In the seventeenth century, dancers of Kélbigk were depicted in a woodcut by Johann Ludwig Gottfried, found in Historische Chronica, oder Beschreibung der fiirnemsten Geschichten, so sich von Anfang der Welt bifS auff das Jahr Christi 1619 (also known as Gottfried’s History of the World) (Frankfurt am Main: Merian, 1674), S. 505.

Choreomaniacs' disorder was performed in passing and constituted a disorder of migration. They were noteworthy because they acted disruptively in concert, and their disruption could spread. Their disorder resided in its potentially infinite intensification. Choreomaniacs seem to have been relatively marginal enthusiasts, keeping up with ancient practices contested in post-plague years. They circulated between western and central Europe, enacting what Clifford has called a "travelling culture," at once contingent on its surroundings and translatinal. For Clifford, pilgrimages typically perform a movement between travel (which is punctual) and nomadism (which constitutes an ongoing state), eccentrically reconstituting dwellings and encounters. Pilgrims move in the margins and peripheries of sites, describing zones of political inheritance or settlement. As such, pilgrims transport and translate experiences from one site to another, provoking new zones of intensity—travelling ones—along the way.

Stevens, Words and Music in the Middle Ages, 180. By at least the fifteenth century, leaping would become formalized as a sign of undignified dancing, contrary to the increasingly refined and courtly basse-danse, in which steps are executed so close to the ground as to give the dancer the appearance of gliding. Eustace with King, ‘Dances of the Living and the Dead’, 56.

Clifford, Routes, 39. Choreomaniacs were disjoiners, separating themselves out from the villages through which they passed yet provoking audience participation, dividing viewers and scribes between those who greeted and those who pitied their fates. In doing so, they carved out an arena for themselves just past the edge of town in a temporarily constituted, shared social space that was parasitic yet sovereign. As visitors, passers-through, forces of ‘passage’ (or kinesis) they drew bemused audiences in and left new audiences and narratives behind, marking the rural and urban spaces that they inhabited before going off to the next dancing site. These were religious eccentrics hanging onto an outmoded and increasingly outlawed way of celebrating life and staving off ill health: gathering and dancing. Choreomaniacs were in this sense quintessentially ‘abnormal’, in Foucault’s sense: marginal, subject to scientific scrutiny. Like the medieval mad Foucault describes, they were in their own time by and large tolerated, albeit with some reluctance. But somewhat unlike the cases of madness Foucault describes from the annals of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century medicine, choreomania was never directly diagnosed; there were no ‘choreomaniacs’ actively sequestered (though some dancers in the sixteenth century were subjected to panels of medical experts and temporarily removed for relatively benign dancing cures [chapter 3]). Retrospective diagnosis performed by medical historians instead saw dance maniacs primarily as curiosities to collect and compare, relatively far removed from the castigating force of medico-penal law.

Individually, choreomaniacs not engaged in dancing bled into everyday life. However, individuals performing tremors and tics likened to the jagged spirit of uncontrol attributed to medieval dance manias were subject to scientific scrutiny, just as crowd movements and rowdy public behavior were increasingly subject to municipal control. Taken from this perspective, ‘choreomania’ signals a zone of intensity in the modern imagination of the Middle Ages, whereby disorderly motions come to be collated and combined, suggesting a troublesome other surging from uncertain places, moving—loitering, grimacing—to no particular end.

Madness and Reason in a Dark Age
Foucault’s most substantial contribution to the history of ideas (and bodies) is arguably his implicit but overarching observation that ‘madness’ becomes the dark hole out of which articulation occurs. From his commentary on the medieval and early modern substitution of death for madness as a prime object of anxiety to his observation that the link between madness and nothingness (‘néant’) would continue to be so profound as fundamentally to define experiences of madness in the ‘classical’ age, and his reading of Victorian sexuality as that which comes to be spoken about and, as such, fashioned, Foucault speaks about that which is spoken—significantly, that which is spoken as if on top of a great void. In the initial preface to History of Madness, Foucault wrote that within madness lies an ‘inaccessible primitive purity’ (‘inaccessible pureté primitive’). Although Hacking argues that Foucault’s later revisions attempted to disentangle his work from this rather vague and obscure phrase, the notion of madness as an indefinable idea underlying contemporary biopolitics continued to inform Foucault’s work. Madness, like sexuality, is one of the intellectual forms—what I am calling a discursive node or zone of intensity—that in being spoken about reveals whole provinces of silence. As Foucault argued, ‘I have not tried to write the history of [psychiatric] language, but rather the archaeology of that silence’. Madness emerges in Foucault’s writing as a zone of intensity through which ‘enlightened’ modernity would construe its inarticulate self and, by extension, a cast of inarticulate others. But as Hacking points out, Foucault’s aim in uncovering this silence—a complex of experiences Foucault elsewhere refers to with a mixture of terms implicating night, darkness, and obscurity, but also dazzlement and light—suggests ‘how a certain absence of discourse became possible’.11 This ‘absence’ is the ineffable other subtending the deployment of scientific and social scientific discourse by which something opposite to ‘reason’ can be imagined—what I am further describing as gesturally abstracted. Madness, then, is paradoxically both the fiction and the truth about which things are said: it signals at once a real reality (an alternative way of being not aligned to ‘reason’) and a fabrication, a set of discourses shaping how this reality comes to be played out. Choreomania instantiates this coming-to-be of modern thought, still in the nineteenth century entangled in the question of silence, cast as gesticulating unintelligibility. Beyond eighteenth-century reason—the era that boasted ‘light’ (‘le siécle des lumiéres’, denoting understanding)—nineteenth-century antiquarian epidemiology suggested a regime in which madness and reason coexisted, Bacchic echoes reverberating in the present day, liable to contagion anyone. ‘Choreomania’ thus represents the relatively unsystematic articulation of an imagined aggregated inarticulacy: the chaos of flailing limbs away from unreason and torque. Through readings and misreadings of ancient sources—producing whole series of persuasive fictions—choreomania became an abstraction, written in scenes of pullulating bodies out of joint with, and uncannily attuned to, their times—and purportedly also reflecting aspects of their readers’ own. If, as Kate Elswit points out, reprising Franko, the task of ‘reading’ historical sources is also to trace contemporary resonances with them, prior sources reading sources prior to themselves similarly extract their own regimes of signification, which we can, today, attempt to trace.4 This does not merely mean that we are only ever writing a history of the present; 110. Foucault, Histoire de la folie, 32. 111. See Hacking, ‘Déraison’, 16. ‘The italics are Hacking’s own. Foucault's original preface is reproduced in Michel Foucault, Dits et écrits 1954-1988, ed. Daniel Defert and Francois Ewald with Jacques Lagrange, 2 vols., vol. 1 (Paris: Gallimard, 2001), 187-195. Foucault in fact writes: ‘A défaut de cette inaccessible pureté primitive’, meaning given that this primitive purity is of course inaccessible, the history of madness that can be written is that of a perpetual set of decisions and exchanges separating reason from unreason, pointing towards an ‘obscure common root’ (‘obscure commune racine’) before the historical moment—the series of movements—by which the language of reason came to be separated out from the murmur of shadowy insects (‘murmure d’insectes sombres’) (192). 112, Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason, trans. Richard Howard (London: Tavistock, 1967), 111-112; cited in Hacking, ‘Déraison’, 20. 113. See Hacking, ‘Déraison’, 17-20. 114. Franko writes that historiographical analysis seeks ‘also to develop [models of the historical period under scrutiny] in the direction of relevant terms for contemporary analysis’. Mark Franko, ‘Dance and the Political: States of Exception’, in Madness after Foucault + 65 but that this presentness is also constituted of fantasies about the past which were themselves—with slight variations—previously held. In tracing the relationship between past forms of historicity—past historical imaginings—we can attempt to draw out a contrapuntal, choreographic "choreohistory." In the final section of this chapter, I turn to Nietzsche's concept of the bacchanalian Middle Ages as constituting alternately a sane and sick form of premodernity. Profoundly informing Foucault's work on madness and genealogy, particularly the complicated and often ironic notion of "Ursprung" ("origin") that Nietzsche employs to describe the ungraspable source of Christian morality on an ever-disappearing horizon of antiquity, Nietzsche's work articulates a perpetual passage between present and past.

As a genealogist, Nietzsche discovers that there is no essential thing underlying present realities but an imbricated set of prior movements, constituting a contradictory and irremediably disparate whole. There is not even a whole, but what Foucault, reading Nietzsche, calls a "theater of procedures," in which events come to appear. Significantly, Foucault remarks, these events are always and inevitably bodied; for Nietzsche, the past may be considered "historically and physiologically." More significantly, Nietzsche fore-grounds the task of genealogy as to be faithful to the movement of life rather than to a detached, critical search for fixed truths.

In this way, the genealogist may survey Europe's decadence once again in theatrical terms, what Foucault describes as an "immense spectacle"; but contemporary history is not just theatrical, full of painted scenes and scenery. The nineteenth century emerges with Nietzsche as an era boasting a "spontaneous historical bent," a predilection for the eruptions and inconsistencies, the surprises and irregularities, of reasonably "unreasonable" times past, which it imagines itself at its best to echo.

In particular, as Dominick LaCapra is at pains to note, Foucault, borrowing implicitly from Nietzsche, located the prehistory of the prolonged discursive rupture between "reason" and "unreason" not only somewhere in the Middle Ages, but more profoundly in pre-Socratic Greece. LaCapra suggests Foucault in fact rewrote Nietzsche's The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music (1872) in his History of Madness. Like Nietzsche, Foucault rearticulated the Dionysian spirit—more specifically what Nietzsche posited as an Apollonian (rational, contained) and Dionysian (ecstatic, disinhibited) duality—as a mad spirit previously enjoying an intimate and relatively uncomplicated relationship with so-called rational forms of life.

But as LaCapra further notes, the on-one-level facile linear history this story seems to trace, according to which the past was freer and more accepting, belies a far greater complexity both Nietzsche and Foucault actually underscored: one in which regimes of reason and unreason have coexisted, according to varying power relations. The murky space of negotiation by which one becomes written in the other was what Foucault set out to highlight. In this regard, redoing Nietzsche's exuberant philosophical excavation of a broadly Dionysian life, Foucault sets a series of contradictory and convoluted twists and turns in so-called history's side describing the "fits and starts," the "fainting spells," that a complex world of madnesses represents. The contradictions in Foucault's work, like those in Nietzsche's, only highlight the always moving, "event"-like quality of genealogical research, the writing that seeks also to be vital and, in this sense, choreographic. Nietzsche's Ambivalence: A New History of Enthusiasm

Nietzsche's depiction of the St. John's and St. Vitus's dances, indebted to Hecker, suggests modernity caught in its own complicated relation to an orgiastic past. In The Birth of Tragedy, as in his earlier, posthumously published The Dionysiac World View (1870), Nietzsche depicted dancing hordes epitomizing a "blissful ecstasy which arises from the inner-most ground of man, indeed of nature itself." Nietzsche saw in these hordes an ecstatic dis-solution of the self that accompanied the "break-down of the principium individuationis [principle of individuation]", offering "a glimpse of the essence of the Dionysiac."

Comparable to a state of "intoxication," these forces—arising "among all human beings and peoples who are close to the origin of things" (he writes literally "von dem alle urspriinglichen Menschen und Vélker")—erupted like "the approach of spring when the whole of nature is pervaded by lust for life" and "awakens" a "Dionysiac power." These deep-seated "stirrings," "as they grow in intensity, cause subjectivity to vanish to the point of complete self-forgetting!"

Close to the origin of all things and to nature, these dancing hordes, for Nietzsche, moreover drew from the same wells as the Bacchic dances of antiquity, uniting Europe with the Near East: "in the German Middle Ages, too, ever-growing throngs roamed from place to place, impelled by the same Dionysiac power, singing and dancing as they went; in these St John's and St Vitus's dancers we recognize the Bacchic choruses of the Greeks, with their prehistory in Asia Minor, extending to Babylon and the orgiastic Saracea."

The medieval and ancient dances to which Nietzsche referred served as a philosophical image with which to describe the ecstatic dissolution of the self in a rapturous Oriental bliss. This was an ecstasy Nietzsche deemed healthy of body and mind, although the dances were considered, he insisted, "popular diseases" by his contemporaries. Nietzsche bemoaned this verdict, arguing that it only belied their own resentment and ill health: "there are those who, whether from lack of experience or from dullness of spirit, turn away in scorn or pity from such phenomena, regarding them as "popular diseases" while believing in their own good health; of course, these poor creatures have not the slightest inkling of how spectral and deathly pale their "health" seems when the glowing life of Dionysiac enthusiasts storms past them."

In Thus Spoke Zarathustra, written over a decade later between 1883 and 1885, Nietzsche depicted a further medieval dance event: the wandering Zarathustra falls upon a chorus of celebrants indulging in the Festival of the Ass (or Feast of Fools), a medieval tradition Nietzsche had read about in an eighteenth-century account, which described the mock solemnity these thirteenth-century iconoclasts were performing in a féte whose carnivalesque overtones were generally believed to stem from the Dionysian revelries of ancient Greece. Although historian Max Harris has convincingly shown that the Feast of Fools was not as rebellious or ribald as is commonly held but was in fact tightly incorporated into church liturgy, the myth of these medieval merrymakers resonated with Nietzsche's anti-puritanical stance. Yet by the late 1880s, Nietzsche found everything wrong with the dances. They—and their medicalization—now epitomized all that was amiss with the world: the medical profession and the masses spurred into contortions by an ascetic culture all signaled a world gone awry. Nietzsche described the medieval St. John's and St. Vitus's dances no longer as expressions of joy but as "terrible epileptic epidemics" that weakened and "emasculated" men. The dancers' convulsions mimicked those he himself witnessed and experienced in psychiatric hospitals, where individuals were forced to suffer humiliating treatments that "shattered [the] nervous system," revealing "terrible paralyses" and exacerbating profoundly depressive states.

At the cusp of his own well-known breakdown in December 1888, on the heels of a decade of poor health that had forced him to resign from his position at the University of Basel in 1879, and ushering in a further decade of institutionalization marked by debilitating paralyses, depressions, delusions, and ecstasies, Nietzsche was well-placed to poke an iron scourge into the medical establishment's side. The prevailing culture of asceticism was to blame, he argued, for medieval as for modern Europe's troubles, as it forced individuals into grotesque expressions of physical and emotional pain as ugly as their Greek and Saracen antecedents had been actually wonderful and joyous. In On the Genealogy of Morality (1887), Nietzsche had only spite for the "masses" as well as the priestly medicine-mongering he saw driving the St. John's and St. Vitus's dances.

Yet overall, Nietzsche was excited at the prospect of the medieval dances signalling an orgiastic resurgence that could liberate men and women from the same pernicious asceticism and herd mentality he considered so destructive in his own time. Rearticulating Arthur Schopenhauer's (1788-1860) Eastern-inspired concept of the principium individuationis—according to which we falsely experience ourselves as individuated until the Veil of Maya falls from our eyes and we perceive other beings' suffering as our own, realizing that we are united in a common humanity—Nietzsche saw the dances as instrumental for attaining an extra-individual state. But for Nietzsche, this extra-individual state was not ascetic. "Describing the blissful ecstasy of the Apollonian spirit (the spirit of the individual self) dissolving, in the dance, into a rapturous Dionysianism, Nietzsche saw collective ecstasy overtaking Schopenhauer's ascetic ideal. For Nietzsche, we had to lose the pettiness and small-mindedness of the individual self, just as Schopenhauer suggested, but also to replace it with the ecstatic joy of a life force erupting in elated dreams and inebriation. We had to choose a bacchanalian overcoming of individualism, rather than what Schopenhauer saw as a more disembodied, yogic, and abstracted conception of human mutuality.

Schopenhauer had put forward an ascetic ideal that resulted in the abandonment of the will to live and of all bodily satisfaction; but in Nietzsche's terms, it was through the Dionysian principle, by which we find oblivion in extreme and jubilant corporality, that we surpass small-mindedness and a false ego.

Euripides (480-406 BCE), Nietzsche thought, had killed tragedy by turning to what he termed a Socratic, over-intellectualizing dramatic mode and away from the impulsiveness of the ancient ecstasies that characterized the earlier Attic tragedians, Aeschylus (c. 523-c. 456 BCE) and Sophocles (c. 497-c. 406 BCE) in particular. Although himself indebted to Euripides's Bacchae in The Birth of Tragedy, as he described Dionysian revelries at one with nature much as Euripides described them in the parodos (or opening choral segment) of his late play, Nietzsche found the true tragic spirit to constitute an ecstatic overcoming of rational life.10

The St. John's and St. Vitus's dances were at once symbolic of a fantasy of the dissolution of the individuated self—and corresponding return to an idyllic Dionysianism—and proof of the tortured results of ascetic ideals championed by a European civilization caught in the throes of a self-destructive Christianity. Although both perspectives claimed disinhibited dancing and movement as good and corporeal repression as bad, Nietzsche saw in the frantic gesticulations of the St. John's Day dancers a particularly contemporary sign of misery and despair.

It is highly likely that he had encountered Hecker's work, given the wide currency of Hecker's writing in the decades preceding Nietzsche's career, and its recuperation by scientific celebrities such as Charcot, whose writings Nietzsche had encountered.11 But Nietzsche was also tapping into widespread uneasiness about collective exuberance and the movements of crowds current at the time of his writing. His own apprehensions about the St. John's Day dances—which in his view were not just primitive and good but modern and ugly too—suggest that in these poorly understood figures of singing, writhing, and wreathed dancing throngs, a host of legends and symbols could be read casting them as wonderfully disinhibited and free but, just as easily, disturbed.

Nietzsche's interest in ancient Greece was not new. A century of German writing on antiquity had preceded his iconoclastic account, but he set new terms for the interpretation of Greek culture highlighting the admittedly ambivalent exaltation of Bacchanalian joy. The German art historian and archaeologist Johann Joachim Wincklemann (1717-1768) had set the grounds for an exaltation of Greek temperance in his influential essay 'Reflections on the Imitation of Greek Works in Painting and Sculpture' (1755),127. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morality, 112.128. See Albert Henrichs, 'The Last of the Detractors: Friedrich Nietzsche's Condemnation of Euripides', Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies 27."______ The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

4 (1986): 369-397. 129. On Nietzsche's familiarity with Charcot’s work at the Salpétriere, see Gregory Moore, Nietzsche, Biology and Metaphor (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 144-145. 68 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE reprised in various celebrations of Greek mod- eration and harmony by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729-1781), Johann Gottfried von Herder (1744-1803), Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767-1835), Friedrich Schlegel (1772-1829), Christoph Martin Wieland (1733-1813), and Goethe, among others."*° Further debates about the Greek character emerged in the wake o: Friedrich Hélderlin’s (1770-1843) suggestion that the Apollonian spirit served as a Grecian counterpoint to what he called the Junonian spirit of sobriety and _self-restraint.'' But Nietzsche's version of the Dionysian underscored ecstasy and enthusiasm, excess, rapture, and a life force so great it spilled into the world beyond the individual, constituting what he would eventually term the ‘will to life’ or ‘will to power’, a ‘superabundance’ of vitality and ‘overflowing of energy pregnant with future’ manifesting as the ‘eternal joy of becoming’ and the ‘eternal joy o: creation’ given to the woman in the agonies of labour, and to all those who trounced pain.” For Nietzsche, this healthy biopower wel- comed and overcame the pessimism and self-destructiveness of the small man, whose experience of pleasure was undercut by his own perpetual sense of defeat. As I have been sug- gesting, Foucault borrowed from Nietzsche’s work a vacillating style and effusive mode o: inquiry that also sought philosophically to draw out the affect driving bodily being. The emphasis both writers placed on life forms—and illness— suggested not just a desire to recuperate looser, lighter ways projected at times fervently into the past, but more urgently to think in embodied ways about what it means to be embodied, to move, to pass between states of consciousness and experience—to trespass. Nietzsche's figure for this was ‘dance’, fantasized as a space of pure being away from the heaviness of everyday life. For Foucault, ‘madness’, like unreason, served as the perpetually murmuring zone within which alternative truths are imagined. I suggest the intensity with which modern figures of medieval Dionysianism appear in the nineteenth century also points towards another Dionysianism in the age of torque: a fantasy of disorderly gestural excess, the phantasmatic counterpart to the ever more efficient rhythms of the industrial age. The challenges of the convulsive body, and of the convulsive body politic, a concept I will return to at greater length in chapter 5, thus come more fully into view: as Mark D. Jordan points out in Convulsing Bodies: Religion and Resistance in Foucault (2015), convulsive bodies are also those that resist the strictures of power.’ They squirm and twist in ungainly ways, troubling the suave- ness of torque; their very being appears anaes- thetic and uncontainable. It seeks to relieve pain and to pervert exhortations to beauty, as well as to still, quiet, or controlled motion. These warped and unruly bodies suggest a zone of contestation between pre- and early Christian forms of religiosity and the orderly state repre- sented by the rising institutions of the Christian church. Choreoman______ As the next chapter argues, chorea posed particular problems to the early modern medical theorist: apparently similar to epilepsy and other falling and trembling movements, chorea baffled all those steeped in centuries of theology, supernaturalism, and demonism. But Paracelsus's iconoclastic approach, emphasizing direct observation and fieldwork, shook the medical establishment in his day, laying the groundwork for a legacy of treatises on chorea still dubiously linking all sorts of trembling and falling movements with medieval and early modern religious and popular fêtes. Significantly, with Paracelsus, the conflation of choreic and choreomaniacal movements catalyzed a surge of writing on purpose-less, meaningless motion. Choreomania became a disorder of gestural aimlessness: no longer the medieval fools' ship's passage but meaningless gesture reproducing itself apparently without origin or cause.

130. A useful discussion of the Greek imaginary in German and English literature is offered by Kenneth Haynes, English Literature and Ancient Languages (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), 138-173.

131. Haynes, English Literature and Ancient Languages, 140.

132. Young, Friedrich Nietzsche, 446-447, 502.

133. See esp. Jordan, Convulsing Bodies, 86-91. Madness after Foucault + 69 Translatio St. Vitus's Dance, Demonism, and the Early Modern Madness cannot be defined, any more than reason. —Louis-Florentin Calmeil, De la folie (1845) STATES OF EMERGENCE: PURPOSELESS GESTURE

Describing Gilles de la Tourette's (1857-1904) writing on spasms, tics, and jerks in Etude sur une affection nerveuse caractérisée par de lincoordination accompagnée décholalie et de coprolalie [Study on a Nervous Condition Characterized by Lack of Motor Coordination Accompanied by Echolalia and Coprolalia] (1885), later known as Tourette's syndrome, a condition since then understood to be closely allied to—often indistinguishable from—chorea, Agamben highlights a 'catastrophic' 'proliferation' of gestures. Writing in 'Notes on Gesture' (1992), Agamben highlights de la Tourette's 'description of an amazing proliferation of tics, spasmodic jerks, and mannerisms—a proliferation that cannot be defined in any way other than as a generalized catastrophe of the sphere of gestures. Patients can neither start nor complete the simplest of gestures. If they are able to start a movement', he adds, 'this is interrupted and broken up by shocks lacking any coordination and by tremors that give the impression that the whole musculature is engaged in a dance (chorea) that is completely independent of any ambulatory end'. The 'catastrophe' Agamben highlights is purposeless gesture, gesture without end; gesture that is going nowhere, that cannot complete itself. Significantly, this catastrophe looks like dance—in his terms, chorea: a particular sort of spasmodic, tic-like dance ( 'cho- rea') that has no destination. Choreomania, a broad category of dyskinetic gestures and movement disorders allied, in medical literature, to Tourette's syndrome and chorea, appears shocking to observers because it seems to lack precision, control, and purpose. It erupts, seemingly epidemically, onto the scene of modernity as a series of purposeless fits: attacks of the uncontrolled body in a rationalized public space in which bodies are meant to be doing something, going somewhere. In Agamben’s formulation, non-catastrophic (non-choreic) bodies complete their gestures; they do not leave them half-finished, interrupted, or broken off. Chorea, in contrast, stutters, stumbles, collapses, and falls. It is a gesture that does not move towards a goal or complete a circuit. This chapter argues that within the associated spaces of chorea, Tourette's syndrome, epilepsy, rheumatism, and an increasing constellation of narratives— after the medieval dances described in the last chapter, an outbreak of dancing in Strasbourg in 1518, and a whole host of Italian cases of tarantism (a condition medically associated with melancholy, and the dance of the tarantella)— 'choreomania' became so capacious as to encompass nearly any seemingly purposeless motion.

The translation from a humoral to an ecosophical and eventually a neurophysiological terrain of diagnosis, however, does not suggest a linear progression towards greater scientific understanding, proof, or verification but physicians' continued bafflement as to what the erratic gestures of the 'dancing disease' meant or how they should be categorized; and these same physicians' increasing recourse to cultural history for explanation. Imagined genealogies took the place of taxonomy. Yet in this double move, at once to observe and to compare with past (and increasingly, later chapters show, foreign) cases, the conflation of gestural disorder in the present and social upheaval in the past further entangled chorea (chorea minor), as an individual neuromotor disorder involving spasms and tics, and choreomania, the morphing complex of desires and fantasies according to which all spontaneous and irregular movement is 'mad'.

TRANSLATIO: ECOSOPHIES AND VITAL SPIRITS

This chapter then hinges on early modern formulations of the dancing disease, mapped decisively onto the figure of St. Vitus, and their lasting imprint in nineteenth-century medical treatises. With the renegade physician Paracelsus, an ambivalent nexus of concepts comes into play in the early modern period: 'St. Vitus's dance', at once medical, historical, ecosophical, and physiological (as opposed to demonic), denoting since Paracelsus a type of falling sickness and simultaneously a type of insanity, begins to signal a complex and, as I show by the end of this chapter, lasting interpenetration of falling, spasming, and jerking forms.

Paracelsus, in the early sixteenth century, ventured an anti-establishmentarian view: what he called chorea merely echoed nature's ripples, tremors, and falls. Thus wresting otherwise unexplained gestures from a history of religious and scientific writings on witchcraft—a trope that, for centuries, had seemingly accounted for unwanted intrusions into everyday life—Paracelsus claimed that the natural world was the sole cause of trembling movements. Witchcraft, this chapter argues, was thus the prime discursive space within (and against) which the medical language of chorea would arise, though abrupt and unstructured gestures would remain marked with the spectre of a dark and unknown force.

Significantly, Paracelsus performed a political move in designing to make choreic gestures appear meaningless; to make them appear to go nowhere, to be caused by nothing exogenous, and as such to become 'merely' medical (rather than demonic). In replacing the invisible world of spirits by what he contended was a verifiable world of natural correspondences and vital locomotion, Paracelsus described chorea corresponding to the gestures of a natural world saturated with a whole range of smooth but also sudden and uncontrolled movements; I have elsewhere called this mixture alterkinetic. Concerned with directly observable reality, Paracelsus submitted that chorea, epilepsy, and other involuntary movements offered formal evidence of diseases far removed from the invisible forces (and institutional politics) of armchair academicism. But he still needed to account for bodily movements somehow. ‘Vital spirits’, or spiritus vitae (also occasionally translated as ‘spirit of life’), Paracelsus posited, were neutral forces that moved through (and moved) all matter. They constituted an underlying principle of locomotion that did away with exogenous means and ends—particularly, with the supernatural, witchy interference his academic peers expounded upon. Presaging Bergson's theories of vitalism by a few hundred years, and what Bergson would call the élan vital or vital thrust (also denoting a life force without origin or end), Paracelsus thrived on a method of experimental discovery, seeing chorea in everyday life; and seeing, as Bergson would, processes of nearly continuous transformation. Paracelsus's vitalist philosophy catapulted chorea, and what he was the first systematically to describe as St. Vitus's dance, onto the modern medical scene. Brushing away the cobwebs of theologically and academically entrenched theories attributing epilepsy, chorea, and other forms of dyskinetic gestures to demonism and witchcraft, Paracelsus instituted a shift, almost a bifurcation, in the emerging choreomania story, constituting what I refer to as a translatio, a transfer or passage from one regime of knowledge and power to another. The author borrowed the medieval concept of translatio to describe passages between aesthetic and disciplinary configurations; in Medieval Latin, translatio was employed alternately to signify translatio imperii (denoting transfer of power or rule, generally from East to West, as from Athens to Rome and Rome to Paris) and translatio studii (denoting transfer of culture, study, or knowledge, for example between fields). 'Translatio' in this sense describes a passage or shift—literally, kinesis, movement, route—between political and intellectual modalities that the narrower concept of 'translation' does not quite capture. So whereas the notion of translatio is generally acknowledged in literature on medieval and early modern history, and more recently in comparative literature, it is absent from dance and performance studies, in spite of these fields' marked investments in discourses of disciplinary power and institutional history, and in the politics and practices of movement. The author used this term throughout the book to describe the passage and transformation of the choreomania concept across nations and modes of knowledge, from Germany and other parts of Europe to the far reaches of the colonial empires, and from medical history and colonial medicine to anthropology. But the translatio is never total or exact; there is never a complete consummation (or, in Roach's terms, surrogation) of one field of knowledge by another, nor is there ever a conclusive passage from one to another shore. Rather, the perpetual sea-voyaging Gilroy describes of the Black Atlantic imprints the story of choreomania with an equally ambivalent (and multivalent) set of trajectories: voyages and returns. So whereas the previous chapter (chapter 2) and this chapter emphasize a translatio from boisterous village dance spurred on by foreign pilgrims and local merrymakers to organic events suggesting individual disorders of the nervous system, choreic tremblings continued to represent a cacophony of movements that remained to their observers illegible, incoherent, and, as the author showed by the end of this chapter, obdurate in their failure to conform to new medical forms. ‘SABBATH, SABBATH’: PARACELSUS, CHRISTIANITY, AND THE WITCH

While St. John reigned as patron saint of the medieval dance manias I described in the previous chapter, St. Vitus emerges in the early modern period to represent the jerky gestural vocabulary and odd mixture of comic movement and theatricality that came to define the dancing disease. Vitus (c. 284-305) was an early Christian zealot, whose unlikely story gained prominence in the wake of the Black Death and ensuing dancing upheavals, as late fourteenth- and early fifteenth-century European folklore.

In a slight twist on the formulation I suggest above, literary critic Ernst Robert Curtius influentially described translatio studii specifically as the transfer of learning from Athens to Rome and Rome to France, and translatio imperii as the transfer of power from one empire to another, often provoked by poor stewardship. Arguably, the transfer of learning and power also often go hand in hand. See Ernst Robert Curtius, European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages, trans. Willard R. Trask (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991), 29, 384. In Elise Bartosik-Vélez’s terms, ‘translatio’ describes the ‘transfer of empire, according to which occidental empire and Western civilization itself was believed to have moved progressively from east to west, first from Asia to Greece and then to Rome (and sometimes to Germany)’. Elise Bartosik-Vélez, ‘Translatio Imperii: Virgil and Peter Martyr's Columbus’, Comparative Literature Studies 46.4 (2009): 559-588, 560. On the concept of translatio in a discourse of power, sovereignty, and legitimacy, given practices of translation and grammar in nineteenth-century Colombia, see Rosé Maria Rodriguez-Garcia, ‘The Regime of Translation in Miguel Antonio Caro’s Colombia’, diacritics 34.3 (2004): 143-175. For David A. Boruchoff, the early modern recuperation of the translatio figure is linked to George Hakewill’s seventeenth-century notion of circular progresse, or that which passes ‘from place to place, and from nation to nation’. David A. Boruchoff, ‘New Spain, New England, and the New Jerusalem: ‘The “Translation” of Empire, Faith and Learning (Translatio Imperii, Fidei ac Scientiae) in the Colonial Missionary Project’, Early American Literature 43.1 (2008): 5-34, 18. On translatio, see also Le Goff, Medieval Civilisation; Douglas Robinson, Translation and Empire: Postcolonial Theories Explained (London: Routledge, 2014), 50-55; and Emily Apter, The Translation Zone: A New Comparative Literature (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006). See also Kélina Gotman, ‘Translatio’, Performance Research 21.5 (2016): 17-20.

In a slight twist on the formulation I suggest above, literary critic Ernst Robert Curtius influentially described translatio studii specifically as the transfer of learning from Athens to Rome and Rome to France, and translatio imperii as the transfer of power from one empire to another, often provoked by poor stewardship. Arguably, the transfer of learning and power also often go hand in hand. See Ernst Robert Curtius, European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages, trans. Willard R. Trask (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991), 29, 384. In Elise Bartosik-Vélez’s terms, ‘translatio’ describes the ‘transfer of empire, according to which occidental empire and Western civilization itself was believed to have moved progressively from east to west, first from Asia to Greece and then to Rome (and sometimes to Germany)’______ Vitus became, by extension, the patron saint not only of epileptics but also of dancers, actors, and comedians, as well as lightning and rabid dog bites—simultaneously representing comical contortions, jagged angularity, sudden movements, virulence, and theatrical deceit. This translatio, from St. John to St. Vitus, emerged in a late medieval context in which unruly dances were increasingly integrated into civic discourse, in collusion with clerical authority. Intermingled with clerical and civic debate, medical discourse gained ground, and the transition from St. John to St. Vitus solidified: although both saints continued to be employed almost interchangeably in reference to collective bouts of unruly dancing, the St. Vitus myth linking collective dances to nervous complaints emerged in the early modern period in full force. A range of medical and religious hypotheses had emerged between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries to account for the dancers’ contortions—half dance and half leaping, grimacing performances of real agony.

Late medieval physicians steeped in the classical theory of humours—according to which disease comes from an imbalance in one of the four bodily elements, either blood, yellow bile, black bile, or phlegm—typically thought the dancers suffered from hot blood. The Cronica quorundam Romanorum regum ac imperatorum suggested that many contemporaries considered the dances a ‘mania’ arising from ‘natural causes’, ‘for the sufferers seemed to be crazed, uttering confused sounds, with strange movements of their bodies, as if mad’. Young women were most prone to this sort of dancing, the Cronica noted, although young and old, women and men, were equally liable to catching the disease. Other writers thought this was the work of demons, a hypothesis that remained strong through the early modern religious wars and the Reformation.

The notorious Malleus maleficarum [Hammer of Witches] (1487), written by the inquisitors Heinrich Kramer (1430-1505) (also known as Henricus Institoris) and Jacob Sprenger (c. 1436-1495), appeared at a time when witchcraft trials were all the rage in parts of Germany and the continent, peaking in the period between about 1450 and 1700. The sixteenth-century De la démonomanie des sorciers [Of the Demon-Mania of Witches], by French writer Jean Bodin (d. 1596), published in French in 1580 and almost simultaneously translated into German, Italian, and Latin, was one of the most widely disseminated works on demonism, appearing in over twenty-three editions. It offered one of the most systematic treatments of the witches’ nightly sabbaths, articulating fears that had run rampant in the European imagination since at least the Middle Ages. But Bodin’s analysis now also comprised references to madness and the civic treatment of dancing manias, linked in his view to witchcraft, inasmuch as both could be cured with the exercise of slow, heavy movement. He claimed: ‘there is no [witches’] assembly carried on where they do not dance, inasmuch as it is their custom to dance at every gathering, but the dances are not like the ones we ordinarily see, rather they are truly wild and unruly, as if they were possessed by some demon’. The Book of Saints: A Comprehensive Biographical Dictionary, 7th ed. (New York: Continuum, 2002), 592; and Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 86.

5. Cited in Backman, Religious Dances, 205-206.
6. Backman, Religious Dances, 205-206. See Sprandel, Die Kélner Weltchronik, 116.
7. Jonathan L. Pearl, ‘Introduction’, in Jean Bodin, On the Demon-Mania of Witches, trans. Randy A. Scott (Toronto: Centre for Reformation and Renaissance Studies, 1995), 14; originally published as De la démonomanie des sorciers (Paris: Jacques du Puys Libraire Juré, 1580). According to Pearl's introduction, the 'witchcraft crisis reached its peak in Western Europe between 1550 and 1650', and 'during this century, witches were actively prosecuted in the law courts and could be punished with death' (14). Translatio + 73 not dance', adding that these dances made men frenzied and women abort.® He argued that 'all raving and frenzied [furieux, & forcenez] people perform such dancing and violent leaping' but could be cured with the enforcement of calm, heavy rhythmic movements [posément, & en cadence pesante], such as those imposed on 'the mad [insensez] people in Germany struck with the illness [maladie] known as St. Vitus and St. Modestus'.° More intriguingly, Bodin notes that dances were engaged in on feast days, as danc- ers raised their hands in the air, shouting 'sab- bath, sabbath', to show their joy (‘allégresse’), a practice he compared to ancient Hebrew dances and oblations at the Temple, including those performed by David, who danced and played his harp as a sign of joy.'° Bodin was quick to add that ancient prophetic dances, unlike these demonic ones, engaged the body in movement that had 'nothing offensive' (‘rien d’insolent’), praising heaven and God rather than the Devil." This would, however, suggest that the 'dancing manias' were in some cases plausibly Jewish dances, reinterpreted as witchcraft and subse- quently disease.” In all cases, the concept of the demonic was radically polysemic, referring as much to the uncontrolled as to the obscure. It also, significantly, described a fear of shape-shifting; these dancers, whose contorted bodies distorted them beyond recognition, had in that respect 'demonic' sympathies. Yet their status perplexed many: were they devil-worshipping and demonic outright? Were they suffering from naturally explainable pains? While some charity was granted the danc- ers in previous centuries, as Herental's account, described in the previous chapter, suggests, no sustained medical discussion had yet emerged, and no real medical theories were propounded besides recourse to the humoral notion that they suffered from hot blood. Plenty of med- ical debate had emerged surrounding the Black Death, arguing that it was caused by astrological conjunctions, mixed with bad air that exac- erbated a form of contagium, as Siraisi, Cohn, Vivian Nutton, and others have shown.!® But the dances were 'plague-like' in image only. Now, one firebrand physician keen to understand the roots of these agitated gestures argued against prevailing theories of the day according to which the dancers suffered from demonic influence, substituting what he saw as politically motivated religious prejudice with hard fact based on empirical research. Paracelsus wrote his treatise Diseases That Deprive Man of His Reason, Such as St. Vitus' Dance, Falling Sickness, Melancholy, and Insanity, and Their Correct Treatment in the 1520s, nearly a century and a half after the medieval dancing mania's zenith in 1374-1375, when new waves of religious reform and______ He discovered that he could observe people suffering from tics. Bodin, De la démonomanie des sorciers, 87-89. See also Bodin, On the Demon-Mania of Witches, 9, 120.

Bodin, De la démonomanie des sorciers, 88-89. See also Bodin, On the Demon-Mania of Witches, 120-121. Unsurprisingly, Scott and Pearl reprise the usual conflation between neuromotor disorder and popular dance to explain St. Vitus's dance as a 'special form of rheumatic fever (Sydenham's chorea) which caused involuntary twitching or writhing movements' in their English edition, adding that the 'term is also commonly applied to a range of neurological disorders'. Bodin, On the Demon-Mania of Witches, 121n70.

Bodin remarks on the ancient Hebrew term haga (22n), meaning simultaneously festival or celebration and dance ('feste, & danse'). Bodin, De la démonomanie des sorciers, 88.

Bodin, De la démonomanie des sorciers, 88.

I have found only scanty evidence of this hypothesis, but Bodin's remark suggests more work may yield important insight on the connection between Jewish dances and what was coming to be known as the dancing disease. Either way, it seems highly unlikely that the dancing mania would be an exclusively Jewish phenomenon, only that certain Jewish dances would be wrapped up into the dancing mania lore.

These theories have long been well documented. See Nancy G. Siraisi, Medieval and Renaissance Medicine: An Introduction to Knowledge and Practice (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 128-129; Vivian Nutton, "The Seeds of Disease: An Explanation of Contagion and Infection from the Greeks to the Renaissance', Medical History 27 (1983): 1-34.

Paracelsus, "The Diseases That Deprive Man of His Reason, Such As St. Vitus' Dance, Falling Sickness, Melancholy, and Insanity, and Their Correct Treatment', trans. Gregory Zilboorg, in Paracelsus, Four Treatises of Theophrastus von Hohenheim called Paracelsus, ed. Henry E. Sigerist (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996), 127-212. See also Paracelsus, Paracelsus (Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim, 1493-1541): Essential Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Andrew Weeks (Leiden: Brill, 2008), 778-793, on St. Vitus's dance; Walter Pagel, Paracelsus: An Introduction to Philosophical Medicine in the Era of the Renaissance, 2nd rev. ed. (Basel: Karger, 1982), 55-56; Andrew Weeks, Paracelsus: Speculative Theory and the Crisis of the Early Reformation (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1997); Allen G. Debus, The Chemical Philosophy: Paracelsian Science and Medicine in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries, 2 vols. (Mineola, NY: Dover, 2002). See also Genevieve Aubert, 'Charcot Revisited: The Case of Bruegel's Chorea', Archives of Neurology 62 (2005): 155-161, 155; L. J. Donaldson, J. Cavanagh, and J. Rankin, 'The Dancing Plague: A Public Health Conundrum', Public Health 111 (1997): 201-204, 201. John's Day fire, further establishing his own reputation as an iconoclast and garnering him a cast of devotees and enemies alike. Paracelsus's new approach did away with the complacent theorization popular among prominent humanists, including Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564), Otto Brunfels (1488-1534), Leonhart Fuchs (1501-1566), Konrad Gessner (1516-1565), and Georgius Agricola (1494-1555); and with the religious superstition rampant in what he saw as a corrupt clerical establishment. 'We must not forget to explain the origin of the diseases which deprive man of reason', he wrote, 'as we know from experience that they develop out of man's disposition. The present-day clergy of Europe attribute such diseases to ghostly beings and threefold spirits; we are not inclined to believe them.' Instead, he argued, 'nature is the sole origin of diseases'. By positing a type of sympathy between parts of the individual and the whole, underscoring analogical relationships across swathes of the natural world, he was overturning the humoral approach to medicine according to which disorders were caused by constitutional imbalances exacerbated by demonic influence. The church and the academic establishment were swept away in one stroke. Paracelsus's natural philosophy complemented his political convictions. As a radical reformer living at a pivotal time in the history of the Christian church, when Lutheran and Protestant reforms were on the rise, Paracelsus operated alongside a small coterie of religious nonconformists whose attitudes garnered them sympathy from townspeople and peasants agitating against the Catholic authorities, who were in turn clamping down on rabble-rousers of all stripes. Although his spiritualist and mystical leanings and Kabbalistic activities caused him to be accused of heresy and black magic by some of his humanist peers, Paracelsus maintained an active and successful medical practice, boasting patients across the lower and upper classes. His theories were bewilderingly complex, and decidedly cartographic, emphasizing relationships between microcosm and macrocosm and the rhizomatic journeys disease could take. As he described it, disease located in the roots of a tree at one point spread to the animal or human's liver or heart at another, and passed from that to the limbs, echoing environmental modulations and climatic changes. The substance of the disease was the same; only its locus and intensity shifted. Even St. Vitus's dance was caused by atmospheric disturbances, which disturbed the dancer's 'vital spirits'; the clergy had simply used these tremors to preach against demonic possession and instill fear in the people. Comparing what he called St. Vitus's dance to epilepsy, he argued that dancers were moved by 'imagination' and 'sympathy' as they imitated images (or 'mental impressions') and sounds that affected them, as a child might be affected when seeing an object and imagining something else—a ghost, a boogeyman—as a result. This phantasm, he thought, provoked the movement of the imagination and so, too, the movements of the limbs, not by the work of any outside agent but by virtue of the patient's mind alone. This was not a figurative imitation but ecosophical and kinetic: the 'imitation' operated at the level of a tremor, a shake. Paracelsus used the terms chorea (from the Latin, 'dance') and palsy (from the Old English 'palsy', meaning 'paralysis') to describe the condition. If nature can instruct irrational animals, can it not much more men? Cited in Deaux, The Black Death, 212. On Paracelsus's dishevelled ways and general notoriety, see also Charles Webster, Paracelsus: Medicine, Magic and Mission at the End of Time (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008); Pagel, Paracelsus; and Weeks, Paracelsus.

16. Pagel, Paracelsus, 20. Webster suggests that this may have been a student textbook summarizing classical ideas, in Paracelsus, 13.

17. Paracelsus, "The Diseases", 142. See also Pagel, Paracelsus, 55-56.

18. Webster, Paracelsus, 22, 158-159.

19. Paracelsus, "The Diseases", 145-146. Translatio + 75 and chorea lasciva (meaning playful, mischievous, or immodest dance) to describe this movement, arguing that the dancing was an 'opinion' or 'idea' conjured in the imagination of persons predisposed to act on mental impressions which caused them to jerk and twist their bodies." Paracelsus attributed this movement to the 'laughing veins', which caused, as he put it, a 'ticklish feeling' in the limbs. This feeling, significantly, could originate in the heart and rise to the head, depriving persons of their reason."* Thus, Paracelsus accounted for the apparent madness of those swept up in the dance.

Just as the occultist and demonologist Johann Weyer (1515-1588) would argue in De praestigiis dae-monum [On the Deceits of Demons] (1563) that witchcraft only amounted to readily observable hallucinatory melancholy caused by organic dys-function rather than demonic intervention," Paracelsus's rationalist attention to corporeal motion found cause and consequence for dan-cing and twitching alike in the mundane move-ments of the natural world. This was the first theory significantly to attend to the purportedly demonic provenance of the dancers' motions, finding echoes for these motions in the observable natural world.

Paracelsus argued that disturbances of the vital fluids or spiritus vitae mirrored disturbances in nature, which had actually provoked the danc-ing; this was an ecosophical conception, positing that human bodies and their environments work inseparably. It was also an aesthetic conception, as metaphor and metonymy enabled him to draw links between individual and ecologi-cal realms, and between parts of the body and the whole: Just as the earthquake takes place in one part but shakes everything within its reach', he wrote, so too a disease located in the head 'afflicts all that it touches'. The same was true of the liver, whose 'brewing' vapours 'creep into the spiritus vitae' and 'reached the head and the whole body like a wind blowing along the roads'. The motions of the heart similarly affected the whole body, like an earthquake that shakes the world but 'is unable to cause poisoning unless the upper parts be broken by the shaking and trembling'. As Paracelsus put it, 'just like an earthquake is wrecking a house, this breaking-up ... is not due to the poison of the spiritus vitae but to its motion'.* The repetition of 'just as', 'just like' and 'the same as' suggested parallels between phenomena in the natural world and more specifically correspondences between them defined by principles of locomotion." Similarly, correspondences between earthquake, head, liver, heart, intestines, abdomen; herb; house; and, above all, root, suggested relations between human, animal, plant, and mineral worlds, connected to one another through fundamental laws of similarity. The principle ensuring their connection was the ubiquitous spiritus vitae running through all of nature, affecting humans, animals, and plants in analogous ways. Paracelsus's rhizomatic theories conceptualized all parts of the natural world as moving through one another, connected by contiguity and resonance. This early kinaesthetic conceptualization of the dancing disease privileged movement. As a vitalist philosophy, Paracelsus's vision integrated observations across spiritual and material planes, combining empiricism and pragmatism, progressive politics and medical analysis, privileging a conception of the body that was open, porous, and polysemic. Still radical to the contemporary ear, Paracelsus's early formulation of choreomania presents an affiliational view of human, animal, and plant species that draws out intensities of motion and affect, as well as resonances, hiccups and breaks, and their dramatic effects.

Paracelsus argued that shaking—and the characteristic tremor of the limbs found in St. Vitus's dance—was often latent and 'sometimes . . . appears after a shock', But the shock was not the cause of the disease; the disease was 'merely inflamed by the shock, which causes the spiritus vitae to swell and boil'. Joy could also cause shaking, by affecting the spiritus vitae that have an 'inclination' towards it." Thus, 'trembling, falling, foaming, and spasms of the limbs are caused because the living spirits [spiritus vitae] of the patients are ill, and therefore the patients too are suffering'."

This unified theory—which he employed to explain epilepsy, the 'falling sickness', as well as St. Vitus's dance—accounted for patent similarities between paroxysms, including epileptic and epileptiform seizures and other sudden involuntary falls (including ones provoked by dancing). Paradoxically, the paroxysmal gestures of choreics and epileptics rendered them more like dance understood in a contemporary aesthetic sense: as movement without signing, abstract rhythm foregrounding structure and form but not necessarily 'ends'. As a sort of purposeless movement, dance in this sense calls forth objects and spaces but is shorn of the sort of ostensive signification of drama. In Agamben's terms, gesture 'communicates communicability' but does not communicate a particular object or thing. Gesture is the pure 'mediality' of language: for Agamben, gesture gestures." It gestures its ability to signify, to mean, point to, stand in for. As a metonymic conception, this sense of gesture differs from gesture conceived as nonteleological movement: movement that does not require an end. For Paracelsus, the gestures of choreics' limbs, torsos, and faces have no symbolic signification. Yet aesthetically they are linked, inasmuch as they formally resemble one another: Paracelsus's theory of choreic movement thus links chorea to earthquakes and other natural cataclysms by virtue of their formal and rhythmic similarities: in all cases, bodies tremble, quake, and quiver. With Paracelsus, the interrelation of ecological movements across the natural world represents a different sort of catastrophe than what Agamben would note of chorea: not the catastrophe of purposeless gesture but the catastrophic emergence of gestural upheaval, rhythmic resonance, and a brand of mutual imitation without beginning or end. For Paracelsus, the tremor of the limbs equals the tremor of a tree and of the earth; these are equivalent movements in the eruption of vital forces onto the world stage. As medical historian Walter Pagel (1898-1983) has pointed out, however, Paracelsus was not entirely immune from belief in supernaturalism or witchcraft himself, and some of his psychiatric theories suggested burning as a means to keep patients from becoming instruments of the devil;* but by and large, Paracelsus's philosophical medicine, rent through with arcane deliberations, sought to go beyond what he saw as the sclerotic academicism of his day. As literary critic and historian Andrew Weeks has further suggested, ambiguity played a pivotal role in Paracelsus's thinking and style: wordplay, rhetorical riddles, paradox, and complex allusions deliberately reconfigured the fields he was seeking to redefine." Paracelsus's later writings, from around 1530, rearticulated St. Vitus's dance as an 'invisible disease', which he nonetheless observed in the first instance in a woman who, he argues, affected illness and danced herself to exhaustion purportedly to annoy her husband; he linked this to what he saw as questionable Anabaptist practices that abused faith for the sake of 'imagined ceremony'." In this sense, the discourse on St. Vitus's dance served as a thinly veiled criticism of superstition once more. Although Paracelsus himself only barely escaped the threats of imprisonment and death suffered by some of his radical compatriots,* his vitalist conceptions paved the way for a new era of medical debate, shifting the discourse on the dancing disease: no longer primarily demonic, foreign, or strange, it had natural and human causes and, as such, should be wrested from clerical control. This conception set the grounds for a new legacy of writings linking St. John's and St. Vitus's dance as popular practices to epilepsy, religious heresy, dissent, and thinly veiled feminine revolt now cast as disease.

THE STRASSBOURG MANIA: MUNICIPAL STAKES
Paracelsus's visionary contributions to natural science initially remained marginal. But throughout the sixteenth century, practical solutions to the so-called dancing disease multiplied as municipal authorities keen to keep disorderly expressions of kinetic enthusiasm in check increasingly siphoned troublemakers off to the church. Tensions had come to a head in Strasbourg in 1518, in a second outbreak of the dancing 'plague' smaller in scope to the large-scale, travelling dance mania of the 1370s described in chapter 2 but more complexly theorized and documented by its contemporaries. In this case, the city's methods for dealing with the outbreak were at first pragmatic: dancers were encouraged—even mandated—to dance themselves to exhaustion in prescribed areas. Exorcism was practiced as a last resort, and standard medical opinion called on to legitimize it: the church, city, and medical establishment worked in concert to assuage, even to contain, though never fully to punish, the dancing. Meanwhile, medical discussions attempting to account for the events proliferated.

The Strasbourg Chronicle described the dancing in terms of its potential fatality: 'A remarkable disease spread / At this time among the people. /...many in their madness / Began to dance, / Which they did day and night / And without interruption / Until they fell down unconscious. / Many died in consequence'. Another Strasbourg chronicle reported that hundreds of men and women began 'To dance and hop... / In the public market, in alleys and streets / Day and night; and many of them ate nothing / Until at last the sickness left them. / This affliction was called St Vitus' dance'.

Legend had it that the dancing was triggered by one woman; within four days, she was joined in dancing by thirty-four men and women, and soon enough two hundred people were dancing. Within four weeks, more than four hundred people of all ages were dancing in the streets and in the private homes of Strasbourg.

With increasing recourse to St. Vitus as patron saint of these dances, theories concerning the dancing frenzies gained a new lease of life, and casual bystander observations of the St. John's dances of the previous centuries gave way to anew era of medical and municipal debate. Exorcism was used to great effect: on the chief magistrate's orders, dancers were taken in wagons to the nearby chapel of St. Vitus by Zabern, in Alsace. They reportedly continued to dance along the way; then fell to their knees before the image of St. Vitus and promptly recovered their senses.

The proximity of the St. Vitus chapel to the Strasbourg 'mania' may have inspired the shift towards St. Vitus as patron saint, gradually occluding the earlier village kermesses and fétes celebrated in the name of St. John (though these continued for many centuries independently to take place). The sixteenth-century architect Daniel Specklin (1536-1589) noted in his Strasbourg chronicle that platforms for dancing were set up in the horse and grain markets, and two guild-halls were reserved for the dancers. These were provided with hired guards specially brought in to contain the dancing and keep dancers from harming themselves, as well as moderating the influence they might have on others.

According to another eyewitness and chronicler, Hieronymous Gebwiler (1473-1545), the hired guards 'danced day and night with those poor people, but toward evening they tied them all onto wagons and took them to St. Vitus of Hohenstein. And after their pilgrimage there was finished and they were danced all out, they took them home again'.

This was a disorder that persisted for several years, with no known cure or treatment. The dancing epidemic remained a mystery, and the city's efforts to contain it were at best only partially successful. The role of St. Vitus as patron saint of the dances seemed to provide a degree of relief, but the exact cause and solution to the dancing mania remained elusive. 33. In Backman, Religious Dances, 237.
34. See Alfred Martin, ‘Geschichte der Tanzkrankheit in Deutschland’, Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde 24 (1914): 113-134, 225-239, 116, 119; cited in Midelfort, A History of Madness, 33. Daniel Specklin and Jean Wencker both note that ‘young and old’ (Ciungen [or yungen] und alten’) were dancing in Daniel Specklin, Les collectanées de Daniel Specklin, chronique strasbourgeoise du seiziéme siécle. Fragments recueillis par Rodolphe Reuss, in L. Dacheux, ed., Fragments des anciennes chroniques d’Alsace, 4 vols., vol. 2 (Strasbourg: Librairie J. Noiriel, 1890), 488; and Jean Wencker, ‘La chronique strasbourgeoise de Jean Wencker’, in L. Dacheux, Les chroniques strasbourgeoises de Jacques Trausch et de Jean Wencker. Les annales de Sébastien Brant. Fragments recueillis par labbé Dacheux, in Fragments des anciennes chroniques strasbourgeoises, 4 vols., vol. 3 (Strasbourg: Imprimerie Strasbourgeoise, 1892), 75-207, 148.
35. See R. H.R. Park and M. P. Park, ‘Saint Vitus’ Dance: Vital Misconceptions by Sydenham and Bruegel’, Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 83.8 (1990): 512-515.
36. Specklin, Les collectanées de Daniel Specklin, 488-489; cited in Midelfort, A History of Madness, 35.
37. Karl Stenzel, ed., Die Stratburger Chronik des elséissischen Humanisten Hieronymus Gebwiler (Berlin, 1926), 74-75; cited in Midelfort, A History of Madness, 33-34. Béhme notes that a century later, in 1615, a servant girl in Basel was ‘overtaken by such a horrifying dance mania (Tanzwut), she danced herself sick for over a month and danced the soles of her feet off. She slept and ate 78 « EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE of excessive movement; but as in the medieval rounds described in chapter 2, its prescribed cure came in the form of movement as well: like purportedly cured like. Dancing, mandated by the municipal authorities, would expunge itself. Too exhausted to resist, dancers were suscepti- ble to the emotional charge of the saint’s inter- cession and—in the case of some—found satiety for a while. For Gebwiler, the event offered a lesson from God that one should practice moderation in all things, including dancing. Dancing should never be lewd or shameful, he wrote; and one should never dance with ‘inappropriate persons’ such as monks or nuns, or ‘in the wrong places’ such as in cloisters or nunneries. Otherwise, God would punish them as he had the Egyptians, ‘and for our obstinacy He will let us sink in a Red Sea of sins’. Some dancers appear to have actually died in the process of dancing, as reported, among others, by Specklin.*° Those who went to church were greeted with a special mass and given small crosses and red shoes,*° an observation echoed for the year 1517 in the Strasbourg chronicle of public official Jean Wencker (1590-1659).** Music seems to have played no small part in the affair: Specklin noted that besides hired guards, a cast of musicians was brought in to accompany the dancers with flutes and drum. But although music was initially prescribed by the city to help assuage______ The 'only exception' noted was 'that if honorable persons wish to dance at weddings or celebrations of first Mass in their houses, they may do so using stringed instruments, but they are on their conscience not to use tambourines or drums'. Festive clothing and jewelry were also banned, and 'loose persons' were cast out of the city until the excitement subsided." Whereas the Franciscan friar Johannes Pauli's (1450-1520) Strasbourg sermons sug- gest that the dancing may have derived from the ballo in Christo—what historian Arlene Epp Pearsall has described as an ecstatic religious exercise performed by worshippers known as chorisanten or dansatores, loosely related to the flagellants, and pronounced heretical a cen- tury earlier**"—the dancing seems also to have become a fashion flaunting excess. Women and men of all ages mixed, cavorting on Sundays and other feast days, disrupting the pious exercise of religious worship. As noted, many dancers may have come from the labouring classes, but records suggest the wealthy indulged liberally as well.

Johann Schenck von Grafenberg (1530-1598), a physician in Freiburg im Breisgau, noted that well-to-do dancers hired help on their own account to guide these communal fétes: little, but kept dancing in one spot, until she was completely devoid of energy. She was eventually brought to a hospital and 'cured'. But while she was dancing, municipal authorities 'assigned two strong men to the dancer, dressed in red, with white feathers on their hats and one after the other they had to dance with the dance maniac [Tanzwithigen]'. In this case, concerted attempts at wearing her out failed; the hospital cure is more perplexing, suggesting she either suffered a neuromotor disease that looked like dance which they were somehow able to treat or, more likely, that the hospital setting itself sobered her. The detail of the red dress and white feathers is also unusual, indicative of official dress.

In Bohme, "Tanzwut im Mittelalter", 43. See also, for the same story, Beckmann, Griindliche Fiirstellung, 467.

Stenzel, ed., Die Straburger Chronik, 74-75; cited in Midelfort, A History of Madness, 33-34.

Specklin writes: 'Viel tantzten [sic] sich zu tode'. Les collectanées de Daniel Specklin, 489.

Backman, Religious Dances, 237. See also Specklin, Les collectanées de Daniel Specklin, 489.

Wencker, 'La chronique strasbourgeoise de Jean Wencker', 148. These are the same red shoes that reappear in Hans Christian Anderson's (1805-1875) fairy tale of The Red Shoes (1845), in which a young girl is so possessed by her dancing shoes that she cannot stop dancing, until eventually her feet are cut off, and her shoes go off dancing on their own into the distance. Further nineteenth-century accounts of women dancing themselves to death with red shoes appear in the Brothers Grimm's Snow White (1812), in which the jealous stepmother is compelled to wear red-hot iron dancing shoes and dance until she dies. So, too, Giselle is compelled by the spirit-world Wilis to dance herself to death. These nineteenth-century tales of obsession, vengeance, and despair emphasized the involuntary aspects of the dance, overlooking the collective, civic aspects of the dances in the sixteenth century. Dancing shoes, particularly red ones, merit a study of their own. For a useful overview of the symbolic power of red shoes over the centuries, see e.g. Hilary Davidson, 'Sex and Sin: The Magic of Red Shoes', in Peter McNeil and Giorgio Riello, eds. , Shoes: A History from Sandals to Sneakers (London: Bloomsbury, 2006), 272-289. 42. Midelfort, A History of Madness, 35-36. See also Specklin, Les collectanées de Daniel Specklin, 239. 43, Pearsall, Johannes Pauli and the Strasbourg Dancers’, 209. Translatio + 79 ‘those who were looking after [the dancers] used to carry around benches and high chairs with which they would ring them in if they still lived when the dancing was over. In this way their madness was assuaged.“* Does this comment belie a hint of irony? Were the dancers actually risking their lives? Many may have been intoxicated or behaved as if they were, showing little reserve, letting loose for a while. Those who could afford such fétes may have died from the efforts in rare cases; as in any extreme physical activity, excess can prompt unintentionally grave results. But the dancers appeared to be all the more morally suspect on this account, even if Schenck’s portrayal suggests only gentle chastisement. He was bemused by the phenomenon, describing St. Vitus’s dance in his Observationes medicae de capite humano [Medical Observations] (1584) as an ‘enthusiasm’ or ‘amazing kind of madness [insania] that has corrupted many of [our] ancestors especially in Germany’.** It was interesting, extraordinary, and novel in its incarnation but old in its genealogy: this was, for Schenck, the same phenomenon that had beset dancers in the 1370s. It was a recurring disease in Germany and yet, as far as he was concerned, still a surprising and enigmatic one. According to municipal accounts, physicians were brought in to testify before the guild-led Council of Twenty-One in Strasbourg in the summer of 1518. As Erik Midelfort has remarked, physicians still typically agreed that the dancing was ‘a natural sickness that came from hot blood’,*® a diagnosis offered among other physicians by Wencker in his Strasbourg chronicle.” But a new body of theories emphasizing individual insanity was also emerging, giving the dancers a stamp of frenetic but, once again, medically justified lack of control. Melancholy, it was thought, prompted delusions, to which the dancers were especially prey. Felix Platter (Platerus) (1536-1614), a physician at the University of Basel, described the dancing frenzy as a kind of insanity, noting in his Observations (1614) that one woman had reportedly danced compulsively for a month; and others, falling in exhaustion to the ground, realized, when recovering, he surmised, that they had succumbed to folly.“ In 1625, Gregor Horst (Horstius) (1578-c. 1635), a professor of medicine in Giessen and the city physician of Ulm, ventured a rare early neuromotor diagnosis: for him, saltatio sancti viti (St. Vitus’s dance) was a physical disorder provoked by organic dysfunction. Convulsive movements, tense pains in the limbs, growing fatigue, and heavy-headedness causing confusion provoked the afflicted person to dance.*® But his theory gained little ground as far more popular theories of melancholy and insanity proliferated in the hundred years following the Strasbourg outburst. Philippus Camerarius (1537-1624) retrospectively attributed the fourteenth-century dance mania to the disorder of melancholy, noting: ‘if [the dancing mania] is to be classed as an illness, the only category into which it seems to me to fit is a delirium of melancholia, which has of course quite a wide range. In such cases the mind is entirely disordered’.°° The Oxford polymath Robert Burton (1577-1640), writing in 1628, argued in his widely influential The______ Vitus's dance was attributable to a subtype of madness – a fury stronger than, though allied to, melancholy, also involving a disordered state of mind. This madness was similar to ecstasy, he argued, and was characterized by a variety of behaviors and beliefs, including enthusiasm, revelations, and visions, as well as obsessions with, or a belief in, possession by devils and sibylline prophecy. It also suggested symptoms characteristic of the 44.

'Those who were rich kept paid attendants to see that they did not hurt themselves or others, and to act as leaders who would guide the crazy band'; cited in Backman, Religious Dances, 214. See Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 97. 45, See Johannes Schenck von Grafenberg, 'Praefatio ad lectorem' in Observationes medicae de capite humano: hoc est, exempla capitis morborum, causarum, signorum, eventuum, curationum, ut singularia, sic abdita et monstrosa. Ex claris. medicorum, veterum simul & recentriorum scriptis (Basel: Ex Officina Frobeniana, 1584), n.p. Also in Midelfort, A History of Madness, 170. 46. Midelfort, A History of Madness, 34. 47. 'In mehreren Sitzungen wurde von Veitstanzern gesprochen: die Aerzte erklarden es fir eine natirliche krankheit, die von hitzigem gebliit herkomme'. In Jean Wencker, ed., 'Annales de Sébastien Brant: Suite et fin' in L. Dacheux, Fragments des anciennes chroniques d'alsace, 4 vols., vol. 3 (Strasbourg: Imprimerie Strasbourgeoise, 1901), 243-470, 252. 48. In Robert Burton, The Anatomy of Melancholy, ed. Floyd Dell and Paul Jordan-Smith (New York: Tudor, 1927), 124, and Backman, Religious Dances, 215. On Platter, see also Midelfort, A History of Madness, 174-179. Beckmann describes another case reported by Platter, according to which a young prelate began having countless convulsions, after which he fell into a steady insan- ity; his body moved 'as if in a dance' (Beckmann, Griindliche Fiirstellung, 467). 49. Martin, 'Geschichte der Tanzkrankheit in Deutschland', 122-123; cited in Midelfort, A History of Madness, 39-40. 50. Cited in Backman, Religious Dances, 214. On theories of melancholy (and mania) in early academic psychiatry see also Midelfort, A History of Madness, 141-157. 80 = EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE consumption of noxious herbs and spider bites, although he insisted that the dancing should not be reduced to a poisonous etiology; more was at play than toxicity. The most common manifestations of this type of mad fury, Burton thought, were lycanthropia (belief that one has turned into a wolf), hydrophobia, and Chorea Sti Viti. The latter, he remarked, had been discussed in prior medical literature by Paracelsus, who 'bragged' about the number of persons he cured of it, and by Schenck von Grafenberg. The Arabs, Burton added, gesturing towards a comparative medical nosography, called it a type of palsy.** As the term 'chorea' came increasingly in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries to be disengaged from the clerical stronghold and integrated into medical debate, discussions of the affliction shifted: from an emphasis on demons, followed by anosography describing earthquakes, plagues, famines, paroxysms, and the 'vital spirits' in______ The popular and semi-religious dancing ‘plague’ was conjoined with a wide range of physiological symptoms, making boisterous dance and sudden movements a common kinetic event, now a neurological disease as vague as it was seemingly widespread. BACCHEGGIAVA: POISONOUS WINDS AND FERTILE MINDS

Choreomania's translation into the realm of neurological and physiological theory endured. The idea that choreomania was provoked by a combination of organic factors and cultural habit, and was thus curable by the same, prevailed throughout much of the seventeenth century. Theories of tarantism (the medical disorder and cultural practices associated with the tarantella), which I discuss further in chapter 7, amalgamated popular dancing, music, and falls, along with various other symptoms, including hallucination, melancholy, insanity, and poison.

Medical approaches to tarantism in the seventeenth century typically argued that poisonous spider bites provoking spasmodic motions, lethargy, dancing, and melancholic fits of despair were cured through music and dancing. The dancing, as in Strasbourg, was at once a symptom of disease and its cure. Although medical views in Italy differed as to the causes and forms of the tarantula disease (tarantism) and the specific operations of its accompanying music and dances (tarantellas), a proliferation of theories in the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth centuries set popular dance practices into the pages of medical lore.

From De venenis [Of Venom] (Venice, 1492) by Santes de Ardoynis (dates unknown) to Cornucopiae latinae linguae [Cornucopia of the Latin Language] (Basle, 1536) by Niccolé Perotti (1429-1480), Genialum dierum [Genial Days] (Paris, 1539) by Alexander ab Alexandro (1461-1523), Commentarii secundo aucti, in libros sex pedacii dioscoridis [Second, Expanded Commentary, in Six Books] (Venice, 1560) by Petrus Andreas Mattioli (1501-1577), De venenis et morbis venenosis tractatus locupletissimi [Of the Treatment of Venom and Poisonous Substances] (Venice, 1584) by Hieronymus Mercurialis (1530-1606), and Centum historiae [A Hundred Historical Observations and Medical Cases] (Venice, 1621) by Epifanio Ferdinando (1569-1638), authors proffered toxic etiologies, according to which the dancing stemmed directly from the physiological effects of the spider's venom on a person's humours and vital or animal spirits; and psychic etiologies, citing lonely people's abuse of the so-called tarantula dances to dance and wear bright colours, feigning that they had been bitten.

Most authors offered a combined approach, by which the spider's venom created a disturbance in the person's animal spirits, which were also cured by music and dancing. By inciting people to dance and thus to sweat, the music helped dispel noxious substances through glands activated by vigorous motion in the summer heat.°*? Ferdinando called this vigorous dancing baccheggiava, after the Bacchic frenzy from which he thought it derived. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Alternative popular accounts, highlighted by dance historian Karen Liidtke, suggest Satan was at the origin of the tarantellas, prompting witchy women to catch tarantulas and set them off to bite unsuspecting hosts. The Renaissance polymath Athanasius Kircher (1602-1680), in Magnes, sive, De Arte Magnetica [On the Art of Magnetic Phenomena] (1643), like Paracelsus, underscored the importance of music’s ability to echo natural processes in the person’s body. For Kircher, music aroused the afflicted persons to dance by creating a motion in the air, compelling them—by the pleasurable sensation this produced—to replicate the movement of the music through their bodies. Eventually, the movement and dancing caused the victim to sweat the venom right out and be restored to health. Kircher argued, in line with Paracelsus’s theory of natural correspondences, that this process was achieved through a series of magnetic effects: stringed instruments moved the air, which was in turn moved. The air then penetrated the body through the faculties of reason and emotion, which were stirred in turn; they then stirred the vital spirits, compelling the person to dance. Dancing was thus neither a purely emotional nor a natural, animal, or even physiological function but the result of complex operations involving magnetic correspondences between music, air, mind, and vital spirits. The heat produced in the body led to the opening of the ‘air holes’ (or pores) through which poisonous winds and humours were exhaled. Dancing thus corresponded at once to the disorder and its cure; movements in spiders, in the air, and in musical instruments echoed one another. The world, in this view, was an ecological machine composed of parts, each of which, when disturbed, affected another.

Dance was naturally cause and consequence of other ecological phenomena; studies of science and dancing, poison and music, were completely enmeshed. For the professor of medicine and anatomy at the University of Rome, Giorgio Baglivi (1668-1707), writing in his widely influential medical textbook De praxi medica [Of Medical Practice] (1699), the medical history of tarantism was part of the general history of poisons, connected to the history of music and dance.° He put forward a unified, ‘mechanical doctrine of music, poison and dancing’,° arguing that these were intimately related, and comparable to other animal sources of psychomotor disease such as those produced by rabid dog bites, which also caused an ‘exaltation of the humors’ and agitation.° But tarantism had a particularly close relation to music, which stimulated dancing, purging patients of the venom infiltrating their ‘animal spirits’ because of the tarantula’s own tendency to dance to music by wiggling its furry legs.° Baglivi recommended dancing to relieve patients of tarantula bites, citing numerous case histories to prove this practice. He also noted the way this practice gave rise to cultural traditions, enshrining the dancing in local lore and in the yearly festive calendar. Because of the mimetic relationship between humans and animals, the tarantula’s poison, Baglivi argued, continued to act well after the first bite, perpetuating the affected person’s need for dancing. Once attacked by a tarantula, in other words, one was infected more or less for life: symptoms re-emerged every year at harvest time, when the summer heat was most intense, aggravating the poisonous winds. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

This occasion sioned what Baglivi described as ‘a long series 53. See e.g. Ernesto de Martino, La terra del rimorso: Contributo a una storia religiosa del Sud (Milan: Il Saggiatore, 1961), 140, English translation in Ernesto de Martino, The Land of Remorse: A Study of Southern Italian Tarantism, ed. and trans. Dorothy Louise Zinn (London: Free Association Books, 2005), 97n; Jerri Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse: A Study of Tarantism and Pizzica in Salento (Bern: Peter Lang, 2010), 134. 54. Karen Liidtke, Dances with Spiders: Crisis, Celebrity and Celebration in Southern Italy (Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2009), 55-56. ‘The literature on tarantism is vast. Especially pertinent here, the medieval origins of tarantism in the cult of St. Paul—adopted as protector saint of all those bitten by spiders—reaching back to ancient Greek (typically Dionysian) cults, is widely referenced in standard histories. See e.g. Ludtke, Dances with Spiders, 55-64, and de Martino, La terra del rimorso, 228-241. 55. In Giorgio Baglivi, The practice of physick, reduc‘ to the ancient way of observations containing a just parallel between the wisdom and experience of the ancients, and the hypothesis's of modern physicians . . . Together with several new and curious dissertations; particu- larly of the tarantula and the nature of its poison: of the use and abuse of blistering plasters: of epidemical apoplexies, &c. . .., 2nd ed. (London: D. Midwinter, B. Lintot, G. Strahan, J. Round, W. Taylor, J. Osborn and J. Clark, 1723), 334. 56. Baglivi, The practice of physick, 313. 57. Baglivi, The practice of physick, 315. 58. Baglivi, The practice of physick, 348-349. 59. Baglivi, The practice of physick, 349-350. 82 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE of evils, which would be very annoying to the patients, if they did not take due care of their health by dancing and balls’.®° He cited the case of one woman who was stung by a tarantula and suffered the typical symptoms of tarantism— lethargy, listlessness—‘but by dancing according to the Custom of the Country, turn’d them off, and was very well that Year. But every Year after, about the wonted Revival of the Poison, her Toes were seiz’d with a most violent Pain... . The lady being oblig’d to dance, after the Exercise was over, found her self presently cur’d of the foremention’d Symptoms of her Toes and whole Body’.* The poison’s effects recalled the symptoms of melancholy, what Baglivi called the ‘green sickness’, and other diseases, echoing Burton’s attribution of St. Vitus’s dance to melancholy. ‘Many of these persons are never well but among graves, and in solitary places’, Baglivi wrote; ‘and they'll lay themselves along on a bier, as if they were really dead; they’ll throw themselves into a pit, as if they were in despair. Maids and women, otherwise chaste enough, without any regard to modesty, fall a sighing, howling, and into very indecent______ When the patients started to dance—one 'fairly danced himself off the stage'—the diagnosis was revised. From then on, only music and dance would be employed to cure them. Women's tendency to engage in the tarantella, particularly when they were suffering from heartbreak or otherwise lacking in the 'Benefit of free Converse with Men', should not, however, Baglivi added, lead one to believe that all cases of tarantism were feigned. Nevertheless, some were. 'Here it must not be conceal'd' he wrote, 'that tho' in our Country there is really such a Thing as the Poison of the Tarantula, and Persons infected with it; yet Women, that make up a great Part of that Number, very frequently counterfeit it under the Mask of its usual Symptoms'. They did this when they were suffering from loneliness and seeking respite from the mundanity, trials, and tribulations of daily life: 'whether they be under the Power of Love, or have lost their Fortunes, or meet with any of those Evils that are peculiar to Women, they never leave poring upon the mournful Object, till they run into Despair, or downright Melancholy, or at least are upon the Borders of it. And then they are also under a Disadvantage of living a solitary Sort of Life, like that of Nuns'. Because, moreover, these women were young and excitable, liable to bouts of 'mopishness', they were particularly well disposed to seek this form of dancing, Baglivi thought, since it was normally reserved only for those stung by the tarantula. 'The Climate is sultry, their Constitution is of the same Nature, their Food hot and very nourishing, and their Life early', Baglivi wrote. 'Partly from the former, and partly from the latter of these Causes, 'tis no rare thing with them to turn mopish and melancholy: No wonder then, if they be mightily delighted with Variety of Musick and Dancing; whence they feign themselves to be stung by the Tarantula, on purpose to enjoy the agreeable Diversion of Musick, which is only allow'd to such Persons; and then the Sham passes the better, for that the Pretext is accompany'd with a real Paleness of Face, Sadness, Difficulty of Breathing, Sorrow of Heart, a depraved Imagination, and the other Symptoms of the pretended, rather than true Poison of the Tarantula'. This conjunction of factors, predisposing women to fake poisoning in order to be able to dance and enjoy the 'musical Entertainment' which was 'so very agreeable' to them, granted the merrymaking rites a local name, "II' Carnevaletto delle Donne" (The Women's Little Carnival). Shamming was at the heart of medical and popular imaginations of the tarantella. "EVERYTHING IS EXTRAORDINARY IN THIS DISEASE" Chorea and tarantism increasingly came to be understood in the ensuing centuries as cultural practices masking an underlying physiological condition suggesting the duplicity of theatre. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Chorea and tarantism were worrisome due to their spontaneity and, paradoxically, the way this spontaneity seemed, in the eyes of their observers, to be shammed. This section turns to the translation from early modern medical theories of chorea (and tarantism) in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries to the growing amalgamation of physiological and cultural histories in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century medicine, describing the associated spaces within which chorea and choreomania became discursively allied.

So, whereas Italian theories of tarantism offer a somewhat parallel history (and genealogy) of the ‘dancing disease’ (and a somewhat separate correlative or institutional space), nineteenth-century narratives in northern Europe did not fail to make the link between these ‘dancing’ forms. I will return to the Orientalist appropriation of southern Italian dance histories in chapter 7.

Paracelsus’s observations ultimately set the discourse on St. Vitus’s dance squarely in line with a growing body of literature on organic disorders of the nervous system. Now a reference not only to the medieval dancing mania, ‘chorea’ came to refer to every sort of spasm as well. In 1686, Thomas Sydenham (1624-1689), known as the ‘English Hippocrates’, reprised Paracelsus’s Chorea Sancti Viti to designate two things: first, chorea minor, which Sydenham used to describe a neurological affection now also often referred to as Sydenham’s chorea (or simply chorea). This described an involuntary, spasmodic motion of the limbs, typically among young children. The condition, for Sydenham, had to be distinguished from chorea major, the historical event—the mass dances—popularly also known as St. Vitus’s dance.

Yet the similarity of the terms chorea minor and chorea major—and the shorthand for both, ‘chorea’, typically shortened from Chorea Sancti Viti (St. Vitus’s dance)—prompted continued comparisons between the ‘major’ and ‘minor’ forms, as well as persistent medical attempts to link these historically as well as biologically. Sustained medical interest in all types of chorea waned in the eighteenth century, appearing in only a few accounts reliant, for the most part, on historical lore.

John Harris (c. 1666-1719), a scientist and theologian endeavouring to make scientific advances at the Royal Society public, put forward a definition of Chorea Sancti Viti in his Lexicon technicum, or an universal English dictionary of arts and sciences (1704-1710) that largely overlooked Sydenham’s still relatively rare clinical usage of the St. Vitus term but recuperated earlier eyewitness accounts. Borrowing from the early seventeenth-century physician Gregor Horst, discussed earlier, Harris described Chorea Sancti Viti as a nebulous mental disorder compounded by a general ‘restlessness’ of the limbs. Chorea Sancti Viti, Harris wrote, was ‘a sort of Madness, . . . wherein the Person affected . . . ran hither and thither dancing to the last gasp if they were not forcibly hindred’. Horst, Harris reported, spoke with some Women, who paying a yearly Visit to the Chapel of Saint Vitus, to implore his assistance in their own or their families’ afflictions. In this view, the hysteric person (the tarantulee) can perform her hysteria in public, ‘coming out’ with her inner misfortunes and, although not curing these, expressing them socially. See e.g. Gilbert Rouget, Music and Trance: A Theory of the Relations between Music and Possession, trans. and rev. Brunhilde Biebuyck in collaboration with the author (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985), 164-165; de Martino, La terra del rimorso; Fabrizio Manco, ‘Bodied Experiences of Madness: A Tarantato’s Perception’, in Birringer and Fenger, eds., Tanz und WahnSinn/Dance and ChoreoMania, 264-283. Manco adopts an ethnographic and auto-ethnographic approach following Rouget and de Martino, calling his analysis a ‘shamanistic interpretation’ emphasizing anthropomorphic transformation (274), and tarantism a ‘living archive’, ‘transgressive’ and transformative, ‘between madness and grace, between mortification and bliss’: tarantati in his view are not so much possessed and healed as ‘dis-possessed’ (281-282). For a broad but useful overview of music therapy in the Mediterranean and elsewhere, see e.g. Peregrine Horden, ed., Music as Medicine: The History of Music Therapy since Antiquity (Aldershot, Hants: Ashgate, 2000).

84 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE
Vitus, ... near the City Ulme in Swedeland, have been taken with such a violent fit of dancing Night and Day, together with a sort of Frantickness in the Mind, that they fall together like so many People in Extasies; and are sensible of little or nothing for a Year together till next May, about which time they perceive themselves so tor- mented with a Restlessness in their Limbs, that they are forced to repair to the same place again about the Feast of Saint Vitus to dance. St. Vitus’s dance in Harris’s view was a psychiatric disorder compounded by physical symptoms wrapped up into popular lore. It was curious but benefited from the direct observation of earlier authors. So, too, the French physician François Boissier Sauvages de la Croix (1706-1767), in Nosologie méthodique [Methodical Nosology] (1772), offered a then relatively rare account of St. John’s Day dancers suffering from what he described as ‘epidemic madness’, as they ran through streets, wreathed, singing and leaping to the point of exhaustion.

But in the early nineteenth century, a surge of new writings on chorea appeared, as emerging interest in nervous diseases brought a new currency to the term chorea, and so, too, to its curious prehistory. From An essay on chorea Sancti Viti, the 1805 thesis of Felix Robertson (1781-1865) at the College of Physicians and Surgeons at the University of Pennsylvania, to Etienne-Michel Bouteille’s Traité de la chorée, ou, Danse de St. Guy [Treatise on Chorea, or, Dance of St. Vitus] (1810), Henri Bouvier’s (1799-1877) De la chorée ou danse de Saint-Guy [On Chorea or the Dance of St. Vitus] (1859), and On Chorea and Choreiform Affections (1894) by the Canadian physician Sir William Osler (1849-1919), drawn from his observations at the Infirmary for Diseases of the Nervous System in Philadelphia, chorea was emerging as a disease of choice for medical study. In France alone, over fifty medical treatises on chorea appeared between 1810 and 1889, further confusing disorders of muscular locomotion with popular dance histories. Yet, as Osler wrote, chorea was still poorly understood and hardly constituted a recognizable category of______ The following text is a corrected version of the OCRed text from a book. It has been cleaned up, with removed extraneous characters and wrongly appended words. The numbered headers and footers have been removed, and the text has been separated into appropriate paragraphs:

Details varied in the descriptions offered by medical writers, he wrote: ‘there have been scores of specific designations, indicating the quality of the movement, the locality involved, &c’. But chorea continued to baffle. ‘In the gradual growth of our knowledge of spasmodic affections this confusion has per- haps been inevitable’, Osler argued. But ‘even to-day it is not possible to make a satisfactory etiological classification, and the best we can do is to separate certain well-defined clinical forms, to which we may attempt to limit the use of the term chorea.’

Osler noted that confusion arose from Sydenham’s unfortunate terminological choice, which centuries of usage had perpetuated and magnified. Although for Osler the ‘epidemic disorder of motion’ that Paracelsus had first described as Chorea Sancti Viti had a ‘sort of prescriptive right to the name’, Sydenham had muddled the issue by applying this same set of names—chorea and St. Vitus’s dance—to ‘an affection of a totally different nature ...so that to these two forms, known respectively as chorea major and chorea minor, and each as St. Vitus’s Dance, the name will doubtless cling’.”

As Osler bemoaned, attached to St. Vitus’s dance ‘comes a long series of motor disorders in which the term has been freely used—the habit spasms and the various forms of tic so often con- founded with chorea minor, the so-called symp- tomatic choreas, the chronic, the hereditary, the congenital, and the spastic forms, and the 68.

John Harris, ‘Chorea Sancti Viti’, in Lexicon technicum: or, an universal English dictionary of arts and sciences: explaining not only the terms of art, but the arts themselves, 2 vols., vol. 1 (London: D. Brown, et al., 1704), n.p. Emphasis mine. See Gregor Horst (1578-1636), Observationum medicinalium singularium, 4 vols. (Ulm: Typis Saurianis, 1628).

Frangois Boissier Sauvages de la Croix, Nosologie méthodique, ou distribution des maladies en classes, en genres, et en espéces, suivant Tesprit de Sydenham, & la méthode des botanistes . .., 10 vols., vol. 2 (Lyon: Chez Jean-Marie Bruyset, Imprimeur-Libraire, 1772), 735.

For Bouteille, ‘tout est extraordinaire dans cette Maladie; son nom est ridicule, ses symptémes singuliers, son caractère uni- voque, sa cause inconnue, son traitement problématique. De graves auteurs ont douté de son existence; d'autres l’ont cru simulée, quelques-uns lont réputée surnaturelle ou magique; le célébre [William] Cullen semble incliner a penser que limagination y joue un grand réle, et [Joseph] Lieutaud pour ne lavoir jamais observée, s'est permis de la nier’. He adds that the seventeenth-century phy- sicians Platter, Hortius, and Sennert are the first really to have accounted for it. In Etienne-Michel Bouteille, ‘Préface’, in Traité de la chorée, ou, Danse de St. Guy (Paris: Vincard, 1810), n.p.

Sir William Osler, On Chorea and Choreiform Affections (Philadelphia: P. Blakiston, Son & Co, 1894), 1.

Osler, On Chorea, 1. Translatio + 85 pre- and post-hemiple______ But chorea major was the St. Vitus's dance of the past, known from chronicles dating back hundreds of years. In it, Osler noted, 'psychical impressions, emotional disturbances, and imitation play the most important role'. A third kind of chorea, Osler remarked, included 'choreiform affections' and 'pseudo-choreas', referring to 'various forms of habit spasm or tic'. These were minor movement disorders, generally, like hysteroepilepsy, which I will describe further in chapter 6, only partly involuntary. Finally, 'symptomatic' or 'secondary' choreas constituted 'chronic disorders of motion, which depend upon degenerative and irritative lesions of the motor cortex or path'. These included pre- and post-hemiplegic disorders of movement (disorders preceding or following paralysis of one side of the body), 'the so-called spastic choreas' and 'many of the cases of congenital and chronic chorea'. These were complex disorders, accompanying and often provoked by other degenerative conditions. 'One malady alone in this group may be separated as an independent affection', he added, 'the chronic progressive form, so-called Huntington's chorea'. But Huntington's chorea, too, continued in popular terminology to be called 'St. Vitus's dance' or 'that disorder' well into the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; and it continued to be stigmatized. As historian Alice Wexler has shown, sufferers have until recently continued to be hidden away by their families for fear of ostracism. As with many neurodegenerative and psychiatric conditions, the unfamiliarity of the sufferer's irregular gestures and apparent lack of control provoked mistrust. And while physicians generally agreed that this was neither the work of the devil nor of the vital spirits, bodily agitation worried all those still unsure just what this was. Definitions and classifications proliferated. In some cases, chorea remained a mostly psychiatric disorder, taking on different hues variously emphasizing the relationship between mind and matter, action and the imagination. In Des névroses (1864), the French-educated Russian psychiatrist Alexandre Axenfeld (1825-1876) argued that chorea tended to be complicated by manic delirium. He was referring to Sydenham's chorea, what he called the 'real chorea' (chorée légitime or chorée vulgaire, also petite danse de Saint Guy, danse, cadence, etc.), though manic delirium also appeared in chorea major (choreomania) (alternatively the dansomanie or danse de Saint-Guy, Saint-Whyt, or Saint-Modeste). For others, chorea was primarily mechanical. The Scottish physician William Aitken (1825-1892) listed 'St. Vitus's dance - chorea' in his widely read medical handbook, The Science and Practice of Medicine (1857), among half a dozen 'cephalic diseases, characterized by exalted, perverted, or suspended functional activity'. These included hysteria, catalepsy, epilepsy, cerebral dropsy (hydrocephalus), sunstroke, and insanity. But Aitken also referred St. Vitus's dance to its historical precedent, as if it boasted roots in the dancing mania that had swept through medieval Europe and now occurred in only rare and isolated cases. 'The history of this disease is a sad picture of superstition', he wrote. 'As late as the close of the fifteenth century it does not appear to have been studied by physicians, but was supposed to depend on supernatural causes or "demoniacal possession." In Germany it was said for two centuries to have been epidemic, and the patients, probably many of them maniacs, were wont to join in frantic dances'. Aitken's account underscored the psychosomatic quality of the events, arguing that masses and hymns may have 'cured' the dancers 'simply by the influence of the intense moral impression'. The 'effects' of the religious 'performances' were on their own sufficient to quiet the dancers for a while.

Osler, On Chorea, 1.

Osler, On Chorea, 2.

On the distinctions between Huntington's chorea, Sydenham's chorea, and chorea major, see also Aubert, 'Charcot Revisited', 155.

Alice R. Wexler, 'Chorea and Community in a Nineteenth-Century Town', Bulletin of the History of Medicine 76.3 (2002): 495-527.

Alexandre Axenfeld, Des névroses (Paris: Germer Bailliére Libraire-Editeur, 1864), 504.

Axenfeld, Des névroses, 498-499.

William Aitken, The Science and Practice of Medicine, 2 vols., vol. 80. Aitken, The Science and Practice of Medicine, 333.

86 +* EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE 1 (London: Charles Griffin and Company, 1864), 333. Aitken's story of historical precedent bolstered the increasingly popular idea that the medieval dancing manias were but poorly understood epi- sodes of neurological disease. The German comparative pathologist August Hirsh (1817-1894) offered one of the most succinct accounts of this discursive genealogy, while perpetuating the rapprochement between neuropathological and psychiatric diagnosis. In his article 'Chorea', in the third volume of his Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology (1883-1886), he notes in a chapter titled 'Neuroses' the tortuous paths the name 'St. Vitus' has taken: The name of St. Vitus' dance (Chorea Sancti Viti) was originally given to a hys- terical psychopathy which appeared in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries in some parts of western Germany in the form of the dancing mania (Tanzwuth, choreomania); it is still commemorated in the grotesque 'procession of the jumping saints' which is held every Whitsuntide at Echternach (Luxemburg). The same word (chorea) was subsequently used by Sydenham to desig- nate the spasmodic malady which is now universally known under that name; and from that time a distinction began to be made between a 'chorea Germanorum' (the 'greater' St. Vitus' dance, or choreomania) and a 'chorea Anglorum' (the 'lesser' St. Vitus' dance, or neurosis of the central organs characterised by incoherent action of the muscles). Great as are the merits of Sydenham's classical description of this disease, . . . still his choice of a name for the malady he described has had a confus- ing effect on the views of his successors.®* Physicians such as Hirsh were well aware that St. Vitus's dance was not at once the medieval processions and the jerks and tics described by Sydenham. Yet, as he and Osler, among oth- ers, complained, the continued conflation of these irregular gestures tied them together in an increasingly thorny complex, what I am call- ing choreomania, an entangled set of discourses linking irregular gesture and unruly popular féte. Awareness of the faulty conflation between phe- nomena did not lessen the concept's pull in the popular and medical imaginations; on the con- trary, throughout the nineteenth century, the continued imbrication of tics, spasms, falling, frothing, music and dance, boisterous eruptions, heightened emotion, theatricality, and fétes fur- ther gelled______ Spasms did not just denote unbidden motion, but a zone of indiscernibility and indetermination; spasms provoked observation but resisted closure. Osler, like many of his contemporaries, wrote almost exclusively about chorea minor, casting aside any serious study of chorea major, its reputedly epidemic, collective form, as the interest of chorea major in relation to chorea minor was, Osler thought, historiographical at best and impossible to grasp in retrospect. But the problematic relation between the two types of event continued to plague medical discourse. Andrew Davidson lamented the unhelpful analogy between chorea minor and chorea major in his 1867 article on choreomania in Madagascar, arguing that ‘this disease, which we shall name Choreomania, was . . . originally called chorea, or Saint Vitus's dance; but these terms are now inseparably, though inaptly, applied to another and perfectly distinct nervous affection. From this change in name, along with the dis- appearance of the original chorea from Europe, 81. Hirsch, Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology, vol. 3, 531. 82. Although confusion between Sydenham's chorea, rheumatic fever, and the so-called epidemic chorea of the Middle Ages has subsided, scholars and medical practitioners who continue to bemoan (and discuss) this confusion include, among others, A. C. Eftychiadis and T. S. N. Chen, ‘Historical Note: Saint Vitus and His Dance’, Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 70 (2001): 14; and, previously, David Chas. Schechter, ‘St. Vitus' Dance and Rheumatic Disease’, New York State Journal of Medicine 75 (1975): 1091-1102. Schechter wrote: ‘the connotation of St. Vitus with rheumatic disease by both the laity and medical profession is so commonplace that its incongruity is hardly noticed’. He goes on to discuss ‘the origins of that bizarre and ill-begotten epo- nymic relationship’, citing Hecker extensively (1091). Translatio + 87 considerable confusion has arisen’.** Davidson cited as an example of this terminological confusion Study of Medicine (1822), by physician John Mason Good (1764-1827), adding that ‘some authors have classed with choreomania many anomalous forms of nervous manifestation, some of which are evidently the result of organic disease of the nervous centres’.** The real chorea, Davidson said, was—except in furthest Africa (as he claimed to observe [chapter 8]) and other non-European locations—extinct. Ergotism was also often highlighted as a possible cause: a form of rye poisoning, ergotism can provoke severe hallucinations and convulsions, as well as a gangrenous blackening of the limbs. Yet virtually none of the dances described as choreomanias involved such severe degenerative symptoms. Only one case, the one discussed in chapter 2 involving a small group of men and women dancing in a churchyard in c. 1021 in Kélbigk, may plausibly have involved some ergotism. As reported by the German physician Daniel Sennert (1572-1637), one of the dancers' arms purportedly fell off when another one tried to pull on it.® This could have been caused by ergotism, given the severe decomposition of the limbs that occurs when ergot poisoning is advanced. But to suggest that ergotism alone successfully spurred on dozens, hundreds, or occasionally even thousands of people to shake their bodies in all or even most so-called dancing manias seems misguided at best. If occasional dancers suffered from ergotism or epilepsy, and others danced alongside them, these were not causes but accidents; at most, catalysts. Yet the ergot hypothesis remains strong, and since about the sixteenth century, dancing manias of every sort have been attributed to ergot poisoning. Occasional studies, after Paracelsus, have also compared dancing manias to epilepsy, which, however, like chorea, does not occur epidemically.*

Rheumatic fever, which Sydenham discussed but had not considered a form of chorea, was eventually also associated with choreiform affections, in the wake of the work of English physician Richard Bright (1789-1858) on chorea and rheumatism, Reports of Medical Cases (1831), adding one more elusive condition to the already extensive chorea family. Bright claimed that ‘the instances of the combination and alteration of rheumatism and chorea are very numerous’ and suggested that the ‘irritation’ that caused both was communicated to the spine via the pericardium (the sac enclosing the heart) when it was inflamed.® This organic lesion accounted for chorea and rheumatism’s similarity and apparent interchangeability: one condition not infrequently morphed into the other, and vice versa. Bright also thought that the cerebrospinal mass might be involved in this transmutation but that that was less likely.®° As Bouteille wrote in Traité de la Chorée, ou Danse de Saint Guy [Treatise on Chorea, or St. Vitus’s dance] (1810), chorea baffled: ‘everything is extraordinary in this disease’, he grumbled. ‘Its name is ridiculous, its symptoms odd, its cause unknown, its treatment problematic’.”

83. Andrew Davidson, ‘Choreomania: An Historical Sketch, with Some Account of an Epidemic Observed in Madagascar’, Edinburgh Medical Journal 13.2 (1867): 124-136, 124.
84. Davidson, ‘Choreomania’, 125.
85. On Sennert, see Backman, Religious Dances, 307.
86. On ergotism, see e.g. S. Wright, ‘An Experimental Inquiry into the Physiological Action of Ergot of Rye’, Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal 52 (1839): 293-334, and 52 (1840): 1-35; Donaldson et al., ‘The Dancing Plague’, 203; Caroline De Costa, ‘St Anthony's Fire and Living Ligatures: A Short History of Ergometrine’, Lancet 359 (2002): 1768-1770; Mervyn J. Eadie, ‘Convulsive Ergotism: Epidemics of Serotonin Syndrome?’ Lancet Neurology 2.7 (2003): 429-434; J. M. Massey and E. W. Massey, ‘Ergot, the “Jerks”, and Revivals’, Clinical Neuropharmacology 7-1 (1984): 99-105.
87. Donaldson et al. cite this hypothesis in “The Dancing Plague’, 202. On epilepsy, see also the standard history by Oswei Temkin, The Falling Sickness: A History of Epilepsy from the Greeks to the Beginnings of Modern Neurology, 2nd rev. ed. (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994).
88. In Eftychiadis and Chen, ‘Saint Vitus and His Dance’, 4; see Schechter, ‘St. Vitus’ Dance’, 1091-1102, esp. 1097-1099. See Richard Bright, Reports of Medical Cases, selected with a view to illustrating symptoms and cures of diseases by reference to morbid anatomy (London: Longman, 1831), n.p. On chorea and rheumatism, see also Alfred Muhry______ 90. See n70 here. See also Schechter, ‘St. Vitus’ Dance’, 1099. 88 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE

Persistent terminological confusion plagued physicians trying to understand, much less treat, this disease. As the American professor of cardiovascular and thoracic surgery David Charles Schechter wrote in ‘St. Vitus’ Dance and Rheumatic Disease’ (1975), ‘although it did not take long to find out that Sydenham’s selection of the St. Vitus cognomen was inappropriate to the clinical state which he had described, countless publications continued to bear that title’. The usage of ‘St. Vitus’ was condoned partly out of deference to Sydenham, partly from force of habit, but chiefly because the terminology sank deeper and deeper into a morass of synonyms, including, most notably, ‘the dance’, ‘chorea’, ‘saltus’, ‘saltatio’>, and ‘morbus of St. Vitus’, also referred to as St. Guy in France and St. John or St. Modestus elsewhere. ‘In their sincere desire to abandon the names of saints, as Paracelsus had tried to do’, Schechter wrote, ‘diverse authors instead muddied the waters even more by interjecting the terms tanzsucht, morbus sacer, morbus gesticularius, morbus men- taphora, morbus germanorum, orchestromania, ballismus, tanzplatz, epilepsia saltatoria, epilepsia procursiva, epilepsia mira, jactatio epileptica, gesticulatio spastica, synclonus chorea, synclonus saltans, convulsiones rhythmicae, tripudatio spastica, and so forth’,”' a testament to the power of Sydenham’s use of the chorea trope—which played not the sole but arguably a significant role in the birth and miscegenation of the extended chorea family. In Sir Thomas Watson’s terms, chorea was composed of a motley array of variations. Each offered ‘points of resemblance, like . . . the different members of a large family, in which the individuals have the same general cast of features, and yet preserve each his particular identity’. This genealogical metaphor enabled not a few further comparisons, extending the scope of chorea further still in a translatio from collective to individual disorder and back; and from a demonic and psychiatric as well as neurological plane to an epidemiological one. The dancing disease in this sense comes into the nineteenth century from late medieval and early modern histories of medical iconoclasm at the edges of academic practice, revealing an archive in motion, an archival repertoire passing through discursive fields, reconstituting itself and them along the way. ‘Chorea’ came to denote not just a conflation of individual and ecological tremors and tics but the opacity of movement, gesture eluding resolution. Chorea became the disorder of volatility par excellence: a disorder whose definition, emerging between observation and hearsay, defied the closure of representation. Chorea, if anything, gestured only obscurity. In the next chapter, convulsions take on a theatricality all their own, with the so-called Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard in the 1730s, passing between their preferred gravesite in the suburbs of Paris and the theatrical stage, where they are mocked for their exaggerated and at times patently feigned religious enthusiasm doubling as popular revolt. With the Convulsionaries and other enthusiasts, monomania also appears on the scene of psychiatric history, describing a highly theatrical, heightened enthusiasm, including one for national dance forms. The next chapter thus suggests a translatio between religious theatre and modern psychiatry, as medical authors map convulsive expressions of high affect onto the emergent disorders of nation. From the comic dramatizations of buffoonish anti-establishmentarians to vaudeville representations of exaggerated zeal, choreomania arises as a disorder of excess enthusiasm reaching beyond its subjects' bodies into politically contested public space. Schechter, 'St. Vitus' Dance', 1098-1099. Watson, Lectures on the principles and practice of physic, 645. Translatio + 89 The Convulsionaries Antics on the French Revolutionary Stage The mark or signature of possession . . . will have a fundamental importance in Western medical and religious history: [it is] the convulsion. —Foucault, Abnormal: Lectures at the Collége de France 1974-1975 (2003) CONVULSIONS APPEAR on the scene of modern science as quintessentially illegible signs yet, as such, paradoxically, also as prime markers of science's capacity to 'read' and to decipher. In Foucault's analysis, convulsions represent an 'immense spider-notion' spanning seventeenth- and eighteenth-century religion and mysticism, medicine and psychiatry, reason and unreason, and modern disciplinary reforms. But convulsions also typically succeeded in generating a few laughs; there was no better place, this chapter argues, to poke fun at these uncertain markers of religious and scientific 'truth' than at the theatre. Histrionic performances of convulsionary activity in Parisian cemeteries and on the vaudeville stage prefigure the popular dances of the Parisian cabarets, all signs of a popular culture thriving on the dramatic potential of comic contortions and public display. For themselves and for their audiences, convulsionary carousers produced outrageous scenes of spontaneous ferment, 'acting out' a politics of volatility and contagious enthusiasm indicating the potential for political change. At stake, then, in this chapter, is the show of gestural excess in the public sphere, as it comes to be mapped onto political moments of contestation. These scenes constitute choreographies of protest in the sense Foster describes—self-organizing bodies acting (and acting out) in public space, at times with the aim of achieving distinct political ends. But these scenes also reveal shows of exaggeration and gestural surplus that fall just short of the direct mobilization of collective energy Foster imagines. The gestural theatre expressed in the following scenes is indirect, often ambiguous, and indubitably zany in its exaggeration; these are bodies that perform too much, hyperbolically, and so remain unconvincing. They are not smoothly persuasive—torque-like—but buffoonish, amateurish, and distorted. As Jana Braziel and Kathleen LeBesco argue in their introduction to a special issue of Women & Performance (2005), Bakhtin, Georges Bataille (1897-1962), and others have theorized excess as a politically subversive force of cultural resistance; but excess is also, they argue, characteristic of particularly female and queer subjectivities. The 'too muchness' of the feminine (and queer) conceit reveals a marginal status that keeps women and queers both to the side of and always protruding into public space. Choreomania, in this respect a feminine and queer sort of excess, performs exuberant intrusion, 'too muchness' in the public sphere: not quite the calendrical upheaval of Bakhtinian carnival but everyday instances of gestural and affective extension, zones of intensity in which enthusiasts throw out their limbs at discomfiting angles and overperform their passions at the risk of falling into public ridicule. Rousseau's Letter to d'Alembert on Geneva's Theatres

In the midst of Rousseau's Letter to d'Alembert on Geneva's Theatres, the philosopher paints a vivid portrait of a simple village dance, which he contrasts with the morally devastating effects of Geneva's theatres. This scene, described as a casual reminiscence, features soldiers and officers dancing around a local fountain, accompanied by fifes and drums. The dance is a serpentine motion, and the participants hold hands.

As the dance unfolds, the wives and children of the dancers join in, creating a joyful and spontaneous atmosphere. Rousseau's father, observing the event from his window, embraces his son and declares, "Jean-Jacques, love your country. See these good Genevese; they are all friends; they are all brothers; joy and concord rule among them." He adds that Jean-Jacques will one day encounter other peoples in other places where such camaraderie does not exist.

Rousseau reflects on this expression of joy, which he sees as spontaneous and governed by the "sentiments of Nature." He believes that the only pure joy is public, and it warms his heart and fills his eyes with the sights, sounds, and emotions of the spectacle. Jana Evans Braziel and Kathleen LeBesco, ‘Performing Excess’, Women & Performance: A Journal of Feminist Theory 15.2 (2005): 9-13, 9. 3. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Lettre à d'Alembert sur son article Genéve, ed. Micheal Launay (Paris: Garnier-Flammarion, 1967), 248-249n1. The Convulsionaries +» 91 The concept of ‘sublime enthusiasm’ of Immanuel Kant (1724-1804), Rousseau’s contemporary, sounds a greater note of caution. Kant described ‘sublime enthusiasm’ as an extreme form of the sublime, not a public but a highly private experience. Whereas the ‘sublime’ for Kant denotes the affective and philosophical experience of pleasure in one’s own individual mastery over nature, ‘sublime enthusiasm’ suggests the heightened exaggeration of this experience. In the scenario Kant depicts, sublime enthusiasm comes to be epitomized in the heightened emotion experienced by remote spectators of the French Revolution. Carried away by the political possibilities afforded their neighbours, the spectators’ sublimely enthusiastic bliss risks tipping them into blind pathological dementia and madness (‘Wahnsinn’), excited by their unfettered imaginations. They experience an extreme—pathological—form of spectatorship, in which their projected participation in a faraway show of enthusiastic revolution exists, Kant suggests, too enthusiastically in their minds. As such, they experience theatre; not the spontaneous, natural village theatre Rousseau depicts—so natural it is not theatre but artless common dance—but a theatre of enthusiastic imitation in which they have excessively imagined themselves to partake.

Kant's politically inflected concept of sublime enthusiasm informed the critique of religious enthusiasm of the English philosopher Isaac Taylor (1787-1865). In Taylor's estimation, such enthusiasm coincided with a surge of religious fanaticism similarly spurred on by high affect and performed through excessively and hypocritically demonstrative gestures. In The Natural History of Enthusiasm, which enjoyed eleven editions from its first publication in 1829 until 1868, and in his follow-up volume, Fanaticism (1833), Taylor sought to dissociate what he saw as true, reasonable, and rational religious piety from the shallow, exploitative, and feigned religiosity of an overzealous and increasingly missionary Christianity characterized by what he saw as illusoriness and ‘vain exaggerations’.° This critique echoed earlier critiques of effusive religiosity put forward by, among others, the poet and priest John Langhorne (1735-1779), in his Letters on Religious Retirement, Melancholy, and Enthusiasm (1762), in which he describes ‘modern enthusiasm’ as luxurious indulgence in religious passions leading to ‘irregular and intemperate raptures’ also occasionally bordering on insanity. The inconstant bodily demonstrative ness of religious enthusiasts that Langhorne described was at odds with the rational and discrete exercise of ‘right devotion’.® Earlier still, the Earl of Shaftesbury had argued in ‘A letter concerning enthusiasm to my Lord . . . (1707) that critiques of folly and extravagance were more in vogue at the time of his writing than ever before. Enthusiasm, it seems, was subject to its own brand of enthusiastic rebuke. ‘The scientific literature on choreomania suggests that enthusiasm and theatre were two sides of a coin signalling a manic ‘too much- ness’ quickly tipping into untrustworthiness and lunacy. But, as this chapter argues, the senseless ‘too muchness’ of religious and political enthusiasts also mapped onto a particular sort of national over-identification by the mid- nineteenth century, so that one could be too much a French or a Polish national or too much a dance lover. Choreomania, theorized by the early to mid-nineteenth century not only as an epidemic but also as a psychiatric disorder, suggests too much dancing and zeal of a national sort. Choreomania becomes, in the terms of pioneer psychiatrist Etienne Esquirol (1772-1840), a ‘disease of civilizations’, queering nationalism and religion alike. Shifting Foucault’s analysis of modern discipline and psychiatry slightly away from a well-rehearsed focus on the ‘great confinement’—characterized by punitive institutions and systems of surveillance and containment—and towards the theatrical acting-out of choreomaniacs and other so-called monomaniacs, this chapter highlights a history of madness as public enthusiasm. Although as Deleuze reminds us, Foucault suggested that the ‘containment’ (‘renferment’) of deviant individuals in the nineteenth century also implied their unwanted protrusion into public space—their public presence and indeed their appearance as ‘mad’ people to be interned—this chapter underscores the more boisterous other side to this dark history.

From 4, see Jean-François Lyotard, L’enthousiasme: La critique kantienne de histoire (Paris: Editions Galilée, 1986), 57-77. 5. Isaac Taylor, Natural History of Enthusiasm, 4th ed. (London: Holdsworth and Ball, 1830), 33. See also Isaac Taylor, Fanaticism (London: Holdsworth and Ball, 1833). 6. John Langhorne, Letters on Religious Retirement, Melancholy, and Enthusiasm (London: H. Payne and W. Cropley, 1762), 6-8. 7. On the interplay of enclosure and visibility in Foucault’s work, see e.g. Deleuze, Foucault, 55. 92 +* EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE

The early eighteenth century, Convulsionaries were acting out their differences by over-identifying with a politically recalcitrant saint. Their gestures, alternately understood to be real and feigned, became increasingly theatricalized, recuperated into the medical and psychiatric history of the dancing disease: a disease of quintessentially theatrical excess.

THE CONVULSIONARIES OF SAINT-MEDARD IN 1730s PARIS: A JANSENIST ST. VITUS’S DANCE

Early eighteenth-century convulsionary antics, read through the lens of late nineteenth-century neurology, epitomized extreme religious states in a public sphere within which political and religious authority were highly contested. What came to be known as the Convulsionary movement swept through Paris in the 1730s, in the crossfire between church and state politics. A papal bull, Unigenitus, had been passed in September 1713 by Pope Clement XI (1649-1721) as an attack on the heterodox Jansenist movement, in particular Father Pasquier Quesnel (1634-1719), whose devotional handbook, Les Paroles de la Parole incarnée, Jésus-Christ, Notre Seigneur, tirées du Nouveau Testament [The Words of the Word Incarnate, Jesus Christ, Our Lord, Drawn from the New Testament] (1668), had provoked a storm of controversy: it was written in French and intended for laypeople. Quesnel's success had prompted him to write more popular religious tracts, such as Le Nouveau Testament en francais, avec des réflexions morales sur chaque verset, pour en rendre la lecture plus utile et la méditation plus aisée (1692), a French-language translation of the New Testament with commentary provided to readers to aid understanding. Pope Clement XI declared Quesnel a false prophet and charlatan, dangerous to the moral well-being of Christians who would be led astray by his and other Jansenist teachings. But the politics that resulted from this______ The French were divided into ‘Acceptants’, who supported the pope and king, and ‘Appellants’, who challenged the papal bull. By 1719, a compromise was reached called the accommodement (concession), written in a corps de doctrine, leading to the creation of a third group, the ‘Accommodants’, which nominally backed both Appellants and Acceptants but favored the bull overall (with minor provisions). By 1722, a royal decree had sanctioned the bull, under the pretext that the bishops of France had agreed to sign it. This created an even greater rupture between Gallicans and Papists, but did not stop the most committed anti-constitutionnaire bishops from continuing to attempt reformation.

When Philippe II, Duke of Orléans (1674-1723), regent since the death of Louis XIV, died in his turn, André-Hercule de Fleury (1653-1743), a Jesuit and former preceptor to the king, called on the young Louis XV (1710-1774) to reinforce Unigenitus, declaring the recalcitrant bishops’ stance to be misled. Fleury was proclaimed cardinal, and the Appellants lost all further right of appeal. As de Félice wrote in Foules en délire, extases collectives [Delirious Crowds, Collective Ecstasies] (1947), only a ‘miracle’ could save them.

This miracle emerged in the form of Francois de Paris (1690-1727), a famous Appellant and fervent Jansenist deacon, whose funeral on 3 May 1727, in the small working-class neighborhood of Saint-Médard, then in the outskirts of Paris, immediately gave rise to prodigious cures. These cures were soon verified by doctors, priests, family, and friends and, once notarized, described in clandestinely published tracts widely disseminated to convince skeptics of the efficacy of posthumous intercession by a figure whose public opposition to the bull was well known. The miracles described were wide-ranging. Convulsions produced at mere contact with Paris’s funeral stone, chunks of earth taken from the tomb area, and relics from Paris himself were all believed to allow people to recover their health. The most dramatic of these cures were kinetic, involving the sudden recovery of movement by individuals who had been previously paralyzed. Some miraculous feats of prowess were performed by the cured, further proof of the deacon's miraculous intercession. The first known miracle involved a young parishioner who suffered from paralysis in her left arm. She introduced herself into the deacon's premises while he was being prepared for burial, kissing his foot through the shroud and rubbing her arm against the bier. She then went home to spin silk and had now recovered the use of both her arms. News of this miracle spread, and throngs began fighting over the deacon's relics.

As word of these cures reached beyond the Saint-Médard neighborhood, Paris's tomb became a destination of choice for Jansenist sympathizers, aristocrats, artisans, priests, magistrates, and an increasing number of new recruits, many of whom sought healing for lifelong infirmities. Others sought social validation for political grievances through Paris's new status as martyr. Many gathered to watch.

The legal problems caused by the massive congregation of individuals led the government to enact severe, though not often heeded, legislation. Louis XV promulgated a law on 27 January 1732 forbidding public congregation around the deacon's tomb. He was compelled to issue another one on 17 February 1733, as the first had been ignored. Both laws were issued in defense of public order and included stipulations against the performance of convulsions in private homes as well as at the deacon's gravesite.

Kant's concept of enthusiasm as an 'effect', Jean-Francois Lyotard (1924-1998) suggests that enthusiasm implies both the deceit of theatre and performative action. Enthusiasm in this sense propels men and women into choreographies of heightened affect, enacted in effusive bodily poses which, uncontained and potentially uncontainable in public space, succeed also in acting on it. The heightened theatricality of enthusiasm, translated into the gestural sphere, thrusts itself performatively into the world. Enthusiasm's affective surplus, 'effective' in this regard, spills into the public arena to overwhelm and transform it.

Choreomania, taken in this sense, implies affect and effect, as well as a (feminine, queer) theatricality that simultaneously performs its own 'too muchness' and in doing so threatens to affect—to contagion—its spectators. The Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard were a case in point: convulsions themselves were theatrical. In Foucault's terms, the possessed person's body (usually that of a woman) 'is the site of a theatre'. It is, significantly, as Jordan points out in Convulsing Bodies, the site where the medieval supplice, or torture spectacle, becomes powerful again. With the possessed nuns of Loudun, made famous in Michel de Certeau's (1925-1986) La possession de Loudun (1970) and reprised in numerous fictional and cinematic works since then, the pornographic theatre of naked bodies the nuns' convulsions represented suggests a renewed regime of biopower. The young nuns move according to the dictates—quite literally, the theatrical directing—of the pastorate, and See also Paul Regnard, Les maladies épidémiques de esprit: Sorcellerie, magnétisme, morphinisme, délire des grandeurs (Paris: E. Plon, Nourrit et Cie, 1887), 116-118. Regnard situates this narrative in a line of spontaneous recoveries from partial paralysis among hysterics at the Salpétriére and across the ages. I will return to this history in chapter 6.

13. For the full text of these edicts, see Pierre-Francois Mathieu, Histoire des miraculés et des convulsionnaires de Saint-Médard (Paris: Didier et Cie, 1864), 217-219 and 227-228.

14. See Kreiser, Miracles, Convulsions, and Ecclesiastical Politics, 175-180. Bernadac and Fourcassié describe the authorities’ vigorous handling of the affair, arguing that the events at Saint-Médard recalled the seventeenth-century insurrection known as the Fronde, considering that scenes of collective hysteria at the gravesite could become a hotbed of contagious effervescence (Les possédés, 29). De Félice suggests the Convulsionaries’ collective ecstasy recalled the origins of dramatic art, when spectators and actors alike were presumably transported outside of themselves and, thus ‘subtracted from reality’, shared in a ‘common fiction’ (Foules en délire, 241-258, 247).

15. Foucault, Les anormaux, 197.

16. Jordan, Convulsing Bodies, 87-91.

94 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE so become at once abstracted and alienated, even while they might be expressing a brand of discontentment in these performances of real pain.’’ In contrast, the convulsions performed by the eighteenth-century Convulsionaries suggest a theatrical acting-out that posits ‘abnor- mality’ in a theatre of effusive self-travesty: the Convulsionaries, while for the most part entirely serious about their miracles and political differ- ence, also played out and played at this difference, choreographing a site of resistance in Paris’s mar- gins without a notable directorate—without the intercession of a conductor of souls.’® As Hecker noted in his discussion of the Convulsionaries, wrapping them into the broader history of dance manias and epidemic disorders, the spectacles performed by these enthusiasts were enthralling: novel and comical at once. But they were also too novel, too com- ical, disrupting Parisian life with their theatrical pull. Nonetheless calling the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard ‘patients’, Hecker underlined their outlandish circus-like acts: they ‘bounded from the ground, impelled by the convulsions, like fish out of water’. ‘Some spun around on their feet with incredible rapidity, as is related of the der- vishes’, he noted; ‘others ran their heads against walls, or curved their bodies like rope-dancers, so that their heels touched their shoulders’.® Others showed more typical signs of motor dis- ease: these ‘patients were seized with convul- sions and tetanic spasms, rolled upon the ground like persons possessed, thrown into violent con- tortions of their heads and limbs, and suffered the greatest oppression, accompanied by quick- ness and irregularity of pulse. But the spectacle of their contortions prompted its own furore. This ‘novel occurrence excited the greatest sen- sation all over Paris, and an immense concourse of people resorted daily to the above-named cemetery, in order to see so wonderful a spec- tacle’.° The scene, Hecker remarked, eventually ‘degenerated’ into ‘decided insanity’.”! The ceme- tery had given rise to a fusion of psychiatric, neuromotor, and social madness: convulsions were spectacular, and though______ The Convulsionaries excited one another and, in doing so, excited their all too readily enthused compatriots. Charcot and Paul Richer (1849-1933), following Hecker's lead, argued in Les démoniaques dans l'art [Demoniacs in Art] (1887) that the convulsionary spectacle resembled St. Vitus's dance and tarantism. This reflection was earlier articulated by Louis Figuier (1819-1894) in his Histoire du merveilleux dans les temps modernes [History of the Marvellous in Modern Times] (1859-1862). Figuier described convulsions performed by one woman, Marie-Anne Vassereau, as a kind of St. Vitus's dance. For Figuier, her convulsions triggered a modern dancing epidemic that swept through Enlightenment France.

Marie-Anne Vassereau's convulsions were the spark that set the new St. Vitus's dance off, tearing through eighteenth-century Paris with infinite variations, each more miserable or comic [bouffonnes] than the next. People converged on the Saint-Médard cemetery from everywhere to participate in the shaking and quivering [frissonnements], the stiffenings [crispations] and the trembling. Whether they were ill or not, each endeavoured to convulse in their own way. It was a universal dance, a veritable tarantella. Soon, the countryside, jealous of the favours the Saint [Paris] was bestowing upon his city,

17. De Certeau writes that the physician's task, in attempting to determine whether a 'possessed' woman is actually possessed or merely feigning, is to 'see and to visit' ('voir et visiter'). Although physicians might be caught up in the emotion of the spectacle of her contorted body, verification of the truth of her possession would be assured statistically: the more such physicians performed the work of observation, the more certain their agreed readings were presumed to be.

18. Foucault describes the medieval pastorate's role of 'conducting souls' in Michel Foucault, Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collége de France 1977-1978, ed. Arnold I. Davidson, trans. Graham Burchell (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007).

19. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 137-138.

20. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 136-137.

21. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 138. The image of the cemetery becoming a 'theatre' as well as a spectacle, a fairground, a tribunal, etc. is reprised in Kreiser, Miracles, Convulsions, and Ecclesiastical Politics, 179, 243-244; Maire, ed., Les convul- sionnaires, 13; Wilson, Women and Medicine in the French Enlightenment, 18.

22. See Jean-Martin Charcot and Paul Richer, Les démoniaques dans l'art (Paris: A. Delahaye et E. Lecrosnier, 1887), 78-90. The Convulsionaries + 95 and claiming a place of its own, contrib- uted tastes of local colour to the show. To the medically attuned eye, the tetanic spasms, tympany, falling and rolling on the ground, con- tortions of the limbs, and irregular pulse all appeared to correspond to the choreomania of the Middle Ages, to the extent legible through visual archives and anecdote. While Charcot and Richer had imagined the convulsionary perfor- mances as instances of hysterical acting-out—a theatre of suffering entirely fabricated by its players—Hecker insisted that political and reli- gious excitement served as a general ecology within which such outbreaks appeared. Like the medieval dance manias, Hecker vent______ The French state of mind was still 'medieval', Hecker contended, despite French claims to Enlightenment. Although the revolution of 1789 'shook the structure of this pernicious mysticism', it was not stamped out entirely: 'even during the period of greatest excitement, . . . secret meetings were still kept up; prophetic books, by Convulsionnaires of various denominations, . . . appeared even in the most recent times'. They had done so as recently as 1828, Hecker noted, only four years before he wrote "The Dancing Mania".

Convulsionaries offered a popular theatre of aberration, characterized by contractions, paralyses, and ecstatic deliverance. In its time, it was decried as medical theatre: not just charlatanism, but a low-level comedy of cures that bedazzled the public, in the words of one disgruntled critic who complained of the scandalous performance of circus-like feats and the imposture the Convulsionaries presented under the guise of religion.

In a desperate letter denouncing their most histrionic performer, the notorious Father Bescherand (or Bécherand) de la Motte, the anonymous critic bemoaned the ridicule convulsionary theatrics brought on the institution of the church, theatrics flaunting excess and mesmerizing a fickle audience.

THEATRICAL CHOREA AND CONVULSIONARY FAKERY

The Convulsionaries' spasms and contortions were ostentatious; but they were also allegorical and, as such, instrumental in furthering the Convulsionary movement. In etchings provided by the Convulsionary apologist Carré de Montgeron (1686-1754), reproduced in Les maladies épidémiques de esprit: Sorcellerie, magnétisme, morphinisme, délire des grandeurs [Epidemic Mental Illnesses] (1887), by Charcot's student and collaborator Paul Regnard (1850-1927), a cast of characters is shown 'before' and 'after' their cure.

'La demoiselle Thibaut' (Miss Thibaut) (figs. 4.1 and 4.2) is one character, presented first in a position suggesting lethargy, as she lies on the ground, bloated, with her eyes cast upward, while a desperate friend or family member prays for her in the background. In the next image, she has seemingly regained a slimmer size and prays thankfully in turn. Marie Anne Couronneau, another Convulsionary, shown with crutches, leans back in an awkward, arched position, almost a typical arc de cercle (a back drawn like a bow) such as Charcot and his colleagues observed among so many of their 'hysteroepileptic' patients, as I discuss further in chapter 6. Again, in the next image, she is shown freely walking up stairs with her Barthelemy (Paris, 1731), n.p. See also Charles-Gaspard-Guillaume de Vintimille Du Luc, Mandement de Mgr Tarchevéque de Paris au sujet d'un écrit qui a pour titre: Dissertation sur les miracles, et en particulier sur ceux qui ont été opéreres au tombeau de M. de Paris en l'église de S. Médard de Paris; avec la Relation & les preuves de celui qui s'est fait le 3e Novembre 1730 en la personne d’Anne le Franc, de la Paroisse de S. Barthelemy (Paris: Chez Pierre Simon, 1731), n.p. 96

EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE ‘A DEMOISELLE 1 HIBAUT — romp, oe Joralade en'cet elat var un crap destine' a lensevelir ei lle mouroit, et fait mettre sur la Tonle Sa sereautejncredule se lle soit fait faire eneas de. -Avvitle ventre calle’ par un squire dine grosseur enorme, les pambes cre i rer ase ae a ite delamaia gauhe anchileser, iris ecwter, ct courerts dulceres, Lat it ecvtcher aubas deTernbeau de Mi de Paras le sg Suir 178 yrosses core enparalacic Lea pentefcs; pe ke hsfpry he nn musttresse MALADIE DE LA DEMOISELLE THIBAUT. Fec-simile d'une gravure du livee de Carré de Montgeron. FIGURE 4.1 ‘Ms. Thibaut’s Disease’ [enormous distension of the abdomen, legs, paralysis, etc.]. Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library.

crutches propped up high, as if triumphantly to demonstrate that she does not require them any longer.”’ These ‘before and after’ portraits, foreshadowing contemporary dieting advertisements, iconographically perform the passage from distemper and disorder to deliv- erance. The images show that cures happened and invite more. Captions narrate the miracu- lous transitions in pithy prose, suggesting quick snapshots encapsulating the benefits of convulsionary practice, just as Charcot and his team would later reappropriate these images as proof that convulsionary disorders partook of the broader category of hysteroepilepsy. The 27. Reproduced in Regnard, Les maladies épidémiques, 121-130. Regnard notes that Mlle. Thibaut’s case was attributed to hydropia by Carré de Montgeron but would in his own time be described as meteorism with hysterical contracture (125). He pro- vides further similarly illustrated case studies culled primarily from Montgeron and Mathieu (see esp. 118-171), noting that by 1732 the Saint-Médard cemetery was a rendez-vous for all the hysterics of Paris (‘le rendez-vous de tout ce qu'il y avait d’hystériques a Paris’), and the site of a ‘whole new Saint Vitus’s dance, resuscitated in the eighteenth century in the very heart of Paris’ (171). The Convulsionaries + 97

LADEMOISELLE UHIBAUT st guerie sur lechamp IoD? jourig Juin in By Tous sei membres hidnepigues replete lave tis pectaryele loan once sr le Tomb frien joiynantlsmains gue son bras gauche cy devant parelitigue, ebsis doite cy de Pant aie sec etcourerts diukeres, soubguerisy Sa servante, gui luyymetses pentowfes) Poppe diétenneimentde voir ses pieds sifortet st subitement edosenfleks « GUERISON DE LA DEMOISELLE THIBAUT. Fae-simile d______ The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Hystero-epileptics were too theatrical: their effusive poses and jagged gestures revealed a disorganization of the mind moving a theatrical body. In Les démoniaques, Charcot and Richer discuss an engraving of a crowd scene around Paris’s tomb, noting that one person sprawled on the floor, as if in an epileptic seizure, is not actually frothing at the mouth or rolling the eyes; this person has fallen but is not actually suffering from epilepsy (fig. 4.3). Other characters, in this and similar images, displayed further stages of so-called miraculous intercession, 28. Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 88-89n1. 98 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE LES GRANDS skcoURS Fae simile Wune gravure de B. Pieart exteaite des Cérémozics et coutumes de lous tes peuples, ete. FIGURE 4.3 the New York Academy of Medicine Library. presenting an overview of convulsionary events uncannily resembling and ostensibly prefiguring the poses Charcot’s patients would take.” While recognizing arched backs and upward-rolling eyes among the subjects depicted in these engravings, Charcot also noted the same among his patients, further cementing the link between past and present corporeal forms and so, too, the backward reach of modern clinical neurology. He and Richer concluded that from the most ancient forms of ritual possession to present-day clinical hysteria, the ‘exaltation of the emotions has not changed’. Their task was to parse this anatomically, morphologically, and dramaturgically and so to recuperate past disorders into the contemporary scientific fold. ‘The grands secours’. From Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques dans lart (1887). Courtesy Yet with this scientific method, ambiguity played a fair part, as did fiction: these were attitudes, poses, tableaux, theatrics, ‘representations’ that performed just as they enacted a rigid sequence of events.*! They were also not always entirely involuntary: Regnard quotes a long account provided by the nineteenth-century historian Pierre-Frangois Mathieu (1808-1864) in his Histoire des miraculés et des convulsionnaires de Saint-Médard [History of the Miraculously Cured and the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard] (1864) which suggests that some of the Convulsionaries performed deliberate actions, often together, so as to imitate or represent moments of Paris’s life. These actions were strung together with a set of further theatrical tableaux, involving spectators 29. In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 82. 30. In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 85. 31. The term ‘representation’ appears in various passages. See e.g. Jean-Martin Charcot, CEuvres complétes [hereafter Charcot, wvres completes], ed. Désiré Magloire Bourneville et al., 9 vols., vol. 3 (Paris: Bureaux du progrés médical, 1886-1890), 219-220. The Convulsionaries +» 99 in a mini-drama that he called ‘comedy’ (‘le comique’). Other ‘actresses’ engaged in tragic or tragi-comic performances of ecstasy, representing Christ’s passion, which they ‘expressed through their movements and gestures’, embodying every detail that might supplement the scene; Mathieu termed these movements ‘figurative’ (‘figuratives’), Another brand of theatrical Convulsionary Mathieu classed as visionaries or ‘ap______ "Notwithstanding the dismissive tone with which Mathieu taxonomizes these convulsion-ary performers, the choreography of pain and cure that they enacted suggests a public display of religious autonomy away from the disciplinary sphere of church and state. As collective expressions of pious enthusiasm, the Convulsionaries offered playful and also arguably powerful portraits of women (and men) taking religion into their own hands. This was a choreopolitics of revolt through corporeal acts of mimicry and representation.

But for Charcot and his nineteenth-century audience, paralyses and contractures presented a different set of problems. Convulsionaries were not only acting out; they displayed a cast of specific, recognizable bodily deformities and falls. What are now typically described as non-epileptic seizures or pseudo-seizures, with no special brain wave activity (no EEG abnormality), account for nearly a quarter of hospital admittances for epilepsy today.** In Charcot's time, these were described as convulsions with a semi-conscious intent, translated into the language of hysteria, imposture, or forgery.

Freud, who kept a lithograph of the famous painting by Pierre Aristide André Brouillet (1857-1914), 'Une leçon clinique à la Salpétrière' [A Clinical Lesson at the Salpétrière] (1887) of his teacher Charcot's famous Lecons du mardi [Tuesday Lessons] in his studies in Vienna and London, attempted to dig at the root of these pseudo-performances, taking Charcot's Lecons sur les maladies du système nerveux [Lessons on the Diseases of the Nervous System] (1875-1887)— whose authorized translation he offered to a German readership in 1886 as Neue Vorlesungen über die Krankheiten des Nervensystems, insbesonderer über Hysterie—into the realm of psychology. But these were complex psychosomatic events, whose designation as a disease and as theatre did not sufficiently explain, let alone diagnose, the knot of goings-on.

Ambiguity concerning cases of 'real' and 'hysterical' epilepsy was hotly debated, among others by the English neurologist and contemporary of Charcot William Gowers (1845-1915), who wrote that 'the convulsions that are called “hysterical”' are normally characterized by 'spasmodic movements of a more or less coordinated character'. These muscular contractions are, Gowers noted, 'in the main, such as may be produced by the will. Hence', he added, 'the spasm has a somewhat purposive aspect'. This 'purposive aspect' often lent hysteroepileptic patients the allure of theatrical performers.

The French physicians Louis Jacques Bégin (1793-1859), Francois-Gabriel Boisseau (1791-1836), and others defined 'Convulsionaries' in their Dictionnaire des termes de médecine, chirurgie, art vétérinaire, pharmacie, histoire naturelle, botanique, physique, chimie, etc. [Dictionary of Medical, Surgical, Veterinary, Pharmaceutical, Natural History, Botany, Physics, Chemistry, etc., Terms] (1823) as feigned or actual invalids. The ambivalence of the definition was fundamental." The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

(2000): 280-281, 280. For a recent overview of literature and estimates, see Hannah Wiseman and Markus Reuber, ‘New Insights into Psychogenic Non-epileptic Seizures 2011-2014)’, Seizure: European Journal of Epilepsy 29 (2015): 69-80. Gaston Baslet, Ashok Seshadri, Adriana Bermeo-Ovalle, Ken Willment, and Lorna Myers suggest ‘up to 30% of admissions to epilepsy monitoring units are diagnosed with PNES [psychogenic non-epileptic seizures] at discharge’, with the total incidence of PNESs per year estimated at between 1.4 and 4.9 per 100,000. Gaston Baslet et al., ‘Psychogenic Non-epileptic Seizures: An Updated Primer’, Psychosomatics 57.1 (2016): 1-17, doi: 10.1016/j.psym.2015.10.004, accessed 3 March 2016. See the recently much-expanded standard text by A. James Rowan and John R. Gates, in Steven C. Schachter and W. Curt LaFrance Jr., eds., Gates and Rowan's Nonepileptic Seizures, 3rd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010). 34. Cited in Don W. King et al., ‘Convulsive Non-epileptic Seizures’, in A. James Rowan and John R. Gates, eds., Non-epileptic Seizures (Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1993), 31-37, 31. See W. Gowers, Epilepsy and Other Chronic Convulsive Disorders: Their Causes, Symptoms and Treatment (London: J. A. Churchill, 1881). 100 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE The term ‘Convulsionnaire’ was used ‘in the past’, they noted, to describe ‘people in whom religious ideas or the hope of a dishonest wage provoked real convulsions or, alternately, voluntary con- tortions’.*> Convulsionaries were by definition either real or fake, either actors or agents. What mattered was that their contortions had all the appearance of theatre. It was increasingly this very theatricality that neurologists and psychiatrists sought (indirectly) to diagnose. Enlightenment philosophers had long ago jumped on the anti-theatrical bandwagon, declaring these convulsionary events to be— offensively—like theatre: the encycloped- ist Jean Le Rond d’Alembert (1717-1837), who attended some convulsionary activi- ties clandestinely with Charles Marie de La Condamine (1701-1774), a French geographer and explorer, proposed that the convulsionar- ies gained their public appeal through secrecy, enhancing the notorious drama of the whole affair. The Enlightenment philosopher Voltaire (1694-1778) argued that this convulsionary theatre was extreme and dangerous; in his view, it enacted the public performance of resistance to the papal bull. As historian Lindsay Wilson has argued, by the later part of the eighteenth century, the term ‘Convulsionary’ itself had become equated not just with shamming but with fanaticism.** For some authors, including the literary critic Charles-Augustin Sainte-Beuve (1804-1869) and the abbé Paul Gagnol (1850-1928),______ The ridicule prompted by the Convulsionaries’ feats soon came to inspire countless satires further dramatizing what were already patently theatrical games. From a semi-haphazard performance of miraculous cures and resistance to regal and papal authority, new dramas emerged, flung gaily into the arms of a Parisian public all too avid to judge and laugh at—as well as with—the agents of this overenthusastic performance of pain; but not before the performers themselves were driven underground, further adding to the mystery and mystique, the inscrutability and the opacity, of the Convulsionaries’ collective acts.

Guillaume-Hyacinthe Bougeant and the Jansenist Comic Pere Bucherand

Once the deacon's tomb had become outlawed as a site for Convulsionaries' activities, convulsionary enthusiasts had to find new sites for the performance of their pain. But they had already made a lasting impression on Parisian society: satires emerged, most notably by the Jesuit playwright Guillaume-Hyacinthe Bougeant (1690-1743) in his trio of works Apologie des miracles faits ou a faire au tombeau de M. de Paris [Apology for Miracles Performed or To Be Performed at Mr. Paris's Tomb] (1732), Le Saint déniché, ou la Banqueroute des marchands de miracles [The Saint Exposed, or, Bankruptcy of the Miracle Peddlers] (1732), and Les Quakres françois, ou les Nouvelles trembleurs, comédie [The French Quakers, or the New Tremblers, Comedy] (1732).

In these plays, Bougeant casts the Convulsionaries as actors in a ridiculous drama meant for the diversion of an equally ridiculous audience, entertained by improbable theatrics sustained by individuals most of whom were believed to be totally out of their senses. The events at Paris's tomb were cast as histrionics prompted by the audience's insatiable thirst for amusement, the 'great troupe" of acrobats and trapezists giving its regular show twice daily for the public's benefit. The dangerous feats the convulsionary performers executed only added to an already titillating experience, colored by its marginal urban location and anti-constitutionnaire hue. The most famous of the Convulsionaries was Father Bescherand, known for his ‘sauts de la carpe’, wild carp-like leaps performed in spite of a famously bad limp. In Les Quakres Francois ou les nouveaux trembleurs, Bougeant satirizes Father Bescherand as a complex plot unfolds to grace this virtuosic Convulsionary with a troupe of men and women paid to jump and leap with him so that he does not look so absurd performing his antics alone. In the play, M. du Sault (homonymously suggesting Mr. Jump) is a thinly veiled portrait of Bescherand. Bougeant claimed in his preface that the real man had made such a spectacle of himself to the city of Paris and to all of France already that it was only fitting his performance should find a new life in the theatre.

At first persuaded by M. Hablador (Mr. Smooth-talking), a Moliére-type doctor, and M. de Bonnefoy (Mr. Good Faith), a not-so-pious Jansenist priest, to leap about the deacon's tomb until the blood flowed through his bad leg, pumping and extending it by a few inches, M. du Sault eventually tires of this. He complains that he understands the principle— though he argues that if the blood extends his bad leg, it could extend and bloat the rest of his body as well—but all he has gained in the process is exhaustion. Even the spectators were starting to tire of this performance. 'If you want me to continue', M. du Sault tells M. de Bonnefoy, 'you need to find me a partner, or two or three, to imitate my movements. It is absurd, and scandalous, that out of so many people who come to pray at the deacon's tomb, I should be the only one to have convulsions, which, I have noted, are anyway starting to wear on the spectators?'

Du Sault would serve as a model for a small group of adepts, all of whom were to help him create a drama of pain more plausible because of the number of people performing it. This scenario poked fun at the supposed fakeries of the Convulsionaries, as well as the behind-the-scenes work of local doctors, cast as charlatans. The play also suggested that these leaps and bounds offered a performance of disorder and distress to an audience growing in intensity; but these convulsionary antics, as theatre, were displacing the religious and revolutionary cause. Bougeant's satire hardly exaggerated public opinion. A notice had not long before been posted at the entrance to the Saint-Médard cemetery, proclaiming that the Convulsionaries' pious exercises had devolved into a regular acrobatic show:

PUBLIC NOTICE, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, THE GREAT TROUPE OF JUMPERS AND ACROBATS OF SR. PARIS, which has until now sought only the pleasure and edification of those who do it the honor of coming to watch it, will give its regular performance evening and morning for the convenience of the public. Mr. Bécheran the Lame, who here has the honor of entertaining the princes and princesses, lords and ladies of the Court with success and applause will continue his regular exercises until the extinction of his strength, and for the satisfaction of the curious will perform many times the new and dangerous leap, holding himself only on his own two feet and with the help of only three people. The rest of the troupe will forget nothing to merit the esteem and goodwill of those who will honor its performance.

Although cast as an epidemic disease and hysterical disorder by neurologists and historians looking back on these events a century later, religious 39. See Kreiser, Miracles, Convulsions, and Ecclesiastical Politics, 176n106. 40. Kreiser, Miracles, Convulsions, and Ecclesiastical Politics, 176.
41. Kreiser, Miracles, Convulsions, and Ecclesiastical Politics, 176n106.
42. 'Au moins si vous voulez que je continué, il faut necessairement que vous me trouviez quelque compagnon, & s'il se peut, plusieurs, qui sachent imiter mes mouvements. De tant de gens qui viennent prier au saint Tombeau, il est ridicule, & méme scandaleux, que je sois le seul a avoir des Convulsions, dont entre nous je m/apperçois qu’on se lasse, pour ne rien dire de plus'. Guillaume-Hyacinthe Bougeant, Les Quakres francois ou les nouveaux trembleurs. Comédie (Utrecht: H. Khyrks le Jeune, 1732), 12.
43. Cited in Kreiser, Miracles, Convulsions, and Ecclesiastical Politics, 176n106.

102 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE zealots and opportunists of every stripe were not duped at the time: this was popular entertainment, and it was a popular religious exercise. Some miracles may have taken place at the start; but now the convulsionary happenings presented an occasion for play. Amateur actors and acrobats joined in with the rest. As Bougeant's theatre rehearsed the Convulsionaries' popular leaps and bounds, performers and devotees alike occupied the parish cemetery with an ever evolving set of stunts and pranks.

In Le saint déniché ou la banqueroute des marchands de miracles, Bougeant exploits comic antics derived from the performance of a supposed convulsive attack. He stages a character named M. Gautier, a Jansenist convert and fervent believer in the convulsionary miracles, suffering an episode of convulsions upon donning a fake relic wig (supposedly belonging to Father Quesnel) purchased at an exorbitant price and 'delivered' to him by his mischievous servant, Mathurin.

"M. Gautier, resembling a warlock on his way home from a sabbath, in Mathurin's insubordinate view (the wig is tangled, rendering it all the more 'real'), comes to be overtaken with emotion: 'Wait. What do I feel? All my blood, I think, is shaken by some extraordin- ary motion. Mathurin, quick, quick, a chair'". Mathurin, bringing a chair to his master, asks him what is wrong. 'A chair, I tell you, a chair', replies M. Gautier who, sitting, then sighing in relief, tells him: 'Ouf . . . I think I am having convulsions'. Mathurin replies, 'confusions?' to which M. Gautier responds, indignantly: 'Shut up, you idiot, it's a miracle'.

Bougeant's mockery of these supposed miracles unfolds as a whole cast of paralytic and otherwise misshapen characters are summoned to become subjects of miraculous cures. M. Caffart, another Jansenist Moliére-type doctor, intent on proving the reality of the miracles occurring at the deacon's tomb, explains to M. Gautier that a paralytic man has recovered his mobility, as was certified by a doctor, a surgeon, and a local priest. Yet when this man is made to demonstrate his recovery, the sceptic M. Germain, M. Gautier's cousin, points out that although he was previously paralysed in his left arm, he is now paralysed in the right. M. Caffart's sole response to this—and to other accusations that his host of paralytic and otherwise physically challenged characters are fakes— is that Saint Paris does not perform perfect miracles: 'that time has passed'. What's more, he was still in his apprenticeship stage.

This theatrical mockery by a Jesuit______ The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

These included writing by Jansenist converts and the most outspoken and prolific of all, Montgeron, for whom convulsionary feats were acts of God. Yet the legacy of ridicule was set: a proliferation of tracts, etchings, and other visual sources amplified the popular appeal of this phenomenon—not quite a dance but a form of agitated gesticulation and collective theatre of motion that drew comparisons to dancing manias and other psychic and hysteroepileptic epidemics for some time. As the physician and hypnotist Anton Mesmer (1734-1815), father of ‘mesmerism’, saw it, the Convulsionaries' gesticulations theatricalized the complex imbrication of cause, symptom, and cure, informing his and his followers' own studies of animal magnetism. As with Charcot's hysteroepileptic patients, the Convulsionaries' gestures appeared to stem from tantalizingly invisible sources, useful in articulating psychological theories of illusion.

A ‘TRANSPORT CHARACTERISTIC OF DELIRIUM’: DANSOMANIES ON THE VAUDEVILLE STAGE
Choreomania epitomized corporeal and affective overzealousness. As a potentially revolutionary affect and ‘effect’, which could be experienced by 44, Guillaume-Hyacinthe Bougeant, Le saint déniché ou la banqueroute des marchands de miracles. Comédie (La Haye: Pierre Oiseau, a la Cycongne, 1732), 93-96. 45. Bougeant, Le saint déniché, 93. 46. Bougeant, Le saint déniché, 102-111. 47. See debates collected in Dissertation sur les miracles. See also Louis-Basile Carré de Montgeron, La vérité des miracles opérés par intercession de M. de Paris, Démontrée contre M. lArchevéque de Sens. Ouvrage dédié au Roy. Par M. de Montgeron, conseiller au parlement (Utrecht: Libraires de la Compagnie, 1737). 48, See Maire, Les convulsionnaires, 238-240; Wilson, Women and Medicine in the French Enlightenment, esp. 10-16, 104-124.

The Convulsionaries + 103 those engaging in it and by those watching from near or far away, spontaneous and excessive gesture signalled the possibility of a social body falling into disarray and reconstituting itself along different lines. Choreomania represented marginality, insignificance, and ‘too muchness’, derided in the public sphere; but also the slightly worrying energetic excess of social revolt. Dance manias afforded vaudeville entertainers opportunities for a spoof not only on overzealous acts of national or religious emotion but also on the medical gaze that overzealously in its turn saw this excess nationalism and religiosity as a disorder in its own right.

In La dansomanie, folie-pantomime, en deux actes [The Dancing Mania, Folie-Pantomime, in Two Acts], a comic ballet that premiered at the Théatre de la République et des Arts (precursor to the Opéra de Paris) in June 1800, the long-standing opera choreographer Pierre Gardel (1758-1840) prefaced the text of his ballet with an apology to the reader for the ‘audacity’ (‘hardiesse’) of his coinage: he could not, he claims, find a better word to describe the particular sort of madness (‘folie’) suffered by his protagonist than to call him a ‘dansomane’______ "Gardel's revolutionary sympathies in particular had prompted him to become involved in choreographing patriotic fêtes and anarchist theatre in the years following the French Revolution. With La Danseomanie, he showcased the common man and woman in a comic spoof that prefigured an emergent national discourse on monomania in psychiatric analysis. Gardel did this with a satirically light touch. The sort of madness his protagonist suffers is benign: M. Duléger (Mr. Lightfoot) is so obsessed with dancing that he refuses to allow his daughter to marry a man who cannot perform sufficiently skillful rondes de jambe, entrechats, and jetés-battus, until the girl's mother conspires with her vassals and her husband's dance teacher to trick him into awarding their daughter to the best dancer at a mock competition they stage at a masquerade ball. M. Duléger falls for the trick, and his daughter happily marries her intended.

Besides offering a pretext for executing virtuosic steps on the stage, this comic play of dancing prowess brings into view a portrait of the protagonist that pokes fun at his obsessiveness. So, while dance historians Lisa Arkin and Marian Smith have suggested that national character dances occupied as much space on the Romantic stage as the ethereal portraits of sylphs that have predominated in contemporary imaginings of the period, the playful exaggeration of national traits also aligned itself with a new psychiatric language of excess.

M. Duléger suffers from a 'transport characteristic of delirium' ('transport qui tient du délire') and a 'dancing religion'. He is described as 'ridiculous' and single-minded. Although arguably a spoof on Moliére's (1622-1673) Le malade imaginaire [The Imaginary Invalid] (1673) and other pre-revolutionary works staging the decadent bourgeoisie and laughable doctor class, Gardel's operatic ballet spoof was also taking a far more serious leap into the comic world of national disorder. Nation was increasingly a site for the contestation of normalcy: personal obsessions aligning themselves with new national characteristics provided occasions for the theatrical display of comic deviance. These deviants identified too much with the new nation; they were overly enthusiastic, effusive, and prone to spontaneous displays, including singing, dancing, and gambolling in public.

Whereas certain instances of deviant behaviour accompanied radical agitation, others merely performed gestural impetuosity in a public show of slightly disruptive disinhibition. This slightly reconfigures the notion of 'partial madness' Foucault argues predominated until about 1850; from then on, he suggests, there were no halfway measures with the mad: they were either entirely insane or they were not so." They had to be either entirely culpable when committing a crime or misdemeanor, or not culpable on account of madness. With the integration of juridical and medical power in the second half of the nineteenth century, madness became a condition different from déraison; one could not consciously 'act out', inasmuch as one could not simultaneously and knowingly hold, let alone perform, a fictitious and a real identity, one of which would be revealed in the theatricalization of the other.*> This was where, as I will detail later, a new brand of neuropsychiatric and neurological research would take over the work of decoding convulsive and other bodily signs, through historiographic and performative fieldwork in the clinic and beyond. These signs came to stand for the significantly involuntary actions of a body not able to express itself through other means. The cavernous depths of psychic disturbance in the nether reaches of primitive impulse paved the way for excavators like Charcot, Mesmer, and later Freud to activate and 'read' what seemed like a subtextual message. Yet early nineteenth-century psychiatry, and the monomaniacal fixations its subjects seemingly expressed, suggested a surface order of reality in which bodily signs such as convulsions held far less weight as a cipher. These were merely accidents in a general regime of accidents, for which there were multiple sites of performance and power. Monomania, in the genealogy this chapter tells, constituted not only a troubling form of partial madness but, more dramatically, a hyperbolic sameness, an overidentification with national and other often comical types.

REVOLUTIONARY SCENES OF EXCESS: THE NEW NATION
At the cusp of a century of new nationalisms, marked by the Congress of Vienna in 1814-1815 and the revolutions of 1848, leading to the unifications of Germany and Italy and uprisings throughout the Habsburg Empire, geopolitical territories around the world were defining new borders, ushering in a shift towards state autonomy and patriotic discourse. Concomitant with this was increasing attention to nations themselves as receptacles for the production and performance of collective affect; in turn, I argue, heightened instances of nationally tinged affective display were recast as a medical conundrum and psychiatric disease. So although Foucault has convincingly argued that the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were times of acute medicalization when nearly everything began to fall into the purview of police and state discipline, enabled by a castigating, judicially allied medical gaze, and although he has decisively shown that medical authority increasingly rationalized forms of deviance along political lines the better to sideline marginals (what he called, after Canguilhem, 'abnormals'),°° another look at nineteenth-century medical and psychiatric writings suggests that physicians were also interested in collective figures representing—often performing—slightly exaggerated national politics. More specifically, the theatricalization of national affect played out on stages and in the pages of medical compendia suggests that individual dispositions to act out according to exaggerated national types provoked as much interest and controversy as did individual attempts to deviate from a supposed political norm. Slavoj Zizek has described strategies of over-identification as subversive means to critique political regimes through subtle acts 54. See especially Foucault, Les anormaux, 145. Foucault argues that in the mid-nineteenth century, 'psychiatry becomes [the power of] medical jurisdiction over every sort of behaviour.' He attributes this specifically to a shift around 1845-1847 from the approach taken by Esquirol—whom Foucault considers the last of France's aliénistes—which emphasized the question of madness (‘folie’), as of a relation to truth (‘rapport à la vérité’), as opposed to that taken by Jules Baillarger (1809-1890)—whom Foucault calls the first of France's psychiatrists—which emphasized instead the distinction between voluntary and involuntary, instinctive and automatic, processes at the heart of 'mental illness'. Foucault, Les anormaux, 147-148. On Foucault’s ongoing analysis of the interpenetration of juridical and psychiatric reason in the nineteenth century, see also Michel Foucault, ed., Moi, Pierre Riviere, ayant égorgé ma mère, ma sœur et mon frère ... Un cas de parricide au XIXe siècle (Paris: Gallimard, 1973).

See especially Foucault, Les anormaux; Georges Canguilhem, The Normal and the Pathological, with an Introduction by Michel Foucault, trans. Carolyn R. Fawcett with Robert $. Cohen (New York: Zone Books, 1991). The Convulsionaries + 105 of performative exaggeration, but portraits of national enthusiasts in the pages of early nineteenth-century psychiatric literature suggest that few boasted such clear agendas. On the contrary, expressions of comically exaggerated national character showcased a different sort of transgressive excess and zeal. These enthusiasts drew their contemporaries’ medical attention and social mockery on account of their indulgence in pleasure and close sympathy with others: they were too French or too Spanish, too much into dancing or too morbid. Enthusiasm—particularly for other people’s cultures as well as one’s own—seemed liable to become as hazardous as any display of the 'dangerous individuality' Foucault has described. While elsewhere concerned with displays of individual difference, early psychiatrists were also intent on describing how enthusiasm could spread within groups and transpire across them, provoking instances of social porosity that might stimulate broader—genuinely grievous—social or political revolts. The lessons of the French Revolution were still being learned, and the heights of agitation that had led throngs of people violently to occupy public space and dispossess the aristocracy had physicians and early social commentators busily scratching their heads. In the shadow of Napoleon’s invasion of Spain in 1808, Le procés du Fandango ou la fandango-manie, comédie-vaudeville, en un acte [The Trial of the Fandango or Fandangomania, Vaudeville Comedy in One Act], by Jean-Baptiste Radet (1752-1830), Pierre-Yvon Barré (1749-1832), and Frangois-Georges Fouques Desfontaines (1733-1825), first performed at the Théatre du Vaudeville in Paris in 1809, theatricalizes the ambivalence and threats of excessive identification with other nations—suddenly and confusingly now also one’s own. In this play, a legal battle is staged to determine whether residents of the small village of Saint-Jean de Luz, on the Spanish border, should be permitted to indulge in a new Spanish dance fashion: the fandango, introduced by a Spanish dance teacher and posing, as its detractors argued, a grave threat to the upright men of the town left in the dust by the lively widows and other young people getting wind of this seductive and 'extravagant' new dance. The supposed dangers presented by the dance's lead critic, M. Clopineau (Mr. Hobble), draw on the irrational excesses to which such dancing purportedly led its enthusiasts: Mme. Folignac (Mrs. Crazymer, a love-struck widow), like M. Duléger in La dansomanie, was a self-avowed 'dansomane', a choreomaniac, because she was 'crazy about dancing'.° Although she owned her choreomania proudly, arguing that it was 'delicious' and 'fabulous' to experience such a happy and 'tender delirium',° the tribunal of husbands and jealous men led by M. Clopineau complained that this type of dancing—very different from the composed, stately, supposedly honest (and emphatically French) minuet—disturbed the public peace, as the enthusiasts' feet got the better of their minds.° The problem was not simply that they danced too much; they danced too fervently and, one is led to understand, in a passionate manner that was locally alien. Yet at the end of the play, the audience is asked to weigh in on the debate and tacitly give their approval to the new dance form in a spirited call to arms: women should not be locked up in the home, the tribunal's supporters claimed, but allowed to dance freely and gaily wherever they please. The dance enthusiasts win their case, and an example of the fandango is executed onstage with flourish by M. Gavotino, the Spanish dance teacher, and his avid dance student. Dancing, equated with libertinism and a Spanish-inflected—as well as a patently feminine—passion, is targeted for threatening to disrupt the masculine moral order, on gendered as well as on national grounds. M. Gavotino is unmistakably Spanish, just as M. Duléger, although French, was instructed by a dance teacher who disguised himself and his co-conspirators in national dress (Turkish, Chinese, and Basque) to enact the mock dance competition in La dansomanie. In both cases, dancing is depicted through the performance of national traits, enabling the comic portrayal of talent. Radet et al., Le procés du Fandango, 23.

In this regard, choreomania was a disease not of excess movement only but of overindulgence in national pastimes. It was idle and zealous; feminine and (usually) foreign; and, most of all, it performed an energetic surfeit at odds with modern nations' celebration of what Marx in 1867 would describe as measured physiological expenditure, necessary for the efficient accumulation of capital in a labour economy.° Men and women frolicking about in a public show of kinetic zeal were liberated but ridiculous, failing properly to harness the sort of national enthusiasm necessary for them to perform an industrious model citizenry. Yet in their zeal, they were rehearsing the sort of leisure—and pleasure— economy that would cement nations to their imagined histories and cultural inheritances in the incipient discourse on national culture. Benedict Anderson (1936-2015) describes all while covertly exercising their right to public corporeal jouissance. Modern nations, while explicitly celebrating traditions of social display largely invented, in Anderson’s terms, for the sake of social cohesion, paradoxically tended to overlook just the sort of collective corporeal ebullience that nurturing and transforming these cultural conventions requires.

MONOMANIA: A ‘DISEASE OF CIVILIZATION’

The nineteenth-century choreography of national affect was reflected in a host of psychiatric theories accounting for a mood of heightened public theatricality. So, too, dance, according to McCarren, represented the pathological expression of heightened affect. As McCarren shows, the Romantic heroine Giselle, in Théophile Gautier’s (1811-1872) eponymous 1841 ballet, suffers from an excess of emotion in the most famous mad scene of the nineteenth century, epitomizing the notion that dance represents madness as such; and that madness, in this view, is bodily, unspeaking, and so quintessentially feminine. Yet the libretto, which depicts a young peasant woman in the medieval countryside who dances herself to death, plausibly also drew from stories of medieval dance manias beginning to circulate at the time; with this in mind, Giselle’s dance depicts a complex of medical stories: not only chorea or syphilis, but choreomania, a dancing mania, individualized. That Giselle should have danced herself to death suggests a form of monomaniacal obsessiveness with dancing that was intently theorized in the nineteenth century and was dramatically portrayed in Andersen’s nearly contemporaneous story, The Red Shoes (1845), in which the hapless heroine dances herself to death as a result of wanting to dance too much. As with the story of Giselle, the significance of the red shoes reprises widely circulating tales of medieval dance manias, tales in which dancers react violently to the color red. Figures of the medieval danse macabre or Dance of Death were also by the nineteenth century well known (chapter 2), but the frisson provided by tales of St. Vitus’s dance as a deadly epidemic also reflected the new psychiatric discourse on obsessive fixation. As such, stories of dancing diseases provoked a new phantasm: the idea that people could dance themselves to death was itself in the nineteenth century a puzzle and an obsession. That one could do anything obsessively, to the point of death, signalled a form of affective excess that if left unchecked, moralists suggested, could lead to class and national transgressions, among other things. Overidentifying with others meant one could lose a sense of one’s own rank. Prosper Lucas (1808-1885), in his doctoral thesis at the Faculté de Médecine in Paris, offered one of the earliest studies of imitative ‘monomanias’ or obsessive fixations, arguing in De limitation contagieuse, ou de la propagation sympathique des névroses et des monomanies [Of Contagious Imitation, or, Of the Sympathetic Propagation of Neuroses and Monomanias] (1833) that popular movements had become a source of monomania in recent years. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Ed. (London: Verso, 2006). The Convulsionaries + 107

Increasingly political, the Convulsionaries took a more political stance, imitative monomanias emerged, leading to government reforms that sometimes resulted in social alienation and provoked agitation of the body politic, resulting in disturbing acts of social revolt and collective madness.

Esquirol, one of the founders of modern psychiatry, argued that all manic disorders had national or historical conditions at their root. All manias, Esquirol thought, should be seen as 'monomanias', including the monomania for dancing. In his monumental Des Maladies Mentales [Of Mental Illness] (1838), Esquirol wrote: "mono-mania... borrows its character . . . from the various ages of the societies in which it is found", In more 'advanced' societies, it is characterized by pride, faithlessness, ambition, gaming, despair, and suicide. Monomania, Esquirol argued, was thus the disease of civilization par excellence ('la maladie de la civilisation').

Although this characterization was considered true of madness ('folie') in general, for Esquirol monomania offered more insight into the intense expressions of passionate affect that marked societies at all times. Monomania, he argued, ought to be considered not only mere obsession but also an extreme heightening of the characteristics of a given culture.

In France, he argued, a new form of monomania had emerged with the disintegration of the old system of religious belief and the rise of the police force: this was paranoia, a new type of persecution delirium, which filled the halls of mental asylums. During the French Revolution and ensuing periods, various forms of monomania had emerged, he noted, each characterized by circumstantial factors: in 1791 in Versailles, a prodigious number of suicides were reported by Pinel, who attributed these to widespread imitation of the French revolutionary figure Georges Jacques Danton (1759-1794).

Similarly, 'superstitious' monomanias had re-emerged after the pope's visit to France; and in the age of empire, many monomaniacs believed they were emperors or kings. The war against Spain had produced its own monomanias, spurred on by terror. In ancient history, Stoics had killed themselves out of pride, and the Japanese killed themselves out of excess virtue. These were all culturally specific forms of national delirium.

For Esquirol, 'the state of a society exercises a considerable influence on the production and character of monomania. The study of this form of disease', he argued, 'thus requires knowledge of the customs and habits of each people'. He was putting forward a concept of psychiatry founded in the description of cultural characteristics whose excesses presented cases of mental alienation. Nation, in this view, constituted one of the main categories for taxonomizing disease.

As I show further in chapter 7, comparison was emerging as a method of choice for scientific analysis, emphasizing variations across nations and eras, occasionally complicated by the intensity of the similarities between them. One such similarity in particular troubled Esquirol: 'convulsions have occurred in all eras, because they depend as much on the organism as on the imagination', he wrote, 'complicating all forms of mental alienation'. Unlike national behaviors and beliefs, convulsions were symptomatic of various disorders all over the world. This complicated the view that psychiatric diseases were determined by national characteristics. The following text is cleaned up and separated into separate paragraphs:

For Esquirol’s student, the psychiatrist Louis-Florentin Calmeil (1798-1895), quoted in the epigraph to chapter 3, the mind alone was at fault. Choreomania, in Calmeil’s terms, was a type of monomania in which the patient evinced an overzealous passion for dance, in contrast to other forms of monomania, such as vampirism or somnambulism.® And although religious deliria and other types of madness typically produced spasmodic muscular convulsions and hallucinatory phenomena, choreomania, Calmeil thought, should not be defined solely in psycho-motor terms. It was, like other monomanias, a product of extreme single-mindedness only. This was ostensibly what M. Duléger and Mme. Folignac suffered from in La dansomanie and La 64.

Prosper Lucas, De limitation contagieuse, ou de la propagation sympathique des névroses et des monomanies (Paris: Didot le Jeune, 1833), 69-70.

65. Etienne Esquirol, Des maladies mentales considérées sous le rapport médical, hygiénique et médico-légal, 2 vols., vol. 1 (Paris: J- B. Bailliére, 1838), 400.

66. Esquirol, Des maladies mentales, vol. 1, 400-401.

67. Esquirol, Des maladies mentales, vol. 1, 516.

68. Calmeil, De la folie, vol. 1, 81.

69. 'Assez souvent', he writes, 'on voit . . . la lésion des sentiments religieux s'associer A la lésion des sens et Ala perversion des mouvements volontaires. Les hallucinations qui font croire a Yobsession diabolique, les tressaillements spasmodiques, les 108 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE fandangomanie, although both were eventually acquitted of their obsessions in narratives that promised audiences their own merriment to come. At the close of the tribunal staged in La fandon-gomanie, the audience is invited to celebrate the dancing duo and implicitly to take its side, on the promise that in doing so they too will have a chance to dance after the show is over. This was a far cry from the inflated language of social plague that would set medical writers off to the four corners of the colonial world and into the trenches of national archives to find extravagant examples of dancing manias with which to bewilder their polite readers.

In Calmeil's account, choreomania seems rather unthreatening. Although he describes it in terms of collective folly and epidemic madness, it frequently adds up to little more than a highly spirited fête. Describing a case of choreomania in Apulia in the seventeenth century in De la folie, considérée sous le point de vue pathologique, philosophique, historique et judiciaire, depuis la renaissance des sciences en Europe jusquau dix-neuviéme siécle [On Madness, Considered from a Pathological, Philosophical, Historical, and Legal Point of View, from the Renaissance of the Sciences in Europe to the Nineteenth Century] (1845), Calmeil wrote: 'youth ... has a passion for balls, flying, as if compelled by some secret instinct, to every party [féte] in sight as long as some glimmer of hope for happiness [bonheur] is to be found there. Some care only to dance, and deliver themselves to this with an ardour that appears to partake of a sort of frenzy'.”” Music served as a powerful stimulant, so that, Calmeil wrote, 'the impulse transmitted to the sensory nervous system via the musical instruments acts on the choreomaniacs by pro- ducing an irresistible transport, translated exter- nally into a succession of rh______ The following text is a cleaned-up version of the OCRed text, with removed extraneous characters and wrongly appended words, and verified page numbers:

But unlike Baglivi’s tarantists or Plato’s Bacchic dancers, whose rhythms, Plato thought, should be outlawed on account of their irregularity, Calmeil’s censure emphasized the intensity with which dancers carried out their movements. For Calmeil, youthful festivity invited psychiatric concern because the boys and girls enjoyed themselves too much: they suffered excess zeal. This emphasis on excess pleasure and joy revealed a curious shift in concepts of health and disease, holding onto older, humoral ideas about imbalance but seeing ‘frenzy’ as the mechanical appearance of overzealousness only, stimulated by mental impressions. Calmeil and his contemporaries, it seems, were baffled by every sign of ebullient movement and powerful emotion.

Religious enthusiasm, which Calmeil described as ‘theomania’ or ‘theo-choreomania’, provoked zealous excitement by disturbing the ‘faculty of reason’, causing hallucinations and obsessions with the devil, as well as spasms and convulsions, and the ‘incessant need to dance’. Dancing was a sign and a symptom of excess passion, troublesome for the impulses that bodily movements could provoke. The catchiness of a tune was worrying because of its propensity to enthuse entire groups: for Calmeil, ‘this bizarre form of monomania’ (choreomania) was ‘susceptible to rapid propagation: it easily becomes contagious’.

A further example he describes is telling in this respect: a band of excited audience members reportedly exiting a production of Euripides’s Andromeda was seized with what Calmeil called contagious enthusiasm, resulting in what he describes as ‘epidemic madness’ (‘folie épidémique’), as they went singing and dancing down the street, in imitation of Perseus, all the way home.

Like the young Italian revellers, these theatregoers from contractions musculaires disharmoniques, les convulsions générales momentanées, forment quelquefois encore aujourd’hui le cortège de l’aliénation religieuse affective. He adds: ‘La folie peut succéder à une affection aiguë du cerveau, à un délire fébrile, à une apoplexie avec lésion du mouvement, à des convulsions générales, à une attaque d’épilepsie; l’aliénation mentale peut se compliquer, dès son invasion ou pendant le cours de sa durée, avec une affection spasmodique, avec un état de paralysie plus ou moins complet, avec l’épilepsie, la catalepsie, 'extase, les phénoménes de ’hystérie’.

Calmeil, De la folie, vol. 1, 58, 66-67.

70. Calmeil, De la folie, vol. 2, 159.

71. Calmeil, De la folie, vol. 2, 159.

72. Calmeil, De la folie, vol. 2, 159-160.

73. Calmeil, De la folie, vol. 2, 160.

74. Calmeil, De la folie, vol. 2, 161-162. The case is also reported in Lucas, De l'imitation contagieuse, who notes, drawing on Sauvages’s Nosologie, that the story was reported by Lucian and constituted one of the sole cases related to nervous epidemics in antiquity, although it was not an epidemic outright (37). The Convulsionaries + 109 Abdére—first reported as a medical case linked to the Italian tarantella by Boissier Sauvages de la Croix—were hardly suffering in any usual medical sense; they certainly didn’t seek medical help. But they displayed contagious zeal, excitement that warranted a place in the ranks of psychiatric disorders considered, as Cal______ Although early psychiatrists were not typically involved in implementing punitive measures against such dancers, the slightly bewildered tone of caution articulated by Calmeil reflected concerns also voiced in the political arena: crowds whose energies proliferated quickly were potentially hazardous. As Jacques Rancière has suggested, theatregoers and patrons of the new cafés-concerts in Paris in the 1830s and 1840s risked, in the police prefecture's eyes, being roused to political action by the songs, dances, and dramatic acts that put them "outside the simple role of spectator."° They risked erupting into a revolutionary crowd, spurred on by the 'mass theatricality' that served as a 'conduit' for the 'reverie of mobile minorities.'"

Not only were workers indulging in bourgeois pastimes—pleasures that exceeded the requirements of hard labour—but also, by passing over class barriers in this way, they risked dreaming themselves out of their present existence. They would, in this event, adopt alien characteristics—middle-class ones—and so destabilize a fragile post-revolutionary regime. But Rancière points out the workers' own derision of displays of carnival spectatorship. Bourgeois decadents who came in swarms to gawk at working-class fêtes held at the Champs-Elysées or elsewhere spoiled, they thought, the zone of safety such revelries provided. Detractors argued that privacy was necessary to help workers avoid slipping continuously—in their observers' eyes—back into the stereotype of the lazy, sloppy, and uncouth brute. The workers, in Rancière's terms, were in this respect puritanical: just as they held fast to the privileged space of the fête, so, too, they resisted the label of drunken depravity that justified paternalistic intervention on the bourgeois' part.

The performance of pleasure in public was at stake, and its disinhibited show was discomfiting for all the constituencies sitting, revelling, or strolling on either side. Dance and the public fête served as a battleground not only for the liberation of unspent energies and collective jouissance, but for the right to occupy public space free from the tyranny of judgmental observation, in a social theatre vexed with class distinction. The public fête was a site of contestation for the right temporarily to unleash passion and emotion in the paradoxical privacy of socially delimited public space.

'The increasingly porous and open sociality of public space and the contested territories within which these roving parties moved made the dancing festivities a fraught affair, a zone of intensity at the heart of the nation's new radical politics. Spontaneous acts in particular were problematic, as they threatened to contagion any passerby. As Clare Parfitt-Brown has shown, spontaneity was employed in the early nineteenth century as a measure of impropriety, particularly with regard to bodily display and dance. Cancan dancers on trial in Paris in the 1830s and 1840s were questioned about whether their performances had been improvised: wilder, 'indecent' forms known as the chahut were more suspect than the choreographed and thus more predictable movements of dance routines overseen by dance masters. Likewise, Parfitt-Brown argues, dancing that subverted classical norms of grace, energy, poise, and bodily contact was considered suspect.' Like the choreomanias described by Esquirol 75. Although it went out of favour for nearly a century, the notion of excessive emotion—including joyous emotion—returned. In the 1920s, Pierre Janet (1859-1947), a professor of psychology at the Collège de France, argued that excess, rather than deviance, troubled everyday life. Joy, he wrote, provokes agitation, resulting in a type of delirium characterized by its intensity. Patients who are too happy show this corporeally, intruding into the public sphere with their extravagance, slipping outside the boundaries of a normally, and normatively, more contained individual self. Pierre Janet, De langoisse à l'extase: Etudes sur les croyances et les sentiments, 2 vols., vol. 2 (Paris: Félix Alcan, 1926-1927). 76.

Jacques Rancière, Staging the People: The Proletarian and His Double, trans. David Fernbach (London: Verso, 2011), 185. 77. Rancière, Staging the People, 188. 78. Rancière, Staging the People, 198-205. 79. Clare Parfitt-Brown, “The Problem of Popularity: The Cancan between the French and Digital Revolutions’, in Sherrill Dodds and Susan C. Cook, eds., Bodies of Sound: Studies across Popular Music and Dance (Surrey: Ashgate, 2013), 9-24. 110

EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE and Calmeil, the chahut suggested uncontrolled gestures stimulating collective contagion, provoking a potential for sharing ideas and emotions that could get socially and politically out of hand. Whereas earlier dance prohibitions had typically been enforced on religious grounds that high leaps and some rounds were ‘demonic’ (chapter 2), the nineteenth-century injunction against singing, dancing, and revelling bodies comparatively emphasized the dangers of mutual sympathy that overt enthusiasm stoked. In the next chapter, crowd theory emerges out of sociological writing indebted to neurology, French revolutionary history, and social psychiatry, all grappling with the changes that revolutionary and post-revolutionary crowd and popular movements occasioned. Significantly, religious enthusiasms—including the ‘jerks’ in Kentucky and Tennessee—became grounds for theorizing mimetic impulses as a social psychiatric problem, an epidemic reflecting the particular sorts of boredom and restlessness besetting the modern working class. The Convulsionaries + 111

Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads Nineteenth-Century Crowd Forms

Whether Foucault is discussing biopower or discipline, law or sovereign edict, subjects are governed or resist being governed as individual subjects or as disciplinary bodies. There is no political body, no demos acting in concert (even episodically) or expressing aspirational sovereignty; there are few social forces from below and no shared powers of rule or shared struggles for freedom. —Wendy Brown, Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution (2015)

‘The present generation is born exhausted; it is the product of a century of convulsions. —Philippe Tissié, La fatigue et l'entrainement physique [Fatigue and Physical Sport] (1897)

CROWDS AFTER FOUCAULT

Witnessing the Iranian revolution in 1979, Foucault confronted for the first time, Said notes, the ‘entirely collective, involuntary excessiveness which could not be herded under conventional rubrics like class contradictions or economic oppression’. The affective and energetic surplus of history, spilling out into crowd movements, constituted an entirely different order of collective being and becoming; a scene of ferment characterized not by structures of oppression, surveillance, and control but by the apparently involuntary amplification of emotions and energies surging up during moments of communal anguish and hope. This chapter delves deeper into the discursive history of crowd movements, mass upheavals, and gestural spontaneities that theatricalize national becoming in the revolutionary era, roughly the eighteenth to the late nineteenth century. The chapter offers a discursive history of bodily turmoil, scenes within which the public spectacle of excessiveness plays out, ultimately to argue that crowds serve in the nineteenth century as a privileged site of theorization about spectacular spontaneity.

The chapter further moves the study of crowds into the sphere of 'dance' broadly construed, with Hewitt, as social choreography: the movement of bodies forming social space, at the edge of the 'aesthetic continuum' he describes as constitutive of modern art and social life. Crowds do not constitute aesthetic formations—orderly objects of contemplation—but the dissolution of orderly aesthetics into its converse, what I am calling an anaesthetic regime of ungainly, disorganized moves.

The figure of the disorderly crowd significantly forms political imaginaries in the nineteenth century: imaginaries that emerge discursively against the grain of the putative primordial herd. In this respect, the chapter carves out a further scene of thinking choreomania conceived in the nineteenth century as an unruly crowd condition, a surge of ungoverned and nearly ungovernable life. This extends Foucault's analysis of biopower to include movements subject to the 'involuntary excessiveness' he alludes to in the anecdote offered by Said—a sphere of inquiry otherwise conspicuously absent from Foucault's writing.

Even Foucault's analysis of biopolitics as a mode of government exercised on individual subjects through regimes of social and corporeal regulation implicating scientific research, statistics, and population control eludes direct engagement with the 'demos', the 'people'. Wendy Brown further notes, Foucault's work suffers from an oversight as far as group life is concerned: his lens focuses on the individual, subject to pressures exercised discursively and politically through regimes of thought and discipline (concerning sexuality and madness, criminality and deviance) constituting the subtle workings of biopower. Foucault fails, Brown argues, to consider the 'people' as a biopolitical unit, an entity rising up and organizing itself from below, to form an alternative, plural, and autonomous politics.

But even in Brown's rereading of Foucault's work, the demos appears on the page as an already formed discursive ideal. Her analysis does not engage with the performative, spontaneous crowd out of and through which the demos arises as a politically cogent force and against which the demos is discursively constituted. The volatile and improvisatory body of the crowd appears, I argue, in nineteenth-century social science at a time of proliferating uprisings, drawing attention to themselves and to the history with which they appear to resonate. As with Foucault's observation of the revolution in Iran, they emerge as fantasy objects of social science, revealing and forming nineteenth-century ideas of rational subjecthood indirectly. Cast in nineteenth-century literature as disorderly, excessive, and uncontrolled, yet also significantly diseased, crowds emerge as a force of nature against which the liberal subject, as outlined by Foucault, would appear. Imagined as indefinite and temporary, improvisatory and artless, but also vulnerable to contagion, gatherings of individuals in crowds become subject to discursive inquiry and medicalization, a problem Foucault and Brown pass over.

Whereas the individual subject, like the demos, arises in post-Enlightenment philosophy as an organized constellation of forces moving history forward into modernity, the disorganized mass of moving bodies pullulating on the scene of revolutionary political life comes to light in nineteenth-century social science as a subject of biomedical and biohistorical writing against the grain of historical progress. Significantly for dance studies, crowds come to be construed in social scientific literature as bodily beings shifting the course of historical progress by virtue of their tendency, in times of crisis, chaotically to appear.

As Judith Butler and Athena Athanasiou note in Dispossession: The Performative in the Political (2013), crowds are performative inasmuch as they appear in public space and in doing so show themselves as political constituencies. They demonstrate their presence and, as such, become political bodies publicly. Significantly, crowds appear in nineteenth-century medical and social scientific literature as an involuntary, bodily, automatic return to a prior state of group life—one of unthinking imitation and aggregation, herd- and hound-like. They serve discursively to illustrate the flip side of scientific modernity's obsession with another sort of automatism: that of the machine. Their automatism signals the prehistorical within modernity; as such, dance—appearing as the swarm-like movement of plural bodies in public space—constitutes modernity's unscientific, irrational, antimodern other half, that out of which it arises. Crowds thus represent a choreopolitical state of emergence and its discursivization, the impetuous movement of bodies cast as a primal force disrupting the smooth forward march of modernity into an efficient industrial age. Crowds in nineteenth-century social theory appear to gather, like a storm, against the productive machinism of rational economic life. The organic metaphor prominent in medically-inflected social theory, posited crowds as biological beings, violent and unpredictable like nature. As such, moving crowds in the nineteenth century epitomize the disorder of a pre-industrial age overwhelming the modern moment with its own brand of biopower. This suggests not only what Jeffrey T. Schnapp highlights as Freud’s concept of the ‘oceanic’, a beatific collective feeling overwhelming individuals with a liberatory sense of disindividuation, but crowds as swarms performing unpredictable gestures—in choreographic terms, flowing and starting, liquid and angular, explosive and resonant—bodies tumbling awkwardly into modernity from another age.

Crowds, this chapter shows, signal in the nineteenth century the intensification of all bodily potential for disorder and turmoil as well as their converse, a choreopolitics of control. Therefore, whereas literature on crowd theory has witnessed a boom since the social and political movements of the 1960s, from Canetti’s Masse und Macht [Crowds and Power] (1960) to R. A. Nye’s The Origins of Crowd Psychology (1975), Salvador Giner’s Mass Society (1976), Susanne Barrows’s Distorting Mirrors: Visions of the Crowd in Late Nineteenth-Century France (1981), Serge Moscovici’s Lage des foules [The Age of the Crowd] (1981), J. S. McClelland’s The Crowd and the Mob (1989), Jaap van Ginneken’s Crowds, Psychology, and Politics 1871-1899 (1993), Etienne Balibar’s La crainte des foules [Fear of Crowds] (1997), Howard Rheingold’s upbeat Smart Mobs (2003), Schnapp and Matthew Ties’s Crowds (2006), and Christian Borch’s The Politics of Crowds: An Alternative History of Sociology (2013), among others, the relationship between crowds, choreopolitics, and biopower remains overlooked.

Crowd theory's little-acknowledged prehistory in de Félice's writing on ecstatic dances, which decisively influenced Canetti's foundational work on group life, merits a further look, not only to clarify the extended genealogy of these intellectual movements in what one may construe as a prehistory of dance and performance studies but also better to distinguish the dancing crowd and dramaturgies of collective, imitative, and gesturally 'showy' assemblies from others. My aim in this chapter, then, is to outline a history of abrupt and fitful gestures in religious and neurological literature where these intersect with nineteenth-century discourses on collective pathology; and to think through the pathological 'showiness' of fitful gestures and their converse, play. This approach highlights the choreopolitics of early crowd theory as an animal, automatic, and comedic genre. The chapter thus places crowds at the basis of dance history, considered as the study of bodies moving in (and moving) social space, in this case just past the outer edges of torque-like grace. This chapter thus furthers the previous chapter's thinking about the queer space of popular religion where it overlaps with public instances of political protest, what Foster has called the choreographies of protest and Lepecki describes with regard to choreopolicing. Here, with the emergence of sociology and neurology, society at large appears periodically excessive, effusive, and uncontrolled. Its eruption onto the scene of urban modernity in the nineteenth century suggests a general 'convulsion', as one of its key moments. 3-7. Schnapp notes that ‘the “oceanic crowd” is . . . traceable at least as far back as the long-standing conflation in Greco-Roman culture of turbulence, whether maritime, meteorological, or political, with the turba (tupe), which is to say, the mob’ (4). On recent crowd theory in the broader social and historical sciences, see also Christian Borch, The Politics of Crowds: An Alternative History of Sociology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013). Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri differentiate what they term the (politically agential) ‘multitudes’ from the crowd, mass, or mob, which they consider passive and not politically efficacious; see esp. Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire (London: Penguin, 2004); Michael Hardt, ‘Bathing in the Multitude’, in Schnapp and Tiews, eds., Crowds, 35-40. On Edmund Burke’s (1729-1797) introduction of the notion of ‘masses’ and ‘mobs’ to describe the purportedly volatile and violent lower classes (in Reflections on the Revolution in France [1790])—and eventually the ambivalent power of a democracy ruled by numbers—see Stefan Jonsson, “The Invention of the Masses: The Crowd in French Culture from the Revolution to the Commune”, in Schnapp and Tiews, eds., Crowds, 47-75, esp. 51-53, 74. Jonsson further discusses the ambivalent notion of a ‘people’ (as sovereign nation, or as social force, and eventually as event), 55-59. I follow Borch’s contention that to distinguish e.g. crowds from masses is to eschew the ‘politics of definition’ by which such terms continue to change over time (Borch, The Politics of Crowds, 13). A discursive genealogy of the language of masses, mobs, crowds, multitudes, and people would constitute another study in its own right.

114 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE historians put it, which had the potential to upend political life.’ The analysis of choreomania as a disorderly crowd condition therefore moves the discursive history of jagged movement to the street, and to the choreopolitics of large-scale revolution and revolt. Central to the discussion on choreomania as a disorderly crowd condition is the emergence of sociology as a science that would, following modern history, in its turn following the language of medicine, return to the French Revolution as a primal scene of dangerous and contagious politicality epitomizing the disruptive choreopolitics of public protest. With the French Revolution, crowds retrospectively came to be described as unthinking, animal, organic, even ecological movements performing their excessive presence as a giant nervous spasm traversing political life. Further drawing the literature on the animalization of crowd movements into a new body of neurological literature on jerks, twitches, and tics in large crowds of religious enthusiasts in the American South, I argue that choreomania appears in the nineteenth century as a disease of disruptive sociality. The social body comes to be described in terms of its potential to erupt. Publicness thus comes to the fore in the discursive history of the dancing disease. Public space, as a contested sphere within which nineteenth-century nation states were defining themselves, required what Foucault called ‘docile bodies’: pliant, submissive bodies that did not draw attention to themselves. Bodies that were emphatically not theatrical: docile bodies hide, conform.® Discourse on the unwelcome appearance of eruptive, restless corporeal formations suggests the articulation of publicness as an arena within which fitful movement has no place. Organic Metaphors: Taine and the Origins of French Biohistory

Organic metaphors permeated the language of social contagion in the nineteenth century. While the revolution of 1848 and the Paris Commune of 1871 swept France into a fury of political protest in the latter part of the nineteenth century, interest in crowds in Germany was spurred on by the epidemics of cholera that swept away thousands of men and women in 1832, 1848-1849, and 1854, sensitizing physicians to human vulnerability in the new urban centers and awakening a new interest in social and medical history, revealing precedents for prevailing bouts of contagion in the popular movements of the past.

The French historian Hippolyte Taine (1828-1893), in his six-volume Les origines de la France contemporaine [The Origins of Contemporary France] (1876-1894), following Hecker's work in medical history, set the stage for a biohistorical analysis of crowd movements in France, depicting dramatic acts of popular dissolution in terms likening them to cataclysmic geological events. Writing a century after the height of the French Revolution, Taine looked back at the revolutionary outbursts of the previous century with disapproval: crowds had behaved like wild animals or children, he wrote, wreaking havoc as a beast of burden might when suddenly taking cognizance of its situation and shaking the shackles off its back, throwing its rider overboard.1 Taine took his disparaging organic metaphors further: rowdy crowds of revolutionaries, overtaking cafés, armed with pamphlets, standing on tables and chairs, seizing moderates by the collar and trampling them in the mud, reached ecological proportions as their movements became, he put it disapprovingly, like a ‘human torrent.2' These same crowds further reached mythopoeic stature: following an exegetic tradition depicting Liberty as a sympathetic, fulsome, and galvanizing woman maternally and seductively leading men and women into revolutionary action, Taine personified the revolution as a monstrous, barking Liberty, a Miltonian woman girdled in Cerberean hounds, a figure of Night as ‘terrible as Hell', advancing with giant steps, shaking a dagger and wreathed in a poor semblance of a royal crown. Like ten Furies, she deployed a destructive power at the head of an unrelenting and irresistible herd: tens of thousands of judges and executioners joined in a chaotic surge of motion behind her.3 This revolutionary figure was fearsome—an ancient goddess terrifying for its pre-civilized barbarity.

Taine wrote that crowds needed governments as animals needed heads: to think and to control with; to see and to domesticate with; and to be refined, intelligent, and moderate—in other words, fit to rule.4 Though modern nation states had reached back to Greek figures of democratic self-governance, they had first, according to Taine's depiction, to conquer their own primal forces, lurking within themselves.

1. Maxime Du Camp, Les Convulsions de Paris, 4 vols., vol. 1 (Paris: Librairie Hachette, 1878).
2. Michel Foucault, Surveiller et punir: Naissance de la Prison (Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1975).
3. Hippolyte Taine, Les origines de la France contemporaine, 6 vols, vol. 2 (Paris: Librairie Hachette, 1878); see esp. ‘L'anarchie spontanée', 3-106.
4. Taine, Les origines, vol. 2, 42-45, 44.
5. Taine, Les origines, vol. 2, 56.
6. Taine, Les origines, vol. 2, 66-67. The new nation had not yet quelled its own revolutionary hounds; nor had it fully outgrown its potential for stupid herd-like life. By all accounts, the French people in Taine's depiction were brutal, animal: even at their most docile, they were too beast-like to turn away from the more violent leaders among them. Coinciding with centenary celebrations marking the uprisings of the French Revolution, Taine's chilling narrative set a hostile tone for discussions on crowd behavior at the close of the Second Empire, when a new set of uprisings and the widespread fires of the Paris Commune of 1871 were fresh in the minds of readers and writers alike. Unprecedented access to the Archives Nationales, which were enjoying greater support than ever before by a government keen to inscribe national history into the collective curriculum, allowed Taine to draw vivid scenes of men and women taken up in the fury of a revolutionary herd. This was an organically inflected history of collective motion, taking the cataclysmic movements of groups as its formidable object, prompting Nietzsche to call Taine 'the foremost historian now living', although, Nietzsche complained, the intellectual life Taine represented still suffered from a pessimistic and vulgar Germanic sentiment indebted to Hegel, progressing, as its proponents thought, towards a predetermined, static, and despondent futurity. This did not, for Nietzsche, yet herald an intellectual disposition living up to the surges of collective life that Taine's history evoked.

The organic metaphors Taine deployed nevertheless proved catchy. The notion of crowd movements as biological events similar to individual bodily spasms in particular inscribed political life into a social scientific discourse emphasizing individual and social crisis. In his contemporaneous four-volume history of the Paris Commune, Les convulsions de Paris [The Convulsions of Paris] (1878-1880), Maxime Du Camp (1822-1894) described a 'wind' of 'revolutionary madness' 'paralysing' and corrupting the urban machine. In his earlier six-volume Paris: Ses organes, ses fonctions et sa vie dans la seconde moitié du XIXe siécle [Paris: Its Organs, Functions, and Life in the Second Half of the Nineteenth Century] (1869-1876), arguably anticipating Foucault's biopolitical analyses of institutional structures of power, Du Camp claimed the danse macabre as a furious passion that struck men and women in Germany, France, Holland, Italy, America, and the Islamic Orient like a frantic scourge that threw exhausted populations into motoric frenzy.

Du Camp, like Taine, drew from broadly medical language, which with Hecker had already begun to characterize crowd movements in terms likening them to giant spasms and convulsive plagues. For the physician Jean Baptiste Vincent Laborde (1830-1903), writing in the heat of the insurrection of 1871, the 'terrible events' of the Paris Commune offered a 'sad and simultaneously a strange spectacle' to their contemporaries, a 'wind of madness' revealing a society so 'sick in spirit and body' it could only signal a 'mental illness', a 'collective madness'. The entire mechanism of the social body was broken. In Laborde's view, this state of crisis played out mechanistically through the exercise of tics and gestures, 'spasmodic contractions' representing 'involuntary motor impulses', which showed the organism's state of (often hereditary) disrepair. As the expressive 'play' of a pathological 'moral physiognomy', this degenerative theatre made public the 'absolute Taine, Les origines, vol. 2, 68. 14. Nietzsche bitterly notes the ‘tyrannical influence’ of Hegel through Taine and the spirit of pessimism to which French intellectual culture as a whole was succumbing. Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil: Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future, trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York: Vintage Books, 1989), 193. 15. Du Camp, Les Convulsions de Paris, vol. 1, i. 16. Maxime Du Camp, Paris: Ses organes, ses fonctions et sa vie dans la seconde moitié du XIXe siécle, 6 vols., vol. 4 (Paris: Hachette, 1873), 376. 17. J.V. Laborde, Les hommes et les actes de l'insurrection de Paris devant la psychologie morbide: Lettres à M. le docteur Moreau (Paris: Bailliére, 1872), i, ii, 3. 18. Laborde, Les hommes, 12. 19. Laborde, Les hommes, 13. 116 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE perversion’ of the individual’s dysfunctional, psychomorbid state. The individual assimilated tics, copied these, and in doing so revealed inter-generational transmissibility and influence. Violent revolutionary excitement, similarly ‘monstrous’ and hereditary (as well as often, in his view, bohemian and atheistic), showed the same sort of ‘organopathological’ dysfunction." Human weakness, wrote Laborde, quoting Rousseau, impelled men to seek association, gathering like herds and eventually arriving at politics. But for Laborde, this form of political association was not just a ‘human weakness’, as Rousseau had suggested; it more forcefully indicated psychological disease." Proof was in the portrait, and the annals of psychopathology and crowd psychology reveled in scenes each more outrageous and each demonstrative of a more passionate and instinctive," as well as a more theatricalized affect, than the next. One revolutionary character—a Girondin, or republican, ‘of the most common sort’—whose case Laborde describes fluctuated between emotions and opinions with an alarming degree of ‘mobility’, carried himself nervously, and trembled, suggesting the exact ‘portrait’ (‘peinture’) of a madman (‘halluciné’)." Others, similarly affected by alcoholism exacerbating what Laborde saw as hereditary predispositions to insanity, showed no fear in the face of danger. A friend of his, venturing out into the ‘orgiastic’ underside of Paris's guarded battle zones, performed an ‘unforgettable’ ‘peregrination’. In one street, this friend and his guide encountered an energetic and savage dance, a vertiginous, unbridled round, replete with hurrahs, while bullets flew overhead. A number of revellers, ‘bacchant-men’, were lying in pools of blood on the ground, singing raucously, contagiously insensitive to danger or pain. The scenes reminded Laborde's friend of the ‘joyous and insane indifference’ given to men stung by tarantulas. The friend's guide, in order to cross an especially perilous street, got down on his hands and knees, crawling through a chaotic brawl, though Laborde's friend notes he himself had been able to conserve his dignity and walked across the street—though not quite holding his head high—at least without ‘for a minute, descending to the rank of the quadruped’. He eventually succeeded in escaping this ‘Bacchic’ ‘Hell’, ‘without looking once behind’. Laborde reflects that his friend, and he himself, at a remove, thus were able to ‘witness, with a shudder, these impulsive events’ (‘On assiste, en frémissant, à ces manifestations impulsives’)."* In Laborde's analysis, these men not only suffered from an alcoholic disposition, but also showed symptoms of______ "They suffered, Laborde thought, from too much enthusiasm, translated into a Bacchic frenzy. Even at their most spectacular, men and women caught in the throes of social disease, Laborde argued, contagioned one another gesturally without going anywhere, without exercising rational, purposeful action. ‘Passions’, in nineteenth-century medical terminology, were also referred to as ‘mobiles’, as Laborde’s writing makes clear: volatile energies, bodily and mental movements spurring individual and collective action and affect, generally, his depictions underlined, to no good." The social choreography of these outbursts, to reprise Hewitt’s language, suggests mobility on the ‘aesthetic continuum’ of social and political life at the jagged edge, where disorderly bodies reveal society falling apart. For Hewitt, the ‘aesthetic continuum of bodily articulation’ suggests the extension of bodily life across art and political forms: bodies shape social being in the public sphere by indicating ways of holding oneself singly and in relation to others: ways of moving and aggregating." The forms bodies take make, reflect, and disrupt the choreographic forms—the choreopolitics—of social life. In cases described here, bodies gather to disrupt political life and simultaneously to constitute it anew as a popular force: not yet a demos, but a potential for communal rule.

Laborde, Les hommes, 29, 48, 75.
Laborde, Les hommes, 69.
Laborde, Les hommes, 37.
Laborde, Les hommes, 97-99.
Laborde, Les hommes, 109-124.
Laborde, Les hommes, 123.
Laborde is borrowing terminology put forward by the psychiatrist Louis Delasiauve (1804-1893), in Laborde, Les hommes, 72. See also E. A. Ross, Social Psychology: An Outline and Source Book (New York: Macmillan, 1908), 54.
Hewitt, Social Choreography, 35; see also 19-20. Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads

Taine’s writing influenced a wave of social theorists, all contributing to the new literature on social disease. Writers including Gustave Le Bon (1841-1931), Gabriel Tarde (1843-1904), Emile Durkheim (1858-1917), and Henri Fournial (1866-1932) in France, Scipio Sighele (1868-1913) in Italy, and William McDougall (1871-1938) in Britain, contributed to an emerging discourse on crowds in social scientific and legal terms. Amply cited, among others, by Fournial, Tarde, Sighele, and Le Bon, whose writing on the psychology of revolutions was littered with ref- erences to his work,"* Taine spurred on a wave of new writing on crowd movements that typically derided the little man and feared the worst from the mob."’ May Day riots, strikes, and demonstrations were erupting throughout Europe, stimulating analysis. The new social theories, generally conservative in tone, reacting against the rapid industrialization and urbanization also mobilizing a socialist Left, and based on distrust of aggregation, drew from studies of epidemics and neuromotor disorder, psychiatry and criminology, to depict scenes of deviant behaviour. The pathologization of crowd and social movements linked natural eruptions, spasms, and antisocial behaviour in a disciplinary node ultimately to show that all bodily and social eruptions were pathological. In choreographic terms, the social body in distress emerged on the scene of industrial modernity as a weak (undisciplined) animal capable of sudden rage, tearing through the fabric of social life, just as biologically conceived society was becoming socially and politically constituted. In the 19th century, crowds were seen as a powerful force that disrupted society, representing the unpredictable and uncontrollable nature of the present. They were characterized as a primitive force that emerged in the modern world, transforming social spaces by bringing individuals close together. Crowds were considered choreopolitical, as they involved the spectacular disorganization of bodies in space. This disorganization is a negative fantasy that contradicts the orderly being constructed in modern social choreography.

Crowds, in 19th-century criminology, law, and psychology, were imagined as a radical force that moved against rational and efficient progress. They represented the most mobile and unpredictable aspects of the past and present, emerging as a force of nature that could hardly be prevented or cured.

Crowds were thought to stand outside time, representing the present moment's most dramatic disruption. They were seen as a force of nature that could be described but not prevented or cured. This concept of social choreography foregrounds processes of choreographic disruption, focusing on the disorganization of bodies in space.

In the 19th century, crowds were considered a choreopolitical phenomenon that disrupted social spaces by bringing individuals close together. The disorganization of bodies in space is a negative fantasy that contradicts the orderly being constructed in modern social choreography. Nineteenth-century crowd theory, I argue, imagines the upright social body as the refined and abstracted counterpart of the pulsating crowd. This respect draws from Hewitt's analysis of mid-nineteenth to early twentieth-century social choreography as an aesthetic formation. Hewitt argues that moving bodies not only reflect but also shape ideologies, from walking and ballet to chorus lines, organizing social form. Abstraction is the refinement of imagined disorder into an orderly form. Abstraction also signals the movement of writing a social body out of its imagined negative, resolving the inherent contradictions and tensions within it.

The fascistic connotations of the Final Solution deployed in Nazi Germany are not unintended. Fascistic body politics seeks to drain a political body of its supposedly messy, dark, heterogeneous elements, typically imagined as being represented in the bodies of blacks, queers, women, and Jews.

In Foucault's analysis of liberalism in The Birth of Biopolitics, social being emerges discursively in the nineteenth century as that which organizes itself in counterpoint to a purportedly uncontrollable and socially or racially inferior core. This self-organizing, discursively disciplined constituency performs itself as an aggregate body temporarily engaged in a state of emergence into public space.

Foucault's liberalism, like madness and sexuality, comes with Enlightenment modernity to signal an empty middle, around which talking, writing, and organizing happens. Liberalism signals the emergence of a system of governance that deliberately fails to organize bodies in space, leaving market processes alone. Modern liberalism writes into being the concept of a social body that represents another order, that of disorder: a state of perpetual crisis and undoing or disaggregation.

In my analysis of crowd theory, sociology emerges to think society organizing itself around and away from self-organizing aggregates, which could be construed as an emergent radical politics. Anarchically moving bodies come to figure as society's anaesthetic other: its ugly other half, fundamental to scientific modernity's self-description as abstracting itself from the putatively unmanageable horde, the animal being quivering at the heart of modern biopolitical life. Political and religious movements offered scenes of spectacular epidemic madness that social theorists likened to plague. For Sighele, religious movements propagating like wildfire on the arid prairies of America drew social bodies into line with natural disasters. Crowds were natural eruptions, transcending eras and cultural worlds. For these social scientists, all eras were prone to spectacular bouts of disruptive insanity. Citing Nietzsche, for whom insanity was the rule among religious sectarians, Sighele argued that political parties, like religious sects, were rife with epidemic psychoses.

Sighele viewed Arab and Indian dervishes, medieval demonomaniacs and their Italian heirs (dancers of the tarantella), Shakers and Christian Perfectionists in America, Russian nihilists, communitarians and ecstatics, as well as early followers of Christ and even Sturm und Drang enthusiasts in Germany, as indicative of moral epidemics pathologically constituted by spontaneous suggestion. According to Sighele, the 'spectacle' of a single 'irritated individual' triggered the whole movement of a crowd, by virtue of the suggestive influence this individual's gesture provided to those who were its witness, and who were, by virtue of this representation, animalistically impelled to follow.

In this view, individuals were at least as prone to imitate pathological behaviour as to imitate pacific gestures and moods. Yet in a rare concession to the calm energy that can be displayed by crowds, Sighele also suggested that on some occasions crowds may turn gay or generous, bursting into laughter or sparing a vulnerable life. However, the vast majority of his depictions, like those of his peers, showed aggregates of people as dangerously animalistic, as well as fickle, volatile, and unmistakably feminine.

Social imitation and 'contagion' were increasingly considered to be politically hazardous. In a lecture on criminal anthropology titled 'Psicosi epidemica' (Epidemic Psychoses) (1888), given at the cusp of massive demonstrations among unemployed workers and students in Rome and Milan, Giuseppe Sergi (1841-1936) argued that 'epidemic psychoses' could further spur on epidemic criminal activity, a thesis that gained currency among penal and crowd theorists in the ensuing decades.

Philosopher and sociologist Georg Simmel (1858-1918) argued that negative affect—a feeling of revulsion for crowds—was necessary for maintaining individual mental health. This view downplayed positive imitative factors, substituting them for the alien and alienating figure of a magnetic force by which negative undercurrents sweep up to a group's surface in the spontaneous act of imitation, the impulsive moment of collectivity. This concept of human beings as intensely mobile—vulnerable to reversals—revealed a pessimistic approach to social life that was shared by many during the long nineteenth and twentieth centuries. With Le Bon, social theory moved to the heart of state power. One of the most influential and socially conservative of the crowd theorists—indebted (though he rarely acknowledged it) to the Italian school spearheaded by Sighele and Enrico Ferri (1856-1929)—Le Bon argued that a magnetic impulse generated in a crowd exercised a hypnotic effect on individuals such that their conscious personalities vanished. This made crowds primitive mental units (what he termed ‘Yunité mentale des foules’), in which individuals’ actions were reduced to ‘the unconscious activities of the spinal cord’. This enabled him to explain why crowds were often dangerous: collective life, when frenzied, was entirely autonomic. Individuals surrendering to the impulsive activity of their spinal cords, regressing to an infant state of mind, suggested a depersonalized and pre-civilized state of being—barbaric.

Scipio Sighele, La foule criminelle: Essai de psychologie collective (Paris: Félix Alcan, 1901), 46-47.

Sighele, La foule criminelle, 54-55.

Sighele, La foule criminelle, 108.

On the ‘feminine’ nature of the crowd, prone to exaggerating emotions and passing quickly to affective extremes, see for example Gustave Le Bon, Psychologie des foules (Paris: Félix Alcan, 1895), 27, 38.

‘Everybody knows that there are mental illnesses, and also that there are special institutions for the mentally ill. But maybe very few believe in the existence of the possibility of collective disturbances—a psychological disease propagating and spreading itself like harmful epidemics. Observations on various historical periods and on contemporary events among peoples, have clearly demonstrated to me [the existence of] such collective psychological diseases, which behave in their propagation just like any other epidemic; therefore I have named them epidemic psychoses’. Giuseppe Sergi, ‘Psicosi Epidemica’, Rivista di Filosofia Scientifica, ser. 2a, 8 (1889): 151-172, 151; cited in Van Ginneken, Crowds, 72.

Le Bon, Psychologie des foules, 12, 14, 19; also in William McDougall, The Group Mind, a Sketch of the Principles of Collective Psychology, with Some Attempt to Apply Them to the Interpretation of National Life and Character (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1920), 40. On Sighele’s bitter attempt to redress Le Bon’s usurpation of the role of founder of crowd psychology, and more specifically Le Bon’s unacknowledged use of Sighele’s work, see the preface to the second French edition of Sighele’s La foule criminelle, i-ii. Sighele also engaged in a protracted debate with Tarde, among others, arguing that whereas sociology compared individuals to droplets of water in a vast, tranquil, and immobile sea, collective psychology saw the sea as stormy, tempestuous, unpredictable, and perilous (22). Continuing with the geological metaphors, Le Bon saw individuals in crowds as grains of sand lifted indiscriminately by the wind (Le Bon, Psychologie des foules, 20). Opinions, likewise, were comparable to sand, ‘mobile’ and ‘changing’, blowing on the surface of a rock—representing, in his extended metaphor, the underlying beliefs and principles of a ‘people’ or ‘race’ (129).

120 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE

Le Bon’s theory helped him justify the superiority of individual, rational activity (and elite leadership) over all other forms of social organization. The organic simile enabled him effectively to abstract crowd movements from democratic politics and to depict what seemed like a natural, scientifically grounded alternative: crowds were not democratic but merely animal mechanisms. For Le Bon, the human motor was not only unintelligent but inefficient; it triggered uncontrolled chain reactions that had to be directed—in Foucault’s terms, governed. Le Bon's recourse to organic metaphors (inspired by Taine) rendered governmental structures implicitly necessary for curbing a merely animal, unthinking social body, protecting it from harm: "The psychological group is a provisional being formed of heterogeneous elements", he wrote, "which for a moment are combined, exactly as the cells which constitute a living body form by their reunion a new being which displays characteristics very different from those possessed by each of the cells singly." This figure of speech, configuring the social body negatively as an organic whole, compared individuals to the cells that make it up. This reduced individual agents to biological units as interdependent as they were purportedly separable from one another at the outset. Elsewhere, Le Bon argued that ideas, affects, emotions, and beliefs are as powerfully and nefariously contagious in crowds as is the effect of microbes.

Notoriously influencing a generation of politicians across the political spectrum, from Theodore Roosevelt (1858-1919) and Charles de Gaulle (1890-1970) to Adolf Hitler (1889-1945) and Benito Mussolini (1883-1945), Le Bon styled himself a consultant to the political elite. His vituperative views on crowd behavior enabled these state leaders better to understand and ultimately to shape rising tides of political discontentment and, ultimately, biopower.

Crowd scenes offered case after case of the apparently spectacular dissolution of individuality, constituting the modern subject by virtue of his or her capacity to withstand the herd. Individual subjectivity, as social psychology and later psychoanalysis would increasingly put forward, stemmed from the successful suppression of base, animal drives. Freud, whose theories I return to later, was particularly influenced by crowd psychology and its foundational writing in the myth of a savage Dionysianism pulsating at the heart of social life, liable to erupt and overpower it at any time. Freud was particularly influenced by McDougall, for whom "the individual, in becoming one of a crowd, loses in some degree his self-consciousness, his awareness of himself as a distinct personality, and with it . . . consciousness of his specific ally personal relations; he becomes to a certain extent depersonalized." McDougall argued that individuals regain an animal or childlike state when they are among crowds: their willpower dissolves in an overwhelming current of energy. McDougall's language was dramatic, emphasizing the primordial power of collective irrationality over the rational individual, who otherwise stands, his portrayal implies, staunchly in isolation: "the individual", he writes, "feels himself enveloped and overshadowed and carried away by the forces which he is powerless to control; he . . . does not feel called upon to maintain the attitude of self-criticism and self-restraint which under ordinary circumstances are habitual to him." Freud, reprising McDougall's concept of the "group mind" in Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921), saw this overpowering force as an occasion for religiously inflected "oceanic bliss". Individuals were not only subject to a suppression or repression of their base animality (as well as their tragic Greek inheritance); they also occasionally transcended themselves in rare moments of collectivity. "Men's emotions are stirred in a group to a pitch that they seldom or never attain under other conditions", McDougall wrote; "and it is a pleasurable experience for those who are concerned, to surrender themselves so unreservedly to their passions and Le Bon, Psychologie des foules, 20. Le Bon, Psychologie des foules, 15. Le Bon, Psychologie des foules, 113. Van Ginneken, Crowds, 171, 185-187. McDougall, The Group Mind, 57. McDougall, The Group Mind, 57. Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads

Freud saw the surrendering of the self in a crowd as a rare occasion for collective bliss, teetering at the edge of the ecstatic dissolution of the ego. However, Freud's recuperation of the collective power of crowds, as articulated by McDougall into a psycho- logical discourse on animal pleasure and prohibition, was more frequently countermanded by his concern that loss of individuality spelled danger and pernicious excess.

Conservative sociology's concept of spontaneous psychophysical degeneration contrasted with earlier medical theories put forward by, among others, the physician Prosper Despine (1812-1892). Despine argued that 'moral contagion' stems from individuals' predispositions to reproduce actions or feelings they witness in others. However, he insisted that such contagion occurs only inasmuch as individuals already have a tendency towards particular actions or feelings within themselves.

Crowds do not create new monsters out of women and men, but they catalyze and intensify existing impulses. Despine argued that crowds need to be curbed because of their capacity to stimulate positive and negative impulses. He pleaded for moral apologists to labor with him in an effort to thwart the social 'poison' spread by unruly popular opinion, spurred on in particular by the press.

Not all theorists emphasized the pernicious effects of plural bodies or even the existence of such metaphorical (or organic) entities. The legal philosopher Hans Kelsen (1881-1973) wrote: 'it is incorrect to talk of a bond "between" individuals.' Society is imagined by every individual, insofar as the whole concept of society is a 'psychic phenomenon.' With Kelsen, individuality comes to the fore as an object of political analysis, in which 'society' is a fiction. Individuals, for Kelsen, are responsible as legal agents; their actions have no bearing on others. However, Sighele, Fournial, and others, not content with this premise of individuality, pored over problems of legal responsibility in groups—groups embedded in ecosystems. One response was to argue that crowds were led by meneurs, leaders, whose example served as a catalyst to action in others, even if those others were operating on the basis of automatic impulses (or, as Fournial ventured, on account of a full moon). Still, someone in the mob had to be held accountable before an increasingly codified justice system. Legal analysis and organic cellularity meshed poorly. This left a gap in biosocial analyses of governmentality, according to which economic (and ecological) imperatives also moved the sociopolitical body along. This left little room for accident. In Foucault's analysis of biopolitical power, the legal determines the economic and is determined by it.

Rational actions—performed by efficient bodies, not subject to 'involuntary excessiveness'—move modernity along without the biosocial disruptions that catapult groups into temporary states of archaic surplus or impulsive animality.

Cited in Freud, Group Psychology, 22.

Laborde spells this out in Les hommes, 66.

Prosper Despine, De la contagion morale; faits démontrant son existence, son explication scientifique; du danger que présente pour la moralité et la sécurité publiques la relation des crimes données par les journaux (Marseille: E. Camoin, 1870), 4.

Despine, De la contagion morale, 21.

H. Kelsen, 'The Conception of the State and Social Psychology with Special Reference to Freud's Group Theory', International Journal of Psycho-Analysis 5 (1924): 1-38, 5.

Kelsen, "The Conception of the State', 5.

Sighele, La foule criminelle, 120-164; on meneurs and menés (leaders and led), see esp. 146-151.

Henri Fournial cites the French Revolution in particular as exemplary of the sorts of criminal acts, gestures, emotions, and attitudes that may be propagated contagiously in a crowd, in Henri Fournial, Essai sur la psychologie des foules. Considérations médico-judiciaires sur les responsabilités collectives (Lyon: A. Storck; and Paris: G. Masson, 1899), 81. Fournial also interestingly considers meteorological events among other ecological factors influencing crowd behaviour; he notes that of 125 noteworthy incidents recorded of the French Revolution, 48 fell on a full moon, further underscoring the crowd as an uncontrollable and feminine natural force (33).

Foucault, Naissance de la biopolitique, 168.

122 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE

So while animals may behave according to perfectly docile and controlled systems of mutual interdependence, the fiction and fantasy of animal spontaneity—operating at the base of the spinal cord, in Le Bon's terms—situated unruly social life in a lesser plane on the increasingly interdependent scales (and spaces) of biopower. Men and women, conceived increasingly, with liberalism, according to Foucault, as homo economicus, economic agents first and foremost, emerged as such inasmuch as they did so against the grain of a mythically animal and irrational, collective and chaotic—indeed lawless—plural being, whose anarchism would threaten liberalism with the truly democratic rule the demos nominally aspires to.

PUBLICS AND PUBLIC OPINION: THE DREYFUS AFFAIR

Crowds, mobs, masses, and multitudes were forming discursively in the pages of social scientific theory, often interchangeably. Occasionally, terms emerged to describe a unique type of social or collective formation. So whereas I use the term 'crowd' generally to depict the movements of groups (following Borch's contention that any etymological or epistemological delineation of such terms belies their historical imbrication in social scientific literature),<10> the notion of the 'public' also came in the late nineteenth century to signal a particularly theatrical and cohesive form of social choreography and a relatively more organized social formation. By the time of the infamous Dreyfus affair in the mid-1890s, discourse on the ‘public’ emerged to complement literature on the crowd. Publicness, with the Dreyfus affair, became the crowd's politically representative face, the discursive interpellation of the demos. Staunchly defended in an open letter, J’accuse’ [‘I Accuse’] (1898) by the realist novelist and radical sympathizer Emile Zola (1840-1902), whose vivid depictions of crowd uprisings virtually sparked a new literary genre, the Jewish military officer Alfred Dreyfus (1859-1935) came to the forefront of intellectual opinion. Dreyfus, Zola intoned, had been unjustly subjected to a government-backed smear campaign, imprisoned for allegedly communicating state secrets to German officials. Zola’s manifesto was supported by a wide circle of Parisian intellectual and artistic luminaries, including Tarde, mobilizing against increasingly aggressive anti-Semitic and xenophobic popular opinion. The repercussions of this case would divide French opinion for years to come. The city streets and pages of local newspapers simmered with debate on the Dreyfus affair, accompanied by a host of further scandals, revealing a new social scientific interest in national bodies and the ways they banded together, divided, and organized. Publicness, conceived as a gathering together of opinions rather than bodies, suggested a discursive social choreography abstracted from its messy and corporeal counterpart. Social choreography—understood in this case, I submit, as the shaping of ideas through their movement across social space—emerged in this case in the motion towards a consolidation of ideas about social bodies and the concerted, generally written, public defense of public life. Social choreography in this regard contributed to forming what I call the archival repertoire of public life, a discursive force that shapes as much as it reflects ongoing public and social scientific debate. Social bodies do not just organize or move through space; they move the language that defines and forms it, aesthetically, politically, and choreographically. Paris and other European capitals were in motion, and the emergence of the intellectual class through the activities of the press was countermanded by an equally powerful and often virulent discourse on the dangers and triumphs of political association. Sighele argued that the term ‘publics’ encompassed individuals with common literary, artistic, and intellectual interests, even when they were physically dispersed; but the term ‘publics’ also referred to popular groupings that shared political opinions.¹ In Tarde’s analysis, the public was more liberal than the crowd, inasmuch as one could participate in a few publics at once, just as one read various newspapers. In this view, publics were expansive and diverse; and they could overlap, unlike crowds, which were physically proximate and could intensify emotions to the point of violence or insanity.² Not all social theorists considered individuals, taken together, to form base or at worst dangerous social bodies. Many took individuals to constitute the basic units of society, not dissolvable into others, though individual moments and views might be shared (and transformed). Crowds, like opinions, gathered but did not always create new, more stupid, or more volatile social beings. Society was also conceived of as a positive force for aggregation: a vital capacity for the expansion and transformation of public life.

Tarde: Inter-Individualism and Collective Action as Art

In a rare homage to the positive vital politics of group being, Tarde offered a counterpoint to his contemporaries' alarmist readings of plural formations. As a social motor, groups, in Tarde's analysis, also afforded the occasion for the positive transcendence of individuality and herd mentality. In a relatively exceptional deployment of socially progressive philosophy in the emerging sociological field, Tarde offered a view of groups and individuals positively and creatively engaging in imitative behaviour.

A crowd is able to multiply itself and so becomes, in his terms, molecular. Tarde argued in Les lois de limitation [The Laws of Imitation] (1890) that imitation is a prime social and historical mover, often positively shaping social activity and political, artistic, and intellectual life, accounting for acts of creative and scientific invention.*® Although he also acknowledged, like his contemporaries, the temporary insanity that could lead reasonable individuals to perpetuate base, criminal acts in crowds, he was most interested in the minute instances of imitation that also brought about positive social and intellectual change.*”

For Tarde, imitations, oppositions, repetitions, and innovations constituted a world of vital activities operating inter-individually. Objects and relations were never static in a given moment but morphed slightly and continuously. Tarde's theory of inter-psychology suggested that human actions, taken at the level of their most incremental associations, offered an ever-evolving landscape of social, intellectual, and artistic movement.

Rehabilitated in Deleuze and Guattari's Capitalisme et schizophrénie 2: Mille plateaux [A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia] (1980), Tarde's interest in micro modulations paved the way for a new, though quickly marginalized, discussion on groups—social aggregates—and what he described, after Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716), as 'monadology', in 'Monadologie et sociologie' [Monadology and Sociology] (1893), a world of radical differentiations connecting the universe and all its motions together.** This world of dynamic differences reconceived the body as an energetic composite made up of infinitely varying "creatures," "worlds," or "monads," yielding a collective subject, and the collective constitution of the biophysical (and metaphysical) universe.*°

For Leibniz, the monad was a vital and a material principle, a force of organic clustering according to which all beings moving through the world were made up of infinitesimally small and dynamic parts that could be shared across bodies and recombine. Tarde saw in this a model for inter- and intra-corporeal association: a way of reconceptualizing the social sphere as being made up of minute movements, continually reorganizing people and things—imbricating them dynamically in one another.

Tarde was putting forward a theory of imitation foregrounding mutuality. The consequences for politics were significant: for Tarde, every world is social, just as every thing is a social thing—a society—vitally co-constituting inter-individual beings and publics in perpetual flux. These pluralities or interrelations tend towards gatherings (rassemblements)® and relationships of inter-possession that have the potential to undo social hierarchy and the fixity of political roles. The following text is a corrected version of the OCRed text provided:

As a radically progressive social philosophy fundamentally at odds with his contemporary Durkheim's positivist theories of static and universal social structures, Tarde's affective biopolitics transcended individual and social formations in favor of diversity, difference, and change. Dancing, in this regard, like 56. Gabriel Tarde, Les lois de limitation, ed. Bruno Karsenti (Paris: Editions Kimé, 1993), 77. 57. Gabriel Tarde, Etudes pénales et sociales (Lyon: A. Storck; and Paris: G. Masson, 1892), 303. 58. Gabriel Tarde, Monadologie et sociologie, ed. Eric Alliez (Le Plessis-Robinson: Institut synthélabo pour le progrés de la con- naissance, 1999). See also Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, Capitalisme et schizophrénie 2: Mille plateaux (Paris: Les Editions de Minuit, 1980), 267. Deleuze notes Tarde's influence on Foucault in Foucault, 81n6. 59. See Eric Alliez, 'Présentation: Tarde et le probléme de la constitution', in Tarde, Monadologie et sociologie, 9-32, see esp. 12, 20-25. 60. Tarde, Les lois de limitation, 212-213.

Other forms of art, such as dance, can occur collectively, and new movements might be invented by individuals, then imitated, and thus incrementally transformed. Movement—moving bodies, in particular—served as modern science's litmus test for understanding crowds and, by extension, the transformations of social life. Metaphorically and materially, movement, dance, and the figure of dancing—particularly 'Bacchic'-type ecstasies—operated as lenses through which to view the forms and misformations of social aggregation.

This way of seeing social formations by attending to the movements and mutual influence of bodies in space emerged in fuller force with the aestheticized, popular dance cultures of chorus lines represented (in Britain) by the famous precision-engineered Tiller Girls, discussed by Hewitt, Burt, and others; but may have emerged in the late nineteenth century in discourse on the far more ambivalently choreographic (and choreopolitical) movements of bodies spilling through streets.

Positive theories of imitation were not entirely new. As with the incendiary depictions of crowds as impulsive, beastly forces, earlier nineteenth-century medical theory provided the organic language and an alternative political ground for theorizing group life. Prosper Lucas, sixty years before Tarde, had set forward a theory of imitation foregrounding genius and art. In De l'imitation contagieuse [Of Contagious Imitation] (1833), Lucas posited that voluntary or 'mimic' imitation ('imitation mimique')—which he set in opposition to involuntary, 'sympathetic' imitation—constituted an art form in its own right, when employed intelligently, through the exercise of the passions, by persons of genius.® Even voluntary imitation of pathological phenomena—most frequently madness, chorea, epilepsy, and hysteria—contained a portion of artistry, derision, or simply interest, he argued, which could turn mimic or feigned symptoms real if performed with too much conviction (and art).® This view emphasized casual, recreational imitation, simulating slight convulsive movements or 'nervous attacks' and suspended at will.

SOCIAL BODIES

The 'social body' in nineteenth-century literature on choreomania is disruptive, spastic, jagged, and queer; dark, animal, and feminine; but also, significantly, aggregate. As a disorder of aggregate bodies, choreomania comes onto the modern social scientific scene as uncontrolled movement, signalling a choreopolitics of corporeal up______ Purposeful corporeal movement, positively allied with modern factories and modern, 61. Though the Tiller Girls were most famously described in the late 1920s by Siegfried Kracauer (1889-1966), they were active in Manchester as early as the 1890s (having formed as a group in 1889). Masterminded by music hall director John Tiller to counter the chaotic chorus lines of the day and offer instead a model of corporeal efficiency and precision, they quickly became emblems of the new, Taylorized, rationalized industrial West. See esp. Ramsay Burt, Alien Bodies, 72-85; Hewitt, Social Choreography, 177-212; Mark Franko, The Work of Dance: Labor, Movement, and Identity in the 1930s (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2002), 31-37; Felicia McCarren, Dancing Machines: Choreographies of the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2003), 142-144. See also Siegfried Kracauer, ‘The Mass Ornament’, in The Mass Ornament: Weimer Essays, ed. and trans. Thomas Y. Levin (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995), 75-86. 62. Lucas, De l'imitation contagieuse, 4-6. Drawing from Hecker’s work on choreomania, recently summarized in French by Emile Littré in the Gazette médicale de Paris [Paris Medical Gazette] (1833), as well as the article on chorea by French physician Jean-Baptiste Bouillaud (1796-1881) in the Dictionnaire de médecine et chirurgie pratique [Dictionary of Medicine and Surgical Practice] (1829-1836), Lucas emphasized the intensity, ‘strange colour’ (‘étrange couleur’), and ‘most bizarre force of contagious propagation’ (‘la force la plus bizarre de propagation contagieuse’) characterizing cases of ‘sympathetic imitation’ in the ‘vast’ epidemics of choreomania as well as in the chorea of his day. Further describing cases of epidemic convulsions among nuns in Germany, in Holland, and at Loudun, as well as among the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, Lucas suggested that these were variously marked by epilepsy, insanity, catalepsy, trembling, bleating like sheep or making other animal cries, and ecstasy. In De Vimitation contagieuse, 33-43. Noting that these cases had first been described by, among others, Pinel and Kaaw Boerhaave (1705- 1753), Lucas turned his attention to the nuns’ barking, nosebleeds, coughing, and other types of ‘neurotic motility’ and ‘extreme sensitivity’ situating these phenomena in a diagnostic line with choreas and choreomanias (8-21). Lucas argued that the nuns’ acts of imitation constituted sympathetic—involuntary—imitations of complex neuroses, whose symptoms could be observed even if underlying physiological processes could not be (32-33). See J. Bouillaud, ‘chorée’, in G. Andral et al., Dictionnaire de médecine et de chirurgie pratiques, 15 vols., vol. 5 (Paris: Gabon, Méquignon-Marvis, J.-B. Bailliare, Crochard, 1829-1836), 262-272; and Gazette médicale de Paris 4, 1.2, 3 January 1833, 5-6. 63. Lucas, De l'imitation contagieuse, 7-8. 64. Lucas, De l’imitation contagieuse, 8. Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads + 125 streamlined, efficient regimes______ At its most forceful, this fitful regime of corporeality was likened to plague. In this view, choreomania was a disorder of imitative crowds; specifically, choreomania erupted among groups of people imitating one another’s gestures, attitudes, and moods pathologically, as it seemed to those who viewed and attempted to diagnose them. With this medical theatre, the concept of the social body as something that could be ill and tended to violence came more fully into view.

In Mary Poovey’s analysis, the ‘social body’ in early nineteenth-century Britain signalled at once the mass of poor people to be disciplined and cared for by generally well-meaning individuals who classed themselves as their social superiors; and the larger organic whole into which these poorer people were folded. The notion of a ‘social body’ suggested at once separation and sequestration; tending-towards (or caring for) and keeping at bay. The social body thus came to signify a space of cultivation, hovering between the unkempt organic state in which the sick and poor were understood normally to reside and the charitable structures of uplifting which new social policies and institutions increasingly engaged.

Describing this modern set of practices as a process of ‘disaggregation’, Poovey argues that the social body emerged discursively in the nineteenth century as a sphere separate from politics and economics; this set in motion a range of ideas designed to cultivate society as an organic entity abstracted from political or economic pressures.¹

The emergence of sociology in the early decades of the nineteenth century thus configured itself in terms of social disorder and care; with this, neurology, the new science of motion, described pathological movements among disorderly groups and individuals in isolation. The ‘social body’ emerged in the nineteenth century as a body liable to be diseased on account of its excess movements, which multiplied and intensified through processes of imitation exacerbated in groups. In less politically incendiary cases, the social choreography of disrepair revealed a regime of machinic efficiency against which bodies and minds reacted: individuals engaging in inane kinetic sport, either semi-involuntarily mimicking one another through the corporeal play of jerks and twitches or finding ludic routes of escape from otherwise boring or oppressive living and working conditions.

In some cases, eccentric bouts of religious enthusiasm served as a playground for kinetic agitation in gatherings as large and popular as their participants were corporeally—and affectively—transfixed. In America, where new utopianisms were seizing religious groups in what appeared to be a wave of religious frenzy, eruptive movements—including all sorts of spasmodic individual corporeality—passed ever more into the scientific limelight, articulated in crowd psychology, neurology, and epidemiology as nervous disorders.

‘ALL THE COUNTRY WAS IN COMMOTION’: THE ‘JERKS’ IN KENTUCKY AND TENNESSEE

The ‘jerks’ in Kentucky and Tennessee were a far cry from the psychopathological, criminal crowd behaviour described in early social psychology, according to which idle men and women—those not engaged in productive labour—were most liable to gather, agitate, and revolt, provoking no less, in Fournial’s terms, than civilization’s degenerate collapse.² Yet as in the case of the medieval and early modern dancers described in previous chapters, religious enthusiasts’ spectacular Anson Rabinbach, The Human Motor: Energy, Fatigue, and the Origins of Modernity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), 3.66. Poovey notes that the ‘social body’ is a nineteenth-century variation on the medieval concept of the body politic, transformed by early modern times into the body of councillors extending the king’s own body and eventually in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries into the mass of urban poor. Mary Poovey, Making a Social Body: British Cultural Formation, 1830-1864 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 7-8. 67. Poovey, Making a Social Body, 13. 68. In Fournial, Essai sur la psychologie des foules, 37. 126 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE displays of gregarious behavior came to be folded into medical literature on nervous dis- ease and nervous imitation, further extending epidemiological analyses of crowds and theatri- cal gesture. Felix Robertson wrote his M.D. thesis, An Essay on Chorea Sti Viti, at the College of Physicians of Philadelphia in 1805, capitalizing on his native knowledge of the American South to contribute a new case study to the European literature on chorea, which was becoming one of the most fashionable fields of medical study. His work on the ‘jerks’ in Kentucky, Virginia, and his home state, Tennessee, brought a new etio- logical perspective to Chorea Sancti Viti, empha- sizing the brain and nerves’ susceptibility to the influence of ‘external bodies’. Stimuli exercised on one person’s brain and nerves provoked mus- cular reactions characterized by a ‘sympathy of motion’, accounting for the epidemic spread of choreic affections. The mere presence of kinetic agitation in the public sphere increased the likelihood of fur- ther agitation, as people imitated other people’s movements. The impressions left on their nerv- ous systems provoked a motor response causing the spectators, as he called them, to reproduce any movements they observed, yielding a result not unlike, he mused, ‘the resemblance that often takes place between man and wife, a resemblance which, before their marriage, did not exist’.”” To avoid the pernicious effects of this ‘sympathy of motion’ when the movements performed were excessive or violent, as in the case of the ‘jerks’ at Methodist camp meetings, Robertson exhorted physicians to isolate patients as much as possible. Physicians should keep patients’ minds ‘occupied on new and agreeable sub- jects . .. which would best be done by travelling with an agreeable companion through a highly cultivated or wild romantic country’, and ‘visit- ing natural and artificial curiosities, particularly of the more sublime kind. By these means’, he added, ‘new trains of associate motions would be produced, which from their novelty, &c. might at length overcome those which produced the dis- ease, and the excitability of the brain would thus be expended’.” Simple exposure to fresh land- scapes provided stimulus enough for patients to encounter new—far more wholesome—objects and actions to emulate. The case study that formed the core of Robertson’s dissertation, enabling him to exam- ine this ‘sympathy of motion’ in some detail, was an outbreak of imitative movement that swept through the United States from Ohio to Kentucky, Tennessee, and parts of Virginia in 1799-1805, presenting, as he put it, an ‘unparal- leled blaze of enthusiastic religion’.”* Hundreds, and soon thousands, of men, women, and chil- dren had started to participate in camp meetings, outdoor religious services that lasted from four days to three or four weeks. Participants traveled to Robertson's essay on Chorea Sancti Viti, which he situates in a historical line with treatises on chorea. Babington includes a passage from Robertson's essay in "The Dancing Mania." Thomas B. Futcher (1905) also wrote about the dancing mania. Robertson cited the importance of isolation in containing the spread of chorea. Léon Babonneix also emphasized the importance of isolation. Robertson described the impact of chorea, citing Peter Cartwright's autobiography and works by Richard M'Nemar, J. B. McMaster, and Charles A. Johnson. These works highlighted the significance of the dance of St. Vitus and its impact on society. In his History of the Presbyterian Church in the state of Kentucky (1847), Rev. Robert Davidson (1808-1876) noted that attendance at these meetings was widespread, as "the labourer quit his task; age snatched his crutch; youth forgot his pastimes; the plough was left in the furrow; the deer enjoyed a respite from the mountains; business of all kinds was suspended; dwelling-houses were deserted; whole neighbourhoods were emptied; bold hunters, and sober matrons, young men, maidens, and little children, flocked to the common centre of attraction; every difficulty was surmounted, every risk ventured." The enthusiasm appeared so violently and wholly to possess participants' bodies and minds as to constitute in Robertson's view a religious epidemic: "The disease no sooner appeared than it spread, with rapidity, through the medium of the principle of imitation: thus it was not uncommon for an affected person to communicate it to a greater part of the crowd, who, from curiosity or other motives, had collected around him." Though at the time of Robertson's writing, the excitement was present in "almost every part of Tennessee and Kentucky, and in various parts of Virginia," it had died down and was thought "not to be so contagious (or readily communicated) as at its commencement." This suggested to him that predisposition to religious enthusiasm was a pre-requisite for the contagiousness to take effect. As it had abated, so too had the camp meetings.

However, the contagiousness that had been reported, and the violence of the gestures performed, spawned a host of medical theories linking imitation, contagion, and acute scenes of enthusiastic motility, constituting a whole literature on choreomania as social affect. David W. Yandell (1826-1898), professor of surgery at the University of Louisville, Kentucky, emphasized the gestures' communicability. Writing in Brain in 1881, he remarked that "the movement proved highly contagious and spread in all directions." In his view, this was, again following Robertson, a form of chorea, though in some cases it bore a strong resemblance to epilepsy and, in the majority of cases, hysteria, not least on account of its contagious aspect. It "was eminently sympathetic in its nature," Yandell wrote, "as has been so often remarked of these affections. The convulsions once started in a congregation spread quickly through it, until all the fit subjects were convulsed." He added that "repetition greatly increased the proneness to the disorder, which was invited by the masses on the supposition that it was a true religious exercise."

Clinical descriptions offered by Robertson and Yandell suggest a paroxysmic event, invariably involving a spiritual leader whose magnanimous oration and ostentatious demonstrations of his own states of excitement provoked followers into similar states. This was markedly different from previous clinical descriptions of epidemic choreas and other epidemic events, in which whole groups seemed spontaneously to rise up as if of their own accord, without a leader. "After a rousing appeal to the feelings of the listeners," wrote Yandell, "and especially during spirited singing, one and another in the audience would fall suddenly to the ground and swoon away. .. . Some fell suddenly as if struck by lightning, while others were seized with a universal tremor before they fell shrieking." Only a few excited individuals were needed to get the whole assembly going. See David W. Yandell, "Epidemic Convulsions," Brain 4.3 (1881): 339-350, 340-341. He writes that at a religious meeting in the courthouse in Knoxville, 150 people were reported by an eyewitness to have been "jerking" at one time. But elsewhere "the frenzy reached a greater height," so that "at a religious meeting in Kentucky, not less than three thousand persons fell in convulsions to the ground." He also notes one concourse at which twenty thousand people were said to have been in attendance (340), although Peter Cartwright cites as many as twenty-five thousand in his Autobiography. Cartwright also estimates that some camp meetings lasted for a few weeks at a time, with up to thirty or forty ministers from different denominations preaching in different parts of the camp simultaneously (43). "And here," writes Yandell, "were united all the elements best suited to stir the emotional nature of man, and to derange his nervous system" (341).

74. Cited in Yandel, "Epidemic Convulsions," 340-341.
75. Robertson, An Essay on Chorea Sancti Viti, 10. See also 17, where Robertson concludes that "the disease thus produced in some, was excited in others by the principle of imitation."
76. Robertson, An Essay on Chorea Sancti Viti, 9.
77. Yandell, "Epidemic Convulsions," 344.
78. Yandell, "Epidemic Convulsions," 349.
79. "A few shrieks never failed to put the assembly in motion, and set men and women to falling all around." Yandell, "Epidemic Convulsions," 344.
128 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE "epidemic" of insanity alongside dancing disorders and crowd movements characterized by their spectacular showiness, the "involuntary excessiveness" with which they appeared in public space. Further symptoms included "a sense of "pins and needles,"" "numbness of body," and "[loss] of all volitional control of [the] muscles." Some symptoms seem to have provoked habituation, causing participants to "fall again under circumstances by no means exciting." Narration alone provoked paroxysms in the most unlikely (and often comical) circumstances: "women who had suffered repeat attacks sometimes fell from their horses" while relating their experiences and exercises to friends on their way to or from meeting-houses.* Some suffered from catalepsy—a suddenly rigid bodily state—lasting from a few minutes to two or three hours or, in extreme cases, up to a few days. As Yandell observed, drawing from eyewitness accounts, "others were violently convulsed as in hysteria or epilepsy, "wrought hard in fitful nervous agonies, the eyes rolling wildly". . . The extremities were cold; the face was pale or flushed, the breathing hard. Sensibility was annulled."** Extreme motion and extreme absence of motion equally characterized this apparently epidemic dancing disease. Strangest of all, eye-witnesses wrote, was when voluntary motion turned involuntary, so that actions commenced by choice came to be repeated as if automatic, producing an awkward sense of purposelessness and thus also of sheer theatre among those engaging in as well as viewing them. In Robertson's terms, participants "found themselves unable by voluntary efforts to suppress the contraction of their muscles, and to their own astonishment, and the diversion of many of the spectators, they continued to act from necessity the curious character which they had commenced from choice".** Contractions occurring primarily in the trunk and upper part of the body moreover made for a ridiculous countenance, resembling, Robertson put it, more a "live fish, when thrown on land, than any thing else to which I can compare them". The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

To counter this mimetic return to an animal-like state, 'bodily exercises' were generated to discipline the participants, regularizing the wild and frantic gestures their enthusiasm compelled them to perform. This theatricalization of initially spontaneous exercises made for a ritual of imitation and counter-imitation and a codified set of games that gained the popularity of a new sport, viewed with a frisson from the medical trenches.

W. L. Sutton (1797-1862), in his 'Report on the Medical Topography and the Epidemic Diseases of Kentucky', published in Transactions of the American Medical Association (1858), described the 'jerks', 'or, as it has been called, epidemic epilepsy', in some detail. He noted that the 'Jerking Exercise' was the 'most common' and 'most remarkable form of these remarkable manifestations', first appearing in East Tennessee, 'where several hundred of both sexes were seized with this strange affection'. It 'soon became so common, and marked by such strongly-marked motions, as to give the generic name to all these extravagances'. Their 'first and most simple appearance consisted in quick and violent motions of the forearms', '[agitating] the whole body violently'. Alternately, muscles of the neck were affected, so that the head 'jerked right and left, with a force and velocity perfectly inconceivable; no feature could be distinguished'.

His account suggests familiarity with Robertson's dissertation and reliance on direct observation, coloured by his amazement at the spectacularity of the whole affair:

At the first twitch, the headdresses and combs of females would be thrown to a distance, and when the hair was long, it would snap and crack like a whip. This may seem to some incredible, but numbers, now alive, were old enough then to mark and remember the fact. At times, the muscles of the back would be affected, and then the subject would be thrown violently to the ground, and suffer the most violent contortions, graphically compared to the fluttering of a fish when thrown upon the ground. Again, the muscles of the whole body would be affected, and the person would be jerked to and fro, in all directions. All control of the muscles was lost, and he must necessarily go as he was driven, whether it was in a violent dash to the ground, or to hop round with the head, limbs, and trunk jerking in every direction, as if they must inevitably fly asunder. The bosom would heave violently, and the countenance become disgustingly distorted.

Rev. Richard M'Nemar (1770-1839), an eyewitness and participant in the camp meetings, provided a further account in The Kentucky Revival (1807), emphasizing the jerkers' rapid head movements and radical disfiguration: they appeared to be inebriated, possessed by a violent movement that threw them uncontrollably to the ground and propelled them in every direction. This was a dramatic performance of dangerous sport: 'nothing in nature could better represent this strange and unaccountable operation', he wrote, 'than for one to goad another, alternately on every side, with a piece of red-hot iron'. Engaging with increasingly frenetic enthusiasm in hopping, running, twitching, and tossing objects and bodies about, they 'bounced from place to place like a football', losing all motor control. It was 'no small wonder to spectators', he added, that they might 'escape without injury'. Rev. Peter Cartwright (1785-1872) noted in his Autobiography (1856) that 'persons taken with the jerks, to obtain relief... would rise up and dance. Some would run, but could not get away'. Those who resisted usually suffered from the jerks even more. Variations proliferated. The Rolling Exercise 'consisted in becoming violently prostrated and doubled, with the head and feet together, rolling over and over, like a wheel; or turning over and over sidewise, like a log'. It required intense physical exertion: 'the subject took a sudden start, and felt impelled to run at his greatest speed, as if engaged in a race, leaping over obstacles in his way, with surprising agility. This was continued until his strength was completely exhausted, when he fell down in a syncopal'. Finally, the Dancing Exercise emerged. Although it was not one of the original forms of 'bodily exercise', it had become a regular practice among Kentucky revivalists by the winter of 1805. Following the lead of a Mr. Thomson, they would 'go to dancing', as Sutton noted. Thomson was reported at the close of a camp meeting at Turtle Creek in 1804 to have 'gone to dancing, ... [continuing] this movement around the stand, in a regular manner for an hour or more, repeating in a low voice, all the time, "This is the Holy Ghost! Glory!"'. Offering writers a puzzling picture of kinetic prostration, delusion, and collective insanity, these religious enthusiasts appeared nonetheless to be having a raucous good time just as they were transfixed by the motions—and emotions—of their collective games. Like the Dancing Exercise, the Barking Exercise was a latecomer to the fad, consisting 'in the subject getting down on his hands and feet, and barking, snapping, and growling in a degree so natural as to deceive the unwary, unless they had their eyes directed to the spot whence the sounds proceeded. It may be difficult in ordinary times', wrote Sutton, 'to conceive how decent, respectable men could be induced to go through these extravagances'. Their mimetic return to animality was so genuine it 'looked strangely enough to see it done with the utmost solemnity'. But, Sutton argued, 'it would seem that no man could command his countenance, when he would hear these ejaculations interspersed with texts of Scripture: as, "Every knee shall bow—wow—wow; and every tongue shall confess." The Barking Exercise served as a culmination of all the others, so that even members of high society were possessed by this 'mortifying' fervor and barked. Barking might also lead to dancing, and vice versa, so that once a 'paroxysm had come on, and the will was powerless to arrest it', subjects could 'substitute other actions for the form with which he had been seized. Thus those who were invaded by the 'barking exercise' were usually able to change it into 'dancing!' 89. Sutton, 'Report on the Medical Topography', 120.
90. Sutton, 'Report on the Medical Topography', 120-121.
91. Sutton, 'Report on the Medical Topography', 121.
92. Sutton, 'Report on the Medical Topography', 121.
93. Sutton, 'Report on the Medical Topography', 121.
94. Sutton, 'Report on the Medical Topography', 122.
130 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE
Yandell argued that 'some of the actors in these strange scenes' bordered on insanity. One participant related that 'while under conviction on account of his sins he went about the woods for two years, through rain and snow, "roaring, howling, praying, day and night."'*> Millennialist visions and trances seized thousands,* exacerbating the excitement already produced by this festive atmosphere, recalling for some observers, such as Robertson, the St. Vitus's dancers whose apocalyptic hallucinations and fits of syncope caused them to jerk and twitch, leaping over imagined rivers of blood (chapter 2). But to physicians reading the eyewitness reports, the fits of agitation and visions provided a theatre of observation in its own right: viewed from afar, these contorted figures had the appearance of persons possessed by a strange delirium doubling as a neuropathological condition foregrounding involuntary movement, and presenting all the difficulties of interpretation that any piece of theatre or literature might. In Sutton's terms, all had one thing in common: extravagance. These were reckless exercises performed without reason or restraint. The theatricality and baroqueness of the movements constituted their status as disease: they appeared superfluous, wasteful, luxurious, and irrational. Those engaging in them did so without reserve. This was why they were, he thought, potentially dangerous: together, these people exacerbated one another's motoric impulses, stimulated by sympathy and a kinetic contagiousness that spread uncurbed. Appropriately, the most commonly prescribed remedy against these fits of dancing, barking, jerking, falling, visions, and trances—besides Robertson's exhortation to isolation and sublime walks in the woods—was the exercise of moral discipline and fear. At a few of the congregations, including one led by Rev. Joseph Lyle in a sermon titled 'Order' in July 1803, threats to turn convulsive members out of doors succeeded in dampening down some of the frenetic activity, until it abated entirely." This proved to observers figuratively offstage that the movements were not literally contagious, not in a bacteriological sense, although members of the congregations excited one another so as to feel—and, significantly, look—as if these movements were spontaneous, automatic, and out of control. In Foucault's terms, a regime of discipline had gradually emerged over the course of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries aligning the individual, the subject and 'somatic singularity'; the individual was controlled through institutional mechanisms of punishment and an insidious system of normalizing checks and balances. But the medical literature on epidemic disorders of the nervous system also suggests a process of disindividuation that called for corporeal control just as it set aside the idea of the juridical or the individual—those Foucault claimed constituted 'Man' in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.°° Instead, epidemic madness and collective group behaviors suggested to writers a gregarious impulse at the heart of religious and social movements that warranted medical attention in its own right. The individual was not the only or even the prime subject of modern scientific debate; groups, and the many forms they could take, swarmed at the heart of modern concepts of energetic expenditure, affective belonging, and states of body and mind co-constituting the political subject, as well as its amorphous underclass, the ‘social body’. The movements of groups, and the choreographies defining these movements—triggered by leaders, and abated by sermons—revealed a disciplinary node con-joining medical, political, religious, social, and aesthetic figures in a modern state of being (and collective association) that enveloped the past into its folds. This collective figure appeared in social scientific literature as primitive and contemporary, animal and modern: moving groups offered insight into the workings of social life and the mechanisms of spontaneous human activity that were apparently moving its cogs.

1. Yandell, ‘Epidemic Convulsions’, 342. Yandell also notes, however, that the exercises did not usually cause insanity: ‘it is remarkable that, notwithstanding the intensity and duration of this nervous disorder’, he wrote, ‘no instance is recorded in which permanent insanity resulted from it’ (349).
2. At a camp meeting at Cane Ridge, three thousand persons were said to have ‘fallen’ in the Falling Exercise, while at Paint Creek and Pleasant Point, two hundred and three hundred persons, respectively, fell to the ground in fits of syncope. Trances and visions were common, so that ‘those who had been subject to syncope or swooning, would, upon recovering, detail visions which they had seen, and sing "in the strains of heaven," and discourse and exhort in a style far beyond what was supposed to be their ability’ (Sutton, ‘Report on the Medical Topography’, 119-121). See also Cartwright, Autobiography, 46.
3. Yandell, ‘Epidemic Convulsions’, 349.
4. See esp. Foucault, Le pouvoir psychiatrique, 56-60.
5. Foucault, Le pouvoir psychiatrique, 60. Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads + 131 EPIDEMIC CONVULSIONS IN HOSPITALS, SCHOOLS, CONVENTS, AND FACTORIES

Factories, convents, and schools proved key sites for the observation of pathological acts of sympathetic imitation, prompting a further explosion of medical literature drawing attention to the mechanistic responses of bodies to institutional settings. As Robertson and others noted, the human propensity to imitate motor behaviors sympathetically was not confined to large religious or political groups, although emotions were at a peak in those settings. A range of further cases offered opportunities for direct observation in confined spaces, where sympathy was even more liable to spread. ‘In the Pennsylvania Hospital’, Robertson wrote, ‘there occurred a few years since a... remarkable instance of ... [sympathy of motion]; an epileptic patient was brought into the house and was seized in the long room with a fit; and a number of convalescents having collected around him, several of them were in like manner, seized with convulsions’.1 In an episode reported from the Shetland Islands, a single epileptic seizure catalyzed a cluster of fits resembling it in form though not in substance: the imitators were not epileptic but seemed to have reproduced the epileptic seizure almost perfectly. Not only was the capacity for imitation noteworthy, but the convulsive nature of these gestures arrested physicians’ attention as well.10 One case, born, in its observers’ terms, from physically and morally oppressive working conditions, emerged in the context of a cotton manufactory at Hodden Bridge, Lancashire, reported in a 1787 issue of Gentleman’s Magazine. One young woman had—in jest—slipped a mouse into another one's shirt, knowing that the girl was terrified of mice. The latter 'was immediately thrown into a fit, and continued in it, with the most violent convulsions, for twenty-four hours'. The next day, three more girls were 'seized' in this way, and the next day six more. According to Hecker, who saw this as a case of morbid sympathy, the women were not predisposed to nervous disorders—they had not suffered any in the past—but the instinct of imitation provoked them to react to the first girl's convulsions with more of the same.

News spread, and now the sole idea that the cotton might be infected provoked yet more convulsions, among people not all of whom worked at this factory. The mere idea that the cotton might have been infected sufficed to set up to twenty-four people, mostly young women, into seizures, characterized by fits of anxiety, strangulation, and convulsions 'so violent as to last without any intermission from a quarter of an hour to twenty-four hours, and to require four or five persons to prevent the patients from tearing their hair and dashing their heads against the floor or walls'.

The initial reports had caused such alarm that the cotton mill was shut down, on the grounds that a disease might have been introduced into a bag of cotton.' A doctor was sent for, who administered electric shocks by way of a 'portable electric machine', which 'universally relieved' the patients, who were then enjoined to 'take a cheerful glass and join in a dance'; they returned to work the next day, with the exception of two or three, who were 'much weakened by their fits'.

In a rare moment of sympathy with the plight of these women—working women, in this case—Hecker attributed this episode to their 'miserable and confined life in the work-rooms of a spinning manufactory'. Although he also mused that this sort of situation was far less likely to produce convulsions than it was religious enthusiasm. The girls may have been bored.

Robertson, An Essay on Chorea Sancti Viti, 19. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 135; Samuel Hibbert, A description of the Shetland Islands, comprising an account of their geology, scenery, antiquities, and superstitions (Edinburgh: A. Constable & Co., 1822), 399-401. Further accounts of church grounds in Shetland from the same period, including The History and Description of the Shetland Islands (1838) by Rev. James Catton (1823-1863), suggest that as in many very remote areas, churchgoing was an occasion for villagers to meet socially, travelling often many miles. James Catton, The History and Description of the Shetland Islands; with an account of the manners, customs, circumstances, superstitions and religion of the inhabitants (Wainfleet: P. I. Tuxford, 1838). See also Anon., A Walk in Shetland by Two Eccentrics (Edinburgh: Stillies, Brothers; and Aberdeen: Lewis Smith, 1831). Eliza Edmondston (1802-1869), in Sketches and Tales of the Shetland Islands (1856), points out the Shetlanders' quite ambivalent relationship to religion. Shetland was, she wrote, 'a wild and primitive district'; it presented 'pictures' of 'a state of society rapidly disappearing under the influence of modern advancement'. In Eliza Edmondston, Sketches and Tales of the Shetland Islands (Edinburgh: Sutherland & Knox; and London: Simpkin, Marshall & Co., 1856), 3, 16. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 130. 104, Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 131. 132. EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARTIFACT and suffered from exhaustion caused by the strenuous and repetitive nature of their work. This sparked an upheaval on the workroom floor, quickly abated by the use of electric shocks and, paradoxically, a socially sanctioned, medically prescribed dance. Scenes of imitation frequently involved young women, who in medical literature epitomized an automatic and animal tendency to spontaneous and uncontrolled movement.

In January 1801, a young woman visited a patient being treated for tetanic spasms at the Charité hospital in Berlin. Upon entering the ward, the woman suddenly 'fell down in strong convulsions', at the sight of which 'six other female patients immediately became affected in the same way, and by degrees eight more were in like manner attacked with strong convulsions'. Hecker argued that the women's behavior was comparable to that of a 'flock of sheep' and suggested that convulsions were signs of strong emotion: 'every species of enthusiasm', he wrote, 'every strong affection, every violent passion, may lead to convulsions—to mental disorders—to a concussion of the nerves, from the sensorium to the very finest extremities of the spinal cord. The whole world is full of examples of this afflicting state of turmoil, which, when the mind is carried away by the force of a sensual impression that destroys its freedom, is irresistibly propagated by imitation. Those who are thus infected do not spare even their own lives, but, as a hunted flock of sheep will follow their leader'.

Women were at the helm of a new feminized social sphere catalyzing volatile tendencies among bodies in public to move without the supposedly rational benefit of foresight. Imitation, widely construed in medical literature as an elemental component of social interaction and social life, also described a type of pathological contagion on the rise as urban centers and industrial labor were increasingly putting women (and men) in proximity with one another. Paris, in Laborde's terms, was the first true capital of the world, but it was also an agitated den teeming with perversions, ambitions, and madness.'

Durkheim argued in De la division du travail social [On the Division of Social Labor] (1893) that social solidarity was also on the rise as well following the Industrial Revolution, as was individual autonomy—and both were rising in tandem with broader negative and positive transformations of social relations resulting from the new division of social labor. This set of changes resulted in increased contact among strangers as well as a sense of social alienation, what Durkheim called anomie, a feeling of lawlessness which provoked crises and depressions among workers for whom the order of the world had become overturned.

In this context, the seeming rise of epidemic hysteria and convulsions revealed a rift: individual and collective bodies were rebelling, and the subjects' minds and bodies appeared disengaged. As a metaphor, the motor impulse coincided with a rise in mechanistic approaches to labor—allied with productivism—rendering women especially vulnerable. For the French polymath Emile Littré (1801-1891), St. Vitus's dance (which he equated with chorea) was a mental epidemic disorder propagated by motoric imitation.

August Hirsch (1817-1894), in his Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology (1886), described a hysterical outbreak 'of a religious kind' in Haute-Savoie in 1857, intimating that women, whom he considered more subject to imitation, were at once more animal, more 105. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 131. 106, Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 132. Félix Bricheteau reports a similar episode in ‘Relation d’une épidémie de chorée observée à Hépital Necker’, Archives générales de médecine 1 (1863): 433-447 and 532-549. 107. Laborde, Les hommes, 38. 108. Emile Durkheim, De la division du travail social, 8th ed. (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1967), xliii-xliv. 109. See also Durkheim’s study of anomie, specifically ‘anomic suicide’, in Le suicide (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2002), 264-311. For his indictment of Tarde’s concept of imitation as ‘contagion’, see esp. 108-117. 110. Sighele, La foule criminelle, 42. See Emile Littré, ‘Des grandes épidémies’, Revue des Deux-Mondes, 15 January 1836, reprinted in Emile Littré, Médecine et médecins (Paris: Didier, 1872), 1-40. Littré borrows liberally from Hecker's recently translated writing on the dancing mania and the Black Death, which he summarized in a book review published in the Gazette médicale de Paris (see chapter 1 here). See also Littré's detailed account in his Dictionnaire de médecine, de chirurgie, de pharmacie et des sciences qui s'y rapportent [Dictionary of Medicine, Surgery, Pharmacy, and Related Sciences]. Emile Littré, ‘Chorée’, Dictionnaire de médecine, de chirurgie, de pharmacie et des sciences qui s’y rattachent, 21st ed., ed. Gilbert Augustin (Paris: J.-B. Bailliére, 1905-1908), 313-315. Under the entry for 'Chorémanie', Littré refers the reader to 'Chorée', which he designates as its synonym (315). In the foundational Dictionnaire de la langue frangaise [Dictionary of the French Language], Littré offers brief entries for 'Chorée' and 'Chorémanie', though he notes them as synonyms only. Both designate an 'illness, also referred to as St. Vitus's dance [danse de St-Guy], consisting of continuous, irregular, and involuntary movements'. In Emile Littré, Dictionnaire de la langue frangaise, 4 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1873), vol. 1, 612. Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads + 133 machinic, and less well adapted to the strictures of a new mechanistic workplace, which favoured individualism just as it sought to break labour down into its component parts. Imitation was at the opposite end of individualism, dissolving it, reaggregating men and women into a social horde. The horde was in this sense understood as feminine and impulsive. Yet sympathetic behav- iours also revealed states of social solidarity and mutuality, discursively tied back in Hirsch's writ- ing, as in his contemporaries', to a pre-civilized state. Modernity and sociality seemed at once inextricably tied together and fundamentally incompatible. Attempts in the new social scien- tific fields to come to terms with motor impulses in groups and individuals persisted in describing restless states as ancient, feminine, and organic, revealing a pervasive prejudice according to which purportedly premodern beings sit closer on the biosocial scale to an automatic animal core. "WORKING THE BODY LIKE A MACHINE': COMIC ANTICS IN THE BACKWOODS What theorists of the 'mirror neuron' have observed, in______ The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

For Rabinbach, social medicine and reform emerged in the last quarter of the nineteenth century to remedy new regimes of hyperproductivity entangled in a physiological discourse on energetic fatigue, signaling the converse of play. Workers engaged in too much work became sick with exhaustion and loss of vitality. Indeed, alongside the scientization of worker productivity (productivism), moments of idleness, boredom, and play arose as instances of archaic excess, a premodern vitality that had no more place in the normative sphere of overwork, whose disorder and disease paradoxically appeared as an excess of imitative gesture. Imitation thus worked doubly hard in the nineteenth century as a metaphor suggesting at once the breakdown of individuality and the human spectacle of mutuality in shared gestures that mechanically jolted workers out of their monotonous everyday—eruptions of premodern idle life onto the industrial stage. Imitation in this sense was experienced as pathological and entertaining, science and art. But most humorous was individual men and women's bodies' awkwardly attempting to mimic the jagged angularity and automatisms of the machine.

Amply theorized with regard to the cinematic representation of it by Charlie Chaplin (1889-1977) in Modern Times (1936), as Gordon has shown, automatic angularity had a far earlier start as a neurological disease allying boredom, monotony, involuntary gesture, and work. The neurologist George Beard (1839-1883), in an article published in the Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease in 1878, described a lumberjack community in the Moosehead Lake area of northern Maine, some of whose members, in response to a loud noise, sharp command, or 'startle', jumped suddenly and engaged in echolalia (the immediate and apparently meaningless repetition of someone else's words) and automatic obedience, performing actions such as hitting a close friend upon command or placing their hands in a fire. They could repeat lines from Virgil and jump off the ground, 'the height of the jump [being] proportional to the degree of unexpectedness of a startle'.1

Sighele called this 'psychic mimeticism', a neurosis. On Beard's work, see F. Andermann and E. Andermann, 'Startle Disorders of Man: Hyperekplexia, Jumping and Startle Epilepsy', Brain & Development 10.4 (1988): 213-222, 216-217; and FE. Andermann and E. Andermann, 'Hyperekplexia and Other Disorders of Startle: Differential Diagnosis with Epilepsy', in Peter W. Kaplan and Robert S. Fisher, eds., Imitators of Epilepsy, 2nd ed. (New York: Demos Medical, 2005), 185-190. On the neurophysiological triggering of various automatic behaviors, including startle, see also Devereux, 'Normal et anormal', 58-62. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

H. and J.-M. Saint-Hilaire and L. Granger, ‘related to the historically boring nature of life for lumberjacks in the forests of Québec and Maine, where jumpers provided a welcome distraction’. Neurologists Frederick and Eva Andermann further note that the jumpers themselves, and those watching them, laugh after being startled; ‘jumping provided a ready source of amusement in the lumber camps’. Beard was aware of the hereditary nature of the disease but, Andermann and Andermann note, ‘did not believe that the condition represented a “pathological nervous disease”; instead he considered it to be a “fixed psychological state” and “a remarkable illustration of the involuntary life.”’ A long day’s work in the logging camps prompted loggers to engage in ‘mutual tickling, punching, and startling of the fearful’, so that ‘this repeated horseplay’ led to jumping as ‘“probably an evolution of tickling.”’ Acts of automatic imitation offered participants a source of release from the boredom of everyday life. As Mary Merryweather (c. 1813-1880) noted in Experience of Factory Life (1862), she and her co-workers were often bored and sought socially sanctioned forms of relief: ‘when no other [excitement] was provided, religious enthusiasm would occasionally take its place’. Osler further argued that ‘the habit of working the body like a machine’, which was a product of the Industrial Revolution, led to a new concept of energy, including ‘energy depletion’ and fatigue, and concepts of stress. Yet jerking and ‘startle’ behaviors and acts of kinetically comical and excessive religious enthusiasm offered social solidarity as well as an occasion for recreation, often at the protagonist’s expense. De la Tourette, who translated Beard’s writing on startle disorders, argued in ‘Etude sur une affection nerveuse caractérisée par l’incoordination motrice accompagnée d’écholalie et de coprolalie’ [Study on a Nervous Affection Characterized by Motor Incoordination Accompanied by Echolalia and Coprolalia], in the Archives of Neurology (1884), that startle disorders, including miryachit (in Siberia) and latah (in Southeast Asia), presented a theatrical performance of motor actions and role play. Coprolalia (involuntary swearing) added a verbal dimension to these bodily acts. Transculturally and transhistorically, bodies in states of boredom performing automatic jumps and startles provided a spectacle to peers apparently suffering from a dearth of productivity—idleness understood in these terms to be pathological. Rabinbach suggests ‘idleness and savagery’ were widely viewed in the nineteenth century together, both equally F. C. Thorne, "Startle Neurosis," American Journal of Psychiatry 101 (1944): 105-109. The gradual disappearance of the jumping Frenchmen has been attributed to the reduction of boredom and isolation among modern lumberjacks (Howard and Ford, "From the Jumping Frenchmen of Maine," 704; Saint-Hilaire et al., "Jumping Frenchmen of Maine," 1269-1271). J. Hardison described a similarity to "goos-eyeness" in "Are the Jumping Frenchmen of Maine Goosey?" Journal of the American Medical Association 244 (1980): 70.

115. Andermann and Andermann, "Startle Disorders of Man," 219. George Rosen argues that psychic epidemics, including the Kentucky revival, are caused largely by their geographic location, when it causes social isolation due to remoteness. "Under such conditions," he writes, "there were few sources of recreation to relieve the monotony of daily life." In Rosen, Madness in Society, 217.

116. Andermann and Andermann, "Startle Disorders of Man," 217. 117. Mary Merryweather, Experience of Factory Life, being a record of fourteen years' work at Mr. Courtauld's silk mill at Halstead, in Essex, 3rd ed. (London: E. Faithfull, 1862), 18. See Rosen, Madness in Society, 220.

118. In L. J. Kirmayer and D. Groleau, "Affective Disorders in Cultural Context," Psychiatric Clinics of North America 24.3 (2001): 465-478, 469.

119. Gilles de la Tourette, "Etude sur une affection nerveuse caractérisée par I'incoordination motrice accompagnée d’écholalie et de coprolalie," Archives of Neurology 9 (1884): 19-42; 158-200. Andermann and Andermann, in "Startle Disorders of Man," draw comparisons between latah and jumping, underscoring the performative value of what neurolo- gist R. C. Simons calls "Role Latah," the last of three phases of latah: the three phases, Andermann and Andermann write, include "first, the immediate response, corresponding to excessive startle; second, the attention capture which corresponds Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads + 135 applicable to the degenerate, primitives, and the working classes.1”° Role play was not new and suggested the comedic interchangeability of individuals via the interplay of their gestures. Sydenham had noted the pantomimic—highly entertaining—quality of St. Vitus's dance in Schedula Monitoria (1686), in which he described involuntary actions resulting in an uncannily automatic performance, and thus comedy. "St. Vitus's dance shows itself by a halting, or rather an unsteady movement of one of the legs, which the patient drags," he wrote. "Then it is seen in the hand of the same side. The patient cannot keep it a moment in its place, whether he lay it upon his breast or any other part of his body. Do what he may it will be jerked elsewhere convulsively." This provoked entertainment for onlookers: "if any vessel filled with drink be put into his hand, before it reaches his mouth he will exhibit a thousand gesticulations like a mountebank. He holds the cup out straight, as if to move it to his mouth, but has his hand carried elsewhere by sudden jerks. Then, perhaps, he contrives to bring it to his mouth. If so, he will drink the liquid off at a gulp; just as if he were trying to amuse the spectators by his antics." The pantomimic aspect of the jerks and convulsions, further remarked upon by Dr. Alexander Tweedie (1794-1884) in A System of Practical Medicine (1______ "This automatic mimesis accounted for the gestures' tendency to 'spread by contagion' or 'sympathy', through the involuntary movement of the sympathetic nervous system. This was a social theatre of jerks, convulsions, and twitches, translated into medical terms; it defined the new field of social epidemiology, in which ambivalent forms of motor contagion and ostensibly benign social play were described as pathological events.

From a social and affective standpoint, the lumberjacks' horseplay may have troubled some of those suffering from startle, who would have been ostracized; so, too, those performing sharp, involuntary gestures may have unwillingly amused their witnesses, in the cases of St. Vitus's dance that Sydenham describes. Involuntary gestures were comical to spectators, belying a fear of social contagiousness, motor dysfunction, and loss of control. Bergson, Tarde's successor at the Collége de France in 1904, wrote that broken, awkward bodies, subject to mishaps—trips, falls, burps, and farts—are humorous, comic bodies, as opposed to nearly abstract the body of the tragic actor, who does not sit, for fear of drawing attention to corporeal vulnerabilities. The humour involved in comedy is that which draws attention to the mechanical, even mechanistic quality of a body that can fall apart.'

Taken in this light, choreomania appeared to signal the subversively comic to expletive, echopraxia and automatic obedience. The third component, according to Simons, they write, is '“Role Latah", consisting of an elaboration of some of the responses into intentionally amusing performances. This may be an important component of this disorder in Imu, the Ainu equivalent of latah, where affected individuals attend special functions expecting to 'perform.' But, they add that this 'willingness to perform is not a feature of jumping, which is considered a handicap and a disability in North American society' (219). See R. C. Simons, 'The Resolution of the Latah Paradox', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 168.4 (1980): 195-206.

Miryachit, or 'Arctic hysteria' (also known as 'olonism'), from the Siberian Tungus word meaning '“doing something stupid and useless because of a sudden fear', is a startle disorder with a 'social function', Howard and Ford note reprising Russian anthropologist Sergei M. Shirokogoroff, 'in that it provides a spectacle and entertainment for the Tungus, “without which Tungus life would be impoverished”' (Howard and Ford, 'From the Jumping Frenchmen of Maine', 700). See Sergei M. Shirokogoroff, The Psychomental Complex of the Tungus (London: Kegan Paul, 1935), and David F. Aberle, 'Arctic Hysteria and Latah in Malaysia', New York Academy of Sciences 14 (1952): 291-297.

Howard and Ford note that 'Gilles de la Tourette (1884), who translated Beard's writings, was the first to suggest that miryachit and latah were the same condition (as were, he believed, “jumping,” and the convulsive tic that bears his name)' (‘From the Jumping Frenchmen of Maine', 700). William A. Hammond describes an account of a journey from the Pacific Ocean through Asia to the United States by two navy men who witness a disorder 'known to Russians by the Name of Miryachit'; Hammond compares this to Beard's description of the jumping Frenchmen, as well as to a sleep disorder ('sleep-drunkenness') resulting in sudden acts of violence. In William A. Hammond, 'Miryachit: A Newly Discovered Disease of the Nervous System and Its Analogues', British Medical Journal 1." 1216 (1884): 758-759.
120. Rabinbach, The Human Motor, 29.
121. Cited in Osler, On Chorea, 3 (emphasis mine). See Thomas Sydenham, Processus integri in Morbis fere omnibus Curandis (London, 1692).
Hirsch, Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology, vol. 3, 525, where he describes the Kentucky revivalists as, engaging in ‘a pantomime performance called “the jerks.” Dr. Alexander Tweedie writes that ‘the patient .. . moves irregularly from side to side, or proceeds by jumps or starts; one foot is rather dragged than lifted, and the movements of the arms resemble the gesticulations of players’. Alexander Tweedie, A System of Practical Medicine (Philadelphia: Lea & Blanchard, 1840), 327.
123. Henri Bergson, Le rire: Essai sur la signification du comique (Paris: PUF Quadrige, 1999).
136 «+ EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE potential of clumsily moving bodies to contagion one another and thus to assail the social whole. PRIMITIVISM, FASCISM, AND THE ‘BIOLOGIC CORE’ Increasing distinctions at the turn of the twen- tieth century between contagion, suggestion, and imitation revealed the continued growth of scientific interest in these fields as ideas about—and practices harnessing—social bodies became ever more powerfully aligned with the efficient workings of nation states. As the chief physician at the Asiles de la Seine, Dr. Auguste Vigouroux (1866-1918), and Dr. Paul Juquelier (1876-1921), professor of clinical medicine at the Faculté de Médecine in Paris, wrote in La contagion mentale [Mental Contagion] (1905), experimental psychology in the early twentieth century used ‘contagion’ metaphorically to dis- cuss cases of mental contamination or infection not literally caused by germs. But this type of contagion was a variant of (and to be differen- tiated from) ‘imitation’, inasmuch as ‘mental contagion’ was involuntary. It also differed from ‘suggestion’ (in the old sense of Mesmerism, or hypnosis), whose effects may emerge over time. Mental contagion was, in contrast, they argued, always spontaneous.' As they put it, it was the pathological transmission of an element or agent—not exactly microbial—whose effects on the person ‘contagioned’ by the ‘contagioner’ were immediate, involuntary, and irresistible. ‘Mental’ (or ‘psychic’) qualities were a function of the cerebrospinal axis, so that ‘contagion- ers’ could affect the physical reflexes, voluntary movements, and emotional states, as well as the ideas and beliefs, of others.1*° But although the metaphorical use of con- tagion, suggestion, imitation, and sympathy to describe crowd movements was becoming popu- lar among some psychologists, sociologists, and other medical and social scientific writers by the early twentieth century, others still used these terms to denote physical or biological hierar- chies across cultures, setting those who were purportedly lowest on the evolutionary scale as those most prone to various types of mimesis. E. M. Davenport (1866-1956), in his work of religious and social anthropology Primitive Traits in Religious Revivals (1905), argued that ‘nervous instability’ was ‘a normal characteristic of primi- tive man’, appearing among northern Siberian tribes, North American Indians, and others.1”° ‘Likeminded people are those whose mental and nervous organizations respond in like ways to the same stimuli’, Davenport argued. “They might conceivably respond unconsciously to the same stimuli, as animals do’, in which case ‘we should . . . call them instinctively likeminded’. But, such a ‘low scale of human development’ being unlikely, ‘sympathetic likemindedness’ more accurately described the mental characteristics of people acting under the influence of suggestibility, imitativeness, imagination, and heightened emotion. These traits, which he deemed ‘exceedingly primitive’ and ‘probably universal’, were responsible for ‘impulsive social action’ exercised primarily among people ‘who have least inhibitory control’. A population ‘under control’ was, conversely, one in which these tendencies were in check; and in which ‘we have deliberation and public opinion and social evolution rather than revolution’.”

Supposedly, primitive people—not only in the past but in the present as well—were not only more prone to impulses leading to acts of sympathetic contagion but also on that account more liable to engage in spontaneous acts of social rebellion and political revolt. As theories of crowds and mobs, masses and publics, came to be developed more systematically in the 1910s and 1920s in works of social psychology by E. A. Ross (1866-1951) and others linking democratic and social democratic movements to biologically conceived public life, so too interest in crazes, fads, fashions, and the aesthetic structures of nation states gained greater sway.

F. M. Davenport, Primitive Traits in Religious Revivals: A Study in Mental and Social Evolution (New York: Macmillan, 1905), ix-x.

Davenport, Primitive Traits, 2-3.

See Ross, Social Psychology; and Wilfred Trotter, Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1916), influenced by Le Bon. The frequent reprinting of Mackay’s Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds at the start of the twentieth century suggests its continued influence in those years. Mobiles, Mobs, and Monads + 137 social theorist Wilhelm Reich (1897-1957) took this further: fascism, which his ‘medical experiences [as a physician] with men and women of various classes, races, nations, religious beliefs, etc.’ taught him penetrates the ‘biologic core’, ‘relies . . . on the mystical thinking and sentiments of the masses’.

It could be fought ‘only if . . . the mystical contagion of the masses is tackled through education and hygiene’. The social-psychological disease he was describing, a disease of ‘all the irrational reactions of the average human character’, took physical and mental order, contagion, imitation, and sympathy to the 1930s world of over-mechanization and ‘biologic rigidity’. People engaged in mundane, mechanical work, detached from their natural, biological needs, including sexual health and gratification (what he called the ‘function of orgasm’), yielded a ‘sick society’. Depersonalization and dissociation from the biologic core resulted not only in fascism but the inhibited, miserable, and angry mysticism of the masses. A renewed sex-economy, for Reich, would liberate society from the enclosure of the past. In the 1960s, Canetti's writings described a renewed taxonomy of crowds, including the masse de fête, a celebratory gathering marked by joy, vitality, and gregariousness. The masse de fête was also marked by repetition, linking pastness and futurity, bringing individuals together in a celebration that promised further fêtes to come. These fêtes allowed for the public performance of play and the corporeal show of solidarity, serving as grounds for the constitution of a living political arena that allowed for insubordination and vivacity.

The next chapter turns to the emergence of neurology as a science of movement, recuperating ancient figures into a modern clinical setting. Charcot and his collaborators practiced "retrospective medicine," informed by visual and narrative montage. They read scenes from the past as scenes of hysteroepilepsy and hysteria, chorea and choreomania. This comparative exercise led to the pursuit of comparative work outside hospital walls, seeking modern-day remains of choreomania in neighboring Luxembourg. With Meige, the shift to an ethnographic method gave way to a flurry of further sightings of "choreomania" in the colonial world.

References:

129. Wilhelm Reich, The Mass Psychology of Fascism, ed. Mary Higgins and Chester M. Raphael, trans. Vincent R. Carfagno (New York: Farrar, Strauss and Giroux, 1970), xiii, 121; see also esp. xi-xxvii and 115-142.
130. Reich, The Mass Psychology, 121.
131. Reich, The Mass Psychology, xiv.
138 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE
Médecine Rétrospective
Hysteria's Archival Drag

Hysteria marks the eruption of the lower, the animal, signifying a sexuality that is anti-social, even criminal, and—worst of all—inexplicable.

—Elin Diamond, Unmaking Mimesis (1997)

To understand history . . . one has to be a physician.

—Lucien Nass, Les névrosés de l'histoire (1908)

Hysteria . . . requires an audience

—Georges Devereux, ‘Normal et anormal’ (1956)

HYSTEROEPILEPTIC REPERFORMANCE AND ARCHIVAL DRAG

Hysteria, Diamond points out, is fundamentally illegible. Yet physicians have persisted in trying to 'read' hysteria in their patients' bodies for over a century. Symptoms including tremors, falls, hallucinations, and a cast of melodramatic bodily gestures taxonomized by Charcot betray the hysteric's psychosomatic disintegration and, simultaneously, her unwitting participation in a knowable, codifiable language of sexual and emotional repression and excess. Often female, the hysteric is conceived as a mad woman, barely more than a girl, whose affliction is not just organic but also fantastical. She imagines her ills and performs her distress according to a repeatable, even learnable language composed of sexually suggestive arcs de cercles (arched backs); hammering and other 'labouring' motions; religious poses, including crucifixions; and whole-body actions reminiscent of popular dances. As Janet Beizer suggests, the hysteric has typically been considered in twentieth- and twenty-first century feminist and cultural criticism heroically to express the inexpressible, rallied to a feminist cause influentially articulated by Héléne Cixous and Catherine Clément (in La Jeune Née [1975]). 1. Elin Diamond, Unmaking Mimesis: Essays on Feminism and Gender (Abingdon: Routledge, 1997), 9. See also Ludmilla Jordanova, Sexual Visions: Images of Gender in Science and Medicine between the Eighteenth and Twentieth Centuries (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 989). Jordanova suggests that ‘during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries it was taken for granted that the human body was legible, even if there was no consensus on exactly how it could and should be “read”’; she cites phrenology and physiognomy as two sciences dedicated to ‘decoding’ bodily signs (51).
2. Janet Beizer, Ventriloquized Bodies: Narratives of Hysteria in Nineteenth-Century France (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1994), 1-2. See Héléne Cixous and Catherine Clément, La Jeune Née (Paris: Editions 10/18, 1975). See also Elaine Showalter, ‘Hysteria, Feminism and Gender’, in Sander L. Gilman, Helen King, Roy Porter, G. S. Rousseau, and Elaine Showalter, Hysteria beyond Freud (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), 286-335. Micale, in Approaching Hysteria, argues that the 1970s saw a resurgence of interest in hysteria, with the ‘hysteric’ gaining scientific currency due to her ability to reperform the past. She not only embodies what is linguistically inexpressible but is also imagined to tap into an otherwise inaccessible, ancient type of corporeality. Her jagged gestures supposedly reproduce ecstatic, ‘demonic’ movements first performed in premodern times, reactualized through her body, operating as a transhistorical—even ahistorical—conduit.

This chapter considers ‘hysteria’ as a concept suffusing modern scientific writing on the dancing disease, considered in this respect as a disorder of illegibility and concomitantly of scientific articulation. Scientists—neurologists, in particular—explain the inexplicably gesticulating body by resorting to comparison and historical artifact, which illustrate the contemporary body in distress by juxtaposing it to past and foreign forms. Without ever being entirely explained, the ‘hysterical’ body becomes science’s site of greatest articulation: the fitful body serves as a litmus test for modern science’s capacity to account for hermeneutically impenetrable figures and events. And this occurs through a process of stylized, dramatic, and richly illustrated narration.

Neurology, as modern science’s arguably most interdisciplinary discipline to emerge in the nineteenth century, draws from history and art history, illustration, psychiatry, epidemiology, and other fields to inscribe erratic gestures into new systems of thought in which these gestures achieve a recognizable, patterned status. Irregular gestures and poses become recognizably abnormal forms that can be treated; and they do so inasmuch as they are convincingly mapped onto historical precedent. Repetition—repeatability—and, in this sense, theatre become the mode by which neurology enters scientific modernity. Hysterical gestures are understood inasmuch as they reproduce poses culled from the annals of the past. History becomes a measure of universality; and science becomes itself, in its purported universalism, through the (semi-choreographed) bodily representation of past forms.

This chapter then moves chronologically through modern neurology’s imaginaries—its ways of seeing antiquity first in ancient artifacts, then more recent but still past cultural narratives; and finally in the clinic, and further afield, outside hospital walls. In all these instances, neurology construes itself as a science paradoxically finding, remembering, and knowing the present by way of an excavated past. This variation on the old Platonic principle—by which knowledge is remembrance—imagines modern science as an art of repetition, in short as theater. Modern neurology, from the late nineteenth century, emerges as a science steeped in humanistic methods, foregrounding narrative, anecdote, ekphrasis (the description of images and scenes), performance, and reperformance. Neurology sees and does gestural reprise. Scientificity, then, appears in the nineteenth century as a method connecting contemporary corporealities and past expressions of these corporealities, in short, as a way of reading bodily history through choreographic congruences.

These congruences emerge in the neurology clinic in terms of patients’ apparent echoing ways of moving their limbs with visual and narrative depictions of motion and gesture highlighted in literature and visual arts by Charcot and his team. This slightly recasts what Lepecki has described as dance’s special way of archiving movement through choreographic redos and re-enactments, which remember and preserve—but also transform—dance and bodily practices in and through dancers’ bodies.

So whereas Lepecki sees current dance practice’s ‘will to archive’ as a method for understanding dance history through dancers’ bodies in choreographic reprises and homages, neurologists in this chapter read patients’ movements and subtly instruct their bodies. This instruction maps patient gestures onto an excavated corporeal and choreographic history folded retrospectively into a neurological core. Neurology patients, in other words, seemingly involuntarily repeat choreic, hysteric, or epileptic movements without an origin; they appear to reveal a phantasmatic meeting point between their own supposed disorders and the visual or historical depictions of similar movements their physician directors endeavour to replicate in their patients.

These congruences, echoes, and repetitions provide a false sense of evidence of rise in studies of hysteria across disciplines—what he semi-jokingly terms New Hystericism (3-18). Micale offers a useful review of scholarly literature in Approaching Hysteria, 33-107, arguing that the ‘first attempts to set down in a systematic fashion the intellectual history of hysteria’ date from between 1890 and 1910, with the work of Charcot's students, Gilles de la Tourette in particular (33-34).

Lepecki, “The Body as Archive.” 140 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE the universality and scientific validity of these gestures—the arched back, the cross shape—which come to appear dramatically as neurological diseases, though the gestures themselves are neither entirely confirmed nor newly created in this exercise of juxtaposition. As Foucault argues of madness, discourse creates something out of a chasm, an absence, an unarticulated complex of experiences; makes a concept and singularity out of and around myriad things. Neurology produces an imagined relationship between current and older movements, finding resonances, but also finally revealing an empty middle, a fantastical conjuration—rather than a ‘will to archive’, what we might call a ‘will merely to repeat’. Modern neurology in this sense approximates what Rebecca Schneider has influentially described as ‘re-enactment’, whereby present performances of seemingly authentic actions do not just copy something prior but become entangled in a thick knot of doublings, false originals, and their equally (un)original reproductions. The ‘temporal tangle’ that results from this perpetual redoing suggests a porous relationship between the present and the past, in which neither is quite separated from the other: the present does not sit outside of and return to the past, nor is the past entirely separated from the present. Rather, what Schneider, following Elizabeth Freeman, calls ‘temporal drag’ suggests ‘pastness—. . . on the move’: pastness that does not stay fixed but enacts what Freeman describes as ‘temporal transitivity’, a sort of constant becoming-other that requires the flitting and fleeting motion of a temporal to and fro.° Temporal ambiguity, including as regards ‘origins’, suggests a choreographic motion that does not just reveal history’s fits and fainting spells, moments of (historical) intensity that gather and dissipate, but the hopping, skipping, and jumping motion—the lateral, diagonal, or zigzag move—of ideas and bodies across time, revealing that ‘history’ is never linear; nor is it ever entirely ‘past’. ‘History’, Schneider writes, ‘remains before us’.

In Charcot's clinic, history remains in the hysteric's body, whose forms Charcot takes it upon himself to describe, rechoreograph, and recode. Hysteroepilepsy, in Charcot's formulation, serves as a privileged site for tapping into past somatic manifestations: figures and scenes of antiquity remerging in present-day hospital settings. The past, in this view, is saturated with hysteroepileptic events, represented in and re-enacted by modern hysteroepileptic bodies. The past emerges as an antediluvian force rippling through the archaeological layers of urban civilization and modern bourgeois life. The past operates contrapuntally in the present as ‘archival drag’—performance theorist David Roman's term, after Freeman, reprised by Schneider, to describe the process of ‘dragging’ images, myths, statues, into the present in tableaux vivants that enact ‘still-ness’: a quality of being still here—or still there;* still in a ‘temporal drag’ between archive and performance.

This chapter then draws a number of strands together, performing a hinge function in the narrative of this book, centered on Charcot and the journeys (the choreography) of his ideas through various roots and routes—which subsequent chapters will explore in Madagascar and beyond. Framed by Charcot and his collaborators' historiographic and iconographic experiments at the Salpétriére, particularly their exercises in visual and historiographic montage, the chapter also returns to the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, who for Charcot represented a prior order of bodily fits and starts that prefigured those of his patients. The chapter shows that Charcot's comparison of the Convulsionaries' attitudes with attitudes he observed firsthand among his patients at the Salpétriére inspired at least one student, Meige, to seek further evidence of hysteroepilepsy outside the hospital's walls. The passage (or translatio) from historiographic and clinical exercise to fieldwork thus, with Meige's itinerant adventure, comes into fuller view, articulating the move this book highlights from a broadly medical to an anthropological field of observation, whereby the dancing disease becomes, by the early twentieth century, a disorder of (predominantly racialized) national and ethnographic ‘culture’. 8. Schneider, Performing Remains, 75. RETROSPECTIVE MEDICINE: ST. VITUS’S DANCE AS HISTORICAL ANTECEDENT

In his Etudes sur l'hystéro-épilepsie, ou Grande Hystérie (1881), Richer, the French neurologist and visual artist and a former student of Charcot, offered a hundred-page addendum to his study, titled ‘Historical Notes’, in which he performed a review of the medical and non-medical literature on hysteria. He was practicing what he called ‘médecine rétrospective’, drawing from artefacts, images, and historical narratives to demonstrate the historicity of contemporary clinical events. In doing so, he revealed the burgeoning field of neurology as a product of nineteenth-century historicism—travelling across eras—and comparativism, travelling across geographic sites and disciplines, to forge new ways of seeing bodily fits.

Referring to works ranging from Calmeil’s De la folie (1845) to Littré’s ‘Un fragment de médecine rétrospective’ in La philosophie positive (1869), ‘Des rapports entre l’hystérie et les affections convulsives épi-demic liées à la folie religieuse, comme la possession, les manifestations des convulsionnaires’ by Theodor Valentiner (1854-1913), in Le mouvement médical (1872), and Charcot’s own Lecours sur les maladies du système nerveux (1872-1883) delivered at the Salpétrière in the 1870s and 1880s, Richer outlined historical precedents of clinical cases that were defining the new neurological field of hysteroepilepsy: a type of hysteria resembling epilepsy in its choreography (its bodily attitudes) only.

Richer’s approach, informed by Charcot’s studies, reconsidered broadly held notions that dance maniacs were in some cases actually epileptic. Hecker had written: ‘where the disease was completely developed, the attack commenced with epileptic convulsions’: ‘those affected fell to the ground senseless, panting and labouring for breath. They foamed at the mouth, and suddenly springing up began their dance amidst strange contortions’. Epilepsy, like many other neurological conditions, was still poorly understood; and the retrospective comparisons that Richer and Charcot outlined between hysteria, epilepsy and chorea sought not only to lift prior bodily forms and mental states out of religious art into medicine but also to attempt to clarify the complex space of interchange between imagination and fitful bodily movement. This ‘retrospective’ gesture reinscribed the extended history of fitful movement disorders into a new drama of hysteroepileptic diagnosis, a disease category broadly described by Charcot in terms of epileptiform movements provoked not by organic but by ‘hysterical’ (non-organic) causes.

The range of conditions Charcot considered hysterogenic was enormous. In his work with Richer, Charcot described hysteroepileptic phenomena including religious ecstasies; demonic possession, satanism, and witchcraft; psychic contagion; catatonic states, spasms, paralyses, and contractions; and benign popular traditions. In drawing together this dizzying array of somatic behaviors, Charcot and Richer were effectively claiming nearly all of human Richer was a professor of artistic anatomy at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. On Charcot’s use of visual art in his research, see esp. Christopher G. Goetz, ‘Visual Art in the Neurologic Career of Jean-Martin Charcot’, Archives of Neurology 48.4 (1991): 421-425. Goetz argues that ‘art . .. misguided Charcot’s career when he relied heavily on artwork in his attempt to convince critics that disorders seen at the Salpétriére Hospital, Paris, France, were independent of his suggestive influence’ (421). Goetz also notes Charcot’s lifelong attraction to art and early dream of becoming a visual artist before deciding on a medical career; this led him to seek to ‘justify scientific credibility through art’, earning him a reputation as a ‘multitalented and culturally sophisticated man’ and drawing to him an audience of artists and philosophers. See also Christopher G. Goetz, ‘Shakespeare in Charcot’s Neurologic Teaching’, Archives of Neurology 45.8 (1988): 920-921; Christopher G. Goetz, Michel Bonduelle, and Toby Gelfand, Charcot: Constructing Neurology (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995); Rhona Justice-Malloy, ‘Charcot and the Theatre of Hysteria’, Journal of Popular Culture 28.4 (1995): 133-138; Sigrid Schade, ‘Charcot and the Spectacle of the Hysterical Body: The “Pathos Formula” as an Aesthetic Staging of Psychiatric Discourse: A Blind Spot in the Reception of Warburg’, Art History 18.4 (1995): 499-517; Sander L. Gilman, “The Image of the Hysteric’, in Gilman et al., Hysteria beyond Freud, 345-436; and Sander L. Gilman, Seeing the Insane: A Cultural History of Madness and Art in the Western World (New York: Wiley, 1982).

10. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 81.
11. See Jean-Martin Charcot, ‘Treiziéme Lecon: De l'hystéro-épilepsie’, in Euvres completes, vol. 1, 367-385. Charcot notes that hysteroepilepsy is not a new term or idea but was first outlined by Jean-Baptiste Louyer-Villermay (1776-1838) and amply described by others (369-370).
142 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE history as precedent for hysteroepilepsy. The new field of neurology was construing itself as a brazenly all-encompassing answer to religious and spiritual paroxysms from across historical eras, transcending historicism to arrive at a universal scientific field. As Richer wrote, ‘why should it be a cause for surprise that in periods of great exaltation, religious excitement pro- voked reactions of the nervous system which, in the end, resulted in the grande hystérie!" In their view, these reactions had simply not been recognized or diagnosed properly before. Paroxysmic types of religious enthusiasm were, for Charcot, Richer, de la Tourette, Regnard, Désiré-Magloire Bourneville (1840-1909), and others, actually nervous conditions triggered by hysteria. In effect, these bodily attitudes were, they thought, hysteriform phenomena (phenomena taking the form of hysteria) only now diagnosed but ancient in their expression. The possibilities afforded neurologists’ historiographic studies were nearly boundless: from prehistoric figurines and Greek vase paintings to friezes, caricatures, ivory plates, tapestries, engravings, miniatures, and the authors’ own photographic service at the Salpétriére, the world seemed to be filled with precedents for hysteroepile______ Bacchic orgies, zealous divination ceremonies, the rites of the cult of Dionysus with their noisy cortege of Maenads and Satyrs, the dancing mania (‘dansomanie’) also called St. Vitus’s dance (‘danse de Saint Guy’) in Germany and tarantism in Italy, etc. (fig. 6.1).1°

The ‘etc.’ is significant: the list presupposes continuity between these phenomena as well as the self-evidence of their similarity. This was a list to which readers might, the ‘etc.’ implied, add. The contours of demoniacal complaints appeared in Richer’s depiction as received knowledge—denoted by the list of cases inviting further additions and comparisons—yet this was also modern science at the cutting edge of a new field. Those who had been possessed could be wrapped into the relatively—it seemed to Richer—self-explanatory purview of historical cases now cast as ‘pure pathology’. Comparison between eras enabled Richer to extend the scope of his visual project and situate the newly named hysteroepilepsy within the broader framework of human history. As he noted, ‘the analogies . . . between ancient convulsive epidemics and the grande hystérie that we observe sporadically today are founded in the same type of nervous contagion that we have demonstrated among hysterics, and on comparable symptomatic manifestations’.

The analogy between ‘ancient convulsive epidemics’ and clinical studies enabled him to abstract from each on the basis of apparent visual and morphological similarity: proof was in the image and choreography of bodies on the page. This is not to say that there were not also movement disorders in the past—seizures, contractions, paralyses, falls—but that the overwhelming concatenation of all these gestures into a neurological fold pathologized a far greater range of events than merited it. Richer’s recuperation of ancient figures into modern diagnoses allowed him to map out an expansive neurological terrain according to which nearly every ecstatic dance or village féte was an expression of an organic (neurological) disorder. This exuberant comparativism arguably over-recuperated the complex corporeal and spiritual past into the domain of modern medical science, a field far more expansive, heterogeneous, and humanistic in its reliance on visual art, theatre, and anecdote than the myth of scientific objectivism—and ahistoricism—allows.

Neurology was, Richer claimed, engaging in a historiographic method, retrospective medicine, looking back to the past and drawing from its iconographic sources to explain and supplement phenomena witnessed presently in the neurology clinic. The method was enabled by Richer’s own visual arts training in human anatomy, which allowed him to depict and describe graphic and postural similarities between subjects: among them, the famous attitudes passionnelles, the dramatic postures Charcot described as gracing the crowning stage of a hysteroepileptic seizure, including the hysterical arc de cercle.12

But as Hacking notes, retrospective diagnosis frequently misconstrues personalities, events, and their interrelations, leading to a reified view of the past and present. Richer’s visual method, while innovative, risked falling into the trap of anachronism, reading the past through the lens of the present, and vice versa. Médecine Rétrospective + 143
FIG. 93. — MENADE EN ETAT DE CRISE. (Fragment d'une peinture sur vase.) FIGURE 6.1 New York Academy of Medicine Library.

Disease, which we may understand as an abnormal state of bodily or mental suffering and even, with Canguilhem, organic degeneration tending to an abnormally rapid movement towards death, is historically and socially constituted. Canguilhem notes that disease refers to that which comes to be construed as abnormal, non-normative, in a given culture; and this can include something as basic and in many respects natural and normal as dying.

Neurology, as a modern science, deliberately takes as its subject forms of life which in earlier times may not have constituted diseased states but which neurologists recast as such: epileptic seizures, long associated with shamanic visions, only come to be seen and lived as forms of suffering to be treated (even eliminated) inasmuch as individuals come socially and culturally to be unable to participate in the everyday structures of economic and political life, rendering their conditions widely experienced as undesirable.

This is not to say that all disease is only socially or historically constructed, or that there are no transhistorical and transcultural events that can be recognized to be similar (even identical); but that states of being have histories as disorders—ways of moving, speaking, or feeling that run counter to current cultural norms. Dancing manias similarly emerge in the nineteenth century as diseases because present bodily forms are compared to ancient ones, in a juxtaposition that reads both in pathological terms.

For Richer, the grounds for comparison across cases of 'hysteroepilepsy' were various. Choreomania in the Middle Ages, epidemics of 'demoniacal possession', the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, and ecstatics were among the myriad hysteroepileptics he depicted. In Les démoniaques dans lart, he and Charcot began their graphic journey with an image of Jesus curing a possessed man in a fifth-century mosaic in Ravenna, before passing to further images of Jesus and a cast of saints, including Saint Catherine of Sienna delivering a possessed woman, in a late sixteenth- or early seventeenth-century fresco by Francesco Vanni (1563-1610). Saint Ignacio likewise delivered a swarming cast of demoniacs of their possession in a painting by Peter Paul Rubens (1577-1640). Nearly all the images involved a saint's intercession and the performance of a cure, to which Charcot as healer would inevitably be compared—by visual analogy, though never by explicit reference.

Charcot himself was first struck by the visual similarity between these depictions and the gestures and contortions of his own patients in a visit to the church of Saint-Ambroise in Génes. As Richer, who was his intern at the time and on the visit with him, reports, Charcot was struck by the 'spectacle' (‘spectacle’), literally the theatre that a possessed woman presented, in a painting by Rubens he saw at the church. For Charcot, this painting presented a scene, a ‘tableau’ ‘crying out with truth and, it seemed, borrowing brushstroke by brushstroke from the convulsive scenes occurring daily in his practice at the Salpétrière.’1 Thus began their odyssey, dedicated, in Richer’s words, to Apollo, god of medicine and art.19 Soon enough, their adventure would encompass multiple volumes of large-format depictions of various ecstasies culled from the past. Charcot and Richer did not rely on visual comparison only; narrative histories further grounded their case studies in an appeal to antiquity, reconfigured through the lens of modern medicine. Their recuperation of ancient historical sources was nearly boundless. Significantly, their use of prior medical literature included not only Calmeil’s psychiatric studies, but Hecker’s writings on St. Vitus’s dance and on the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard. Hecker’s essay ‘The Dancing Mania’, translated into French by Dubois in the Annales d’hygiène et de médecine légale in 1834, provided vivid narrative precedents to the sorts of convulsive events Charcot and Richer saw in early European history. In a way, Charcot and Richer thought, these characters were all demoniacs: jerking, twisting, and bending their bodies, performing obscure spasms and re-enacting ancient convulsive pos- tures; often, they thought, these ‘demoniacs’ merely indulged in theatrical posturing.1In that sense, Charcot and Richer argued, the ‘demoni- acs’ were hysterical: possessed by overly active imaginations. Contemporary histories of the pilgrimage to Echternach and word of mouth on the part of a contemporary judge helped Charcot and Richer complete the cursory picture of medieval ‘possession’ to which contemporary hystero- epileptics were still, in their view, subjected.1 Further visual sources serving as evidence of these recuperations of the past in present hystero- epileptic forms were suggested to them by a Florentine colleague, Dr. Tommaso-Tommasi, to whom they give thanks throughout the pages of Les démoniaques dans lart, as well as by various other writers who joined in this grand project of iconographic and historiographical collage.18 As an exercise in amateur art historiography, Charcot and Richer’s full-colour, large-format compilations presented a baffling array of bodily contortions, ecstasies, and exorcisms, each per- forming a theatre of transport and distress. Page after page, each event seemed at once more extra- ordinary and more banal than the next. In Les 18. Richer, Lart et la médecine, 3-4. 19. Richer, Lart et la médecine, 3. 20. Hecker, ‘Mémoire sur la chorée épidémique du moyen Age’. See Richer, Etudes sur 'hystéro-épilepsie, 617-621, and Jean- Martin Charcot, Euvres completes: 1, Lecons sur les maladies du systéme nerveux, ed. Désiré Magloire Bourneville, 1 vol. (Paris: Bureaux du progrés médical, 1892), 336-337. In Calmeil’s words, Convulsionaries were prone to ‘ecstato-convulsive theomania’, not quite a hysteroepileptic diagnosis but a psychiatric descriptor that roughly fit the bill. See Calmeil, De la folie, vol. 2, 314. Also in Maire, ed., Les convulsionnaires de Saint-Médard, 241. 21. In a long footnote to the brief section on the St. Vitus’s dancers, Charcot and Richer give thanks to M. Majerus, a judge in Luxembourg, for his firsthand account of the dancing procession, which involved thousands of pilgrims gathering outside Echternach, before proceeding into town, according to a well-defined and rhythmically regulated hopping pattern: three hops forward and one______ In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 36n1. 22. In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 12. Médecine Rétrospective + 145 difformes et les malades dans l'art [The Misshapen and Diseased in Art] (1889), Charcot and Richer compiled images of lepers, syphilitics, idiots, dwarves, and other ‘grotesque’ characters— including the dead—depicted in sumptuous, religious, and lay iconography, echoing case studies in the Salpétriére clinic.”* Implicitly performing a comparative analysis, they juxtaposed visual images from the annals of art and church history, only slightly glossed—a paragraph or two for each—enough to draw each back, ‘again and again’, as Schneider suggests theatrical re-enactment and archival drag do,” to the grande attaque hystérique, the great hysterical attack. The grande attaque’s contours would then become apparent to readers through this exercise of repetition and juxtaposition. Repetition—and here recuperation—would make the grande attaque emerge as a distinct figure encompassing nearly all of the body’s paroxysmal and convulsive movements. Charcot and Richer’s iconographic collage and clinical re-enactments (staged ‘again and again’), offered a choreographic spectacle of the body in distress, stage-managed by a small group of scientific mages. As Charcot and Richer wrote of the ‘epidemic of convulsions’ at Saint-Médard, convulsions constituted a ‘theatre’ exhorting all in attendance to recognize the power and proof—the evidence— of religion,” just as Charcot and Richer would, implicitly, through their works, exhort their own readers to recognize the new neurological science’s historicity: its place in the annals of saintly exorcism, now sanctioned and verified by experimental research. Didi-Huberman has argued that the photographic work of image-making at the Salpétriére provided a theatre of hysteria in which patients staged themselves for their master, Charcot.”° But Charcot and Richer’s encyclopedic exploration of figures of contortion and pain also reveals a historiographical methodology casting the new in light of continual returns to the old. This was a theatre of transformation, a mystical exercise infusing contem- porary models with ancient art. The theatrical method forged, as much as it observed, hysteria and specifically hysteroepilepsy as an exercise in repetition with a slight measure of difference. This was science not as novelty but as theatre— performing a return, with difference (‘again and again’), to the past.

THE EVIDENCE OF IMAGES: HYSTEROEPILEPSY AND ICONOGRAPHIC ILLUSTRATION

In Les démoniaques dans l'art (1887), Charcot and Richer collected visual and historical materials pertaining to ‘demoniacal possession’ to showcase examples of hysteroepilepsy in history. These episodes, which involved convulsions and often tympany were, they argued, forms of hysteria, a broadly psychosomatic condition whose contours they were seeking to describe. Unlike previous definitions of hysteria, such as those articulated by Hecker, theirs emphasized individual predispositions to act out according to highly patterned and predictable corporeal forms, rather than the excited, often religiously stimulated life of groups. Hysteroepilepsy resembled epilepsy inasmuch as it involved falls or swooning. As Charcot and Richer noted of an image depicting a procession of dancers in Echternach, ‘it is quite easy immediately to recognize the role hysteria and hysteroepilepsy play in this case, as in the epidemics themselves’. ”They were referring to what may be the most often reproduced visual ‘evidence’ of dance manias, an image also frequently cast as an example of an epileptic procession, furthering the confusion between epilepsy, hysteroepilepsy, and dancing manias. This was an illustration now attributed to Pieter Bruegel the Younger (c. 1564-1637),”® reproduced in a nineteenth-century woodcut by Jean-Nicholas Huyot (1780-1840), depicting what is plausibly a procession of persons 23. Charcot and Richer, Les difformes et les malades dans Vart, i. 24. Schneider, Performing Remains, 6, 18-19. 25. In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 85. 26. Georges Didi-Huberman, Invention of Hysteria: Charcot and the photographic iconography of the Salpétriére, trans. Alisa Hartz (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003). 27. ‘Ilest facile, en effet, d’y reconnaitre 4 premiére vue que hystérie et l’hystéro-épilepsie jouaient la, comme elles font fait dans les épidémies proprement dites, un rdle prédominant’. Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 35. 28. This is by far the image most widely, if not the only one, used to represent St. Vitus’s dance. Although it was long attributed to Pieter Bruegel the Elder, it is now considered to be the work of his son. See Park and Park, ‘Saint Vitus’ Dance’, 514. 146 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE DANSEURS DB SAINT-GUY CONDUITS EN PRLERINAGE A L'RGLISE DE SAINT-WILLIPROD, A EPTERNACH, PRES DE LUXEMBOURG! D'aprés un dessin de P. Broughel, 4 la galerie de Varchidue Albert, & Vienne. FIGURE 6.2 ‘Saint Vitus’ dancers driven as pilgrims to the church of Saint-Willibrord, in Epternach [sic], near Luxembourg. After a drawing by P. Breughel, in the gallery of the archduc Albert, in Vienna’. From Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques dans lart (1887). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library. suffering from chorea or other movement disorders on a pilgrimage to a cure (fig. 6.2). Copper plates of Bruegel’s artwork were made by Henricus Hondius the Younger (1597-1651) in 1642 (fig. 6.3). Charcot and Richer employ both the Bruegel and Hondius images in Les démoniaques dans lart and the Legons sur les maladies du système nerveux to illustrate St. Vitus’s dance (the danse de Saint-Guy), only somewhat convincingly. In both pictures, a small group of women, apparently ill at ease, are lifted off the ground and each one carried firmly by two strong men; the procession is accompanied by musicians playing bagpipes.” As neurologist Geneviéve Aubert has suggested, the original Bruegel drawing exists in at least three versions, at the Albertina Museum in Vienna, the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, and the Staatliche Museen in Berlin. The Vienna and Amsterdam versions are known as ‘Die Epileptikerinnen von Meulebeeck’ (The Epileptic Women of Meulebee) and ‘Pelgrimage naar Meulebeke’ (Pilgrimage near Meulebeke), respectively, and bear inscriptions in Old Dutch that read: ‘Those are the pilgrims who on St John’s day, outside Brussels in Molenbeek, must dance, and when they have danced or jumped over a bridge, then they are cured for a whole year of St John’s sickness’.°° The inscription accompanying the Berlin______ And when they have danced over the bridge, or have been forced to do so, then they seemed to be cured for a year of the falling sickness. Ahead go the musicians or bagpipers, then follow the pilgrims held by strong servants, reluctantly against their will (as shown in the following second and third figures), sometimes shouting and vociferating; but when they come near the bridge, then they turn around, using great resistance; however, they are promptly overcome and carried and lifted over the bridge; once crossed, they sit down on the ground, as if exhausted: and then come the servants of the place quenching their thirst and giving them something warm: and so is the work accomplished.

Nicely Médecine Rétrospective + 147 UN GHOUPE DE DANSRURS DE saiNr-ctY Fac-simile d'une gravure de Hondius. FIGURE 6.3 ‘A Group of St. Vitus’ Dancers. Facsimile of an engraving by Hondius [1642]’. From Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques dans l'art (1887). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library.

‘pilgrims’ only.*t What is surprising, Aubert suggests, is that neither inscription mentions Echternach or St. Vitus. Charcot seems to have drawn the conclusion that these were St. Vitus’s dancers from a spurious caption inscribed under Bruegel’s drawing in a posthumous publication by the French collector Paul Lacroix (1806-1884) in 1873, which reads: ‘Sufferers from St Vitus’ Dance going on a pilgrimage to the church of St Willibrord, Epternach [sic], near Luxembourg. After a drawing by P. Breughel (Sixteenth Century), in the gallery of Archduke depicted by the excellent and skillful painter Pieter Breugel. Engraved and published by Henricus Hondius’ house, in The Hague, 1642’. In Aubert, ‘Charcot Revisited’, 158.

31. Aubert, ‘Charcot Revisited’, 157-158. 148 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE Albert, at Vienna.*? That the Echternach dan- cing procession was not, in spite of this depic- tion, particularly choreographically legible was overlooked by Charcot and Richer, as these figures all indistinguishably came to designate what they considered to be epileptiform move- ment disorders. More interesting yet, a descriptor provided to me by the Rijksmuseum suggested in parenthe- ses that the image of these St. Vitus’s ‘dancers’ (or, confusingly, epileptics) is alternately titled ‘Landscape with Four Drunken Men and Two Drunken Women’.*?

Molenbeek, named after a creek in what is now greater Brussels, boasted a sacred well dedicated to Saint Gertrude, known for its miraculous cures. It attracted thousands of pilgrims, including epileptics. Some pilgrims may have been drunk on their way to the wells. Others may have performed seizure-like motions, even though it is unlikely all would have been under- going epileptic (or even non-epileptic) seizures at once. One woman’s open mouth and the oth- ers’ awkwardly turned heads suggest they are in states of relative discomfort, perhaps under- taking the pilgrimage against their will. But the prominence of the women in this image—all the central characters are women—and the presence of male companions or attendants with them gives pause. The women, judging by their dress, are likely of a lower class, as Charcot and Richer point out, and would not necessarily have been able to afford hired help. Charcot and Richer’s gloss suggests that the men were companions, also on the pilgrimage, and that servants in the background were gathering water from the stream for its curative properties or perhaps to quench the pilgrims’ thirst. *4 But two of the women are also quite large-bellied. Are they merely corpulent, or are they pregnant, performing a pilgrimage for an unborn child? The other two women appear to be lifted almost off the ground as the men grasp their armpits to hold them up. This may have been a way to help them jump, mimetically to enact the cure. The description noted on the Hondius engraving reads: ‘Two epileptic women walk, each supported by two men, on a country road, near the right. The first woman is screaming’. The second reads: ‘Two epileptic women walk, each supported by two men, over a country road. In the background, a third woman, also supported by two men. A fourth woman sits by the side of the road under a tree’. These images, taken together, represent a scene, in which, plausibly, a cast of female pilgrims to the waters in Molenbeek are being held—and helped—so that they can ‘dance’ (or leap), in the belief that this motion will help protect them or their unborn children from motor disorders—including epilepsy or chorea—at least for the following year. Read as a performative pre-enactment, this scene depicts the pre-emptive representation of choreic distress, designed to quell further paroxysms. As pilgrims perform the jump or struggle with a bodily fit that might occur outside the heightened time of the pilgrimage, they use the intensity of the pilgrimage to ward off further attacks. This medical theatre represents and significantly pre-presents physical distress to its sufferers (and their deferred audiences) in a cyclical structure of yearly returns that tries to break that very cycle in the performative event. As deferred viewers, we retrospectively grapple with the discursive claims presented by the captions accompanying these images and the choreography captured as a still. Trumped only by the deceptive half legibility of the gestures, our reading is necessarily partial: considered on their own, these women seem to be prone to emotional paroxysms, organic or mechanical falling, 32. Aubert, ‘Charcot Revisited’, 159. See P. Lacroix, Vie militaire et religieuse au Moyen Age et à l'époque de la Renaissance (Paris: Librairie Didot, 1873). On the dancing procession at Echternach and its connection to St. Willibrord, see also Backman, Religious Dances, 116-126. 33. ‘The title indicated reads ‘De pelgrimstocht van epileptici naar de kerk van Meulenbeke (Landschap met 4 dronken mannen en twee dronken vrouwen. Pieter Breugel inv)’. Identification provided by email from Susan van Gelderen, information specialist, Collection Information Department, Rijksmuseum, ‘RE: Brueghel—Pelgrimage naar Meulebeke’, to the author, 9 November 2012. ‘The description has since been modified to read: ‘Twee epileptische vrouwen worden door hun begeleiders meegenomen op de pelgrimstocht van epileptici naar Molenbeek bij Brussel op Sint Jansdag. De voorste vrouw protesteert luid’. This eliminates mention of drunkenness but emphasizes the first pilgrim’s loud protestation, still suggesting significant contestation regarding the event of the scene, as well as the increasing inscription of this image into the annals of the history of epilepsy, associated by art historians and curators with St. John’s Day, though it is still not clear why the first pilgrim is ostensibly distressed; <https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en/search/objects?q=RP-P-1904-525&p=1&ps=12&ii=0#/RP-P-1904-525,0, accessed 17 March 2016. 34. In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 35-36. 35. In Dutch, ‘Twee epileptische vrouwen lopen, elk ondersteund door twee mannen, over een landweg, naar rechts. De voorste vrouw loopt te schreeuwen en “Twee epileptische vrouwen lopen, elk ondersteund door twee mannen, over een landweg. Op de achtergrond komt een derde vrouw aan, eveneens ondersteund door twee mannen. Een vierde vrouw zit langs de kant van de weg. Médecine Rétrospective + 149 or fits. They are clearly struggling, though it is uncertain whether they are struggling against their companions; and there is a group of them, winding their way through the countryside as if on a cacophonous parade. But the men’s bodies are contorted as well, as they hold the women up. It may be that they are also performing the pilgrimage or that they are merely struggling under the women’s weight. The women are disproportionately large in the image, which may explain why they required two men, one at either side. Their disproportionate size may also suggest their importance as focal points in the image, though (unless my hypothesis that they are pregnant stands) it is not certain why the women are foregrounded in this event. The musicians appear to cower, suggesting the whole affair may have been trying: this is not quite a jubilant, boisterous féte. Charcot and Richer’s reading of these pilgrims moving through the countryside reveals at once a retrospective neurological reading and the faintness of a pageant gone by, recuperated into the choreomania repertoire. Repeated again and again by neurologists in the last century, this image has become the quintessential— often the only—representation of choreomania. As such, the image comes to epitomize a collective fantasy, shot through with layers of artefactual readings. Charcot and Richer saw the form St. Vitus’s dance, confirmed in their eyes by a caption, enveloping this pilgrimage into the hysteroepileptic fold: a collection of disparate images and scenes made to support, and evidence, what they encountered in Charcot’s clinic. As McCarren has pointed out, hysteria and the myriad neurological disorders associated with it—including chorea or St. Vitus’s dance— pose the problem of visuality inasmuch as they resemble dances and, resembling one another, suggest sameness where there may be none. But this privilege accorded to dance and movement as a site of seeing—Charcot’s realm of greatest expertise (as opposed to his student Freud’s preference for the aural)—and thus to dance, movement, and theatrical gesturality as the art forms of the unsayable, misses a crucial point. While dance may be ‘the ability to represent itself in images, through movement’, as McCarren suggests,** and thus to express femininity, for instance, in a semiotic system in which women, like children, are to be seen and not heard, dance and femininity in Charcot’s iconographic system also point to other systems— other histories—which moved. Juxtaposed to one another, the images Charcot and Richer stage in their work perform a class of intertextual movement that situates dance-like gesturality, leaping performances, and hysteria on a continuum with the historical relic, and thus too with the antiquarian past. These figures all participated in the grand iconographic repertoire of religiosity and the expressive language of visual art. Rather than signifying silence, these images signalled bodies whose choreographies Charcot and Richer, as neurological mavens, took it as their task to interpret and to collate. The bodies, rather than appearing silent, seemed to be gesturing through the ages, constellations now finally read in collusion with science. In recognizing these scenes as hysteroepileptic, choreic, and choreomaniacal, Charcot and Richer grounded their findings in a fantasy of premodernity. Few images of choreomania exist. While the Bruegel image has come to epitomize visual ‘proof’ of choreomania as a serious medical condition associated with popular lore, caricatures depicting the ridiculousness of the so-called St. Vitus’s dance highlight the difficulty of diagnostic legibility and the condition’s comic potential as movement gone awry.

A medical caricature published in Lalbum comique de pathologie pittoresque, recueil de vingt caricatures médicales dessinées par Aubry, et al. [Comic Album of Picturesque Pathology, Collection of Twenty Medical Caricatures Drawn by Aubry, et al.] (1823) depicted buffoonish sufferers of St. Vitus’s dance (the danse de Saint Guy) performing a comical and pathetic village round with floppy hats and soft faces, their legs bent in a seemingly haphazard fashion (fig. 6.4). Charcot reproduced this image in his Nouvelle iconographie de la Salpétriére [New Iconography of the Salpétriére] (1904) as yet another illustration of the dancing disease from the uncertain annals of choreic history.

Actual motor disorders characterized by incoordination and involuntary movement could, it seemed, be covered up by popular dances, just as popular dances, in the caricaturist’s depiction, presented a choreic potential: all popular dances had the potential to appear odd and ridiculous. But I have also been arguing that these awkward gestures became archival ‘stills’, ‘dragged’ into live clinical scenes apparently demonstrating the recursion of ancient gestures in the present. The archival repertoire of choreic movements became live again in Charcot’s patients’ theatrical illustrations. In the next sections, I turn to Charcot’s experimentation with scenes of chorea and hysteroepilepsy among patients who were reproducing, as it seemed to him, figures from the archival past.

Spontaneous Crucifications and Hysteroepilepsy: Convulsionary Remains
In order to link ancient iconographic scenes and his own patients’ gestures, Charcot and his colleagues studied an intermediary medical theater, offered by neurology ‘patients’ whom they read retrospectively as suffering from neurological disorders in the more recent past. In order to do this, Charcot drew from a repertoire of case studies depicting individuals steeped in scenes of highly theatrical religiosity and popular lore. The Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard offered an ideal case in point. They were contorted, excited, and histrionic, and they showed particular gestures that captured Charcot and his colleagues' attention in terms of their potential for neurological study. In his Légons sur les Médecines Rétrospective + 151 maladies du système nerveux, Charcot described the Convulsionaries as a case study in hystero-epilepsy, particularly showcasing what he described as hysterical hemianaesthesia (anaesthesia in half of the body). He argued that if the Convulsionaries were reported not to have experienced pain on the penetration of a sharp object—such as a sword—into their skin and if contact with such an object did not produce any hemorrhaging, this was because they were not actually experiencing physical pain. They were engaging in a theatre of pain; their heightened emotion presented a case of 'acute hysteria'.° The whole spectacle was a charade but a no less medically diagnosable one. Although specific forms of religious gesture appeared in epileptic, hysteric, and hysteroepileptic fits, their exact character could be attributed, Charcot thought, to the range of symbols and signs available to them in a given culture. Christianity offered a fountain of iconographic gestures, in the cases of the Convulsionaries. Many Convulsionaries, he wrote, 'operated veritable crucifixions among themselves, placing those among them on crosses and fixing them there with nails going right through their hands and feet. These "saints," who more or less allowed themselves to be crucified, were hysterics'.** Proof included testimony by La Condamine, who wrote that the Convulsionaries suffered and shed blood only when they were pierced on the right sides of their bodies. This corroborated what was observed at the Salpétriére: hysteria was often characterized by hemi-anaesthesia.*® Charcot observed 'spontaneous' crucifixions among his own patients at the Salpétriére, documented among others by Regnard. In Les maladies épidémiques de l'esprit, Regnard depicts a figure of a young woman performing a crucifixion (fig. 6.5) juxtaposed to identical images drawn from Charcot's clinical practice (fig. 6.6). These crucifixions constituted one of the primary attitudes passionnelles and characterized any number of mental (or spiritual) epidemics. But, significantly, such attitudes were involuntary and spontaneous, Charcot and Regnard noted. Although the attitudes mimicked Christ's passion on the cross, they differed from 'artificial' crucifixions, poses performed by Convulsionaries, among others, with intention—as theatre. Artificial poses involved an elaborate mise en scène on the part of performers and bystanders, who collected hammers and nails as props for these convulsionary performances. The border between theatre and 'real' neurological disease was thin in Charcot's practice; significantly, his recuperation of popular theatre into the domain of neurology made of this new science a retrospective historiographic exercise in medical choreography. Neurology recuperated and reperformed gestures from the past recast as disease. Yet what Charcot called hysterical convulsions—those not entirely acted out but in his view genuine symptoms of organic dysfunction—represented in his view real instances of heightened emotion affecting the neurological core. For Charcot, this diagnosis helped dispel eighteenth-century medical opinions, such as the opinion expressed by Philippe Hecquet (1661-1737) in Du naturalisme des convulsions dans les maladies de l’épidémie con- vulsionnaire [Of the Naturalism of Convulsions in the Diseases of the Convulsionary Epidemic] (1733) that crucifixion was provoked by insanity (aliénation d’esprit’). Charcot countered this view, arguing that crucifixions constituted a neurological disorder, partially imagined (and so psychiatric) but played out in 37. Charcot writes: "in the Saint-Médard epidemic, for example, the sword thrusts given to the Convulsionaries did not, it is said, produce any hemorrhaging. The reality of this cannot be disclaimed without examination; if it is true that many of these Convulsionaries were guilty of sleight of hand [jonglerie], we are nonetheless obliged to recognize, after careful consideration of the question, that most of the phenomena presented, whose history has been transmitted to us via naive description, were not all simulated, but amplified, exaggerated. It was almost always a case, the critics have demonstrated this, of hysteria taken to the highest level; and so, for these women struck by anaesthesia not to shed blood when pierced by a sharp instrument such as a sword, it was sufficient . . . that the instrument should not be pushed in too deeply." Charcot, Euvres completes, vol. 1, 303-304.

Désiré-Magloire Bourneville and Paul Regnard, Iconographie photographique de la Salpétriére (Service de M. Charcot), 3 vols., vol. 1 (Paris: Aux bureaux du Progrés Médical, 1876-1880), 45.

Bourneville and Regnard, Iconographie photographique, vol. 1, 45-46.

Bourneville and Regnard, Iconographie photographique, vol. 1, 46-47. Lindsay Wilson provides a useful discussion of Hecquet’s beliefs and practices as a physician, such that he was too frail to attend the events firsthand but retorted that he had seen and studied convulsions all his life; his detractors on the other hand should go see the events for themselves. He argued for the ‘naturalism’ of the convulsions, i.e., their status as physiological, rather than supernatural, events, a stance that contradicts Charcot’s retort. But Hecquet’s naturalism was determined largely by the ‘imagination’, as he attributed the convulsions to a disturbance of the vapours, among men occasionally and nearly universally among women, when the passions were ignited. In Wilson, Women and Medicine in the French Enlightenment, 26-30.

152 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE CRUCIFIEMENT D'aprés I'leonographie photographique de la Selpétriére, par Bourneville et P. Reguard. FIGURE6.5 ‘Crucifixion. From the Iconographie photographique de la Salpétriére’. From Paul Regnard, Les maladies épidémiques de l'esprit (1887). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library. the nervous system. In that regard, the convulsionary theatre presented a form of neurological hysteria: the body disordered without the direct action of the will. Neurology in this view captured mind and matter, history and biology. This was a science at the forefront of medical research, recuperating all the most invisible and nearly illegible gestures into its fold; neurology in this sense performed the ultimate ‘reading’ of all the subtlest and most dramatic gestures from the annals of religion, spirituality, and culture, and its proponents were the new spiritual and hermeneutic elite, the new interpreters of movement across the cultural and historical spectrum. Following Charcot's theory, the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard provided neurologists with a rich opportunity for retrospective diagnosis, as their practices were full of potential for dramaturgical readings that could translate into and inform case studies in the clinic. The Convulsionaries experienced intense tympanic pains and subjected one another to abdominal binding. As with St. John's Day dancers, bystanders often administered relief, resulting in a dramatic mise en scène, complete with theatrical props.

Charcot linked the epigastric discomfort to a long line of thinking associating abdominal troubles and hysteria. This connection was made as early as 1746 by the physician John Andree, who associated hysteric fits with "a Working in the Abdomen," followed by "Distention and Rumbling of the Hypochondria [upper abdomen], with a Swelling at the Stomach." Although hysteric fits resembled epileptic seizures, Andree wrote that their "seat" was in the abdomen, not the cerebellum. However, hysteric and epileptic seizures might occur simultaneously if the nervous system was so weakened as to admit the two disorders at once.

Tweedie, in A System of Practical Medicine (1840), also noted that "a tympanic state of the abdomen was a frequent symptom" in St. John's and St. Vitus's dances. However, as Charcot and Richer noted, convulsionary activities did not always include abdominal distension or tympanic pain. At first, miracles had occurred without convulsions, then epileptics made their way to the Saint-Médard cemetery to seek help for their own con-vulsive movements, initiating a second phase, characterized by some miracles accompanied by real convulsions. Finally, a third (the longest and most satirized) phase, lasting over a century, was characterized by convulsions without miraculous cures. Those who imitated real epileptics in the second phase now outnumbered those who had actually suffered from neurological disease. It was during the second and third phases that tympanic binding emerged as a routine (theatricalized) practice, and the administration of secours (or help), performed by secouristes (or helpers), provided a gripping show to all who gathered to watch. Although noting the high proportion of ‘imagination’ playing out in these scenes, Charcot was convinced that their purpose was not primarily entertainment—or lewd entertainment.

Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 137.

In John Andree, Cases of the Epilepsy, Hysteric fits, and St. Vitus Dance, with the Process of Cure: Interpreted with Practical Observations... (London: W. Meadows and J. Clarke, 1746), 26-27.

Andree, Cases of the Epilepsy, 26-27.

Andree, Cases of the Epilepsy, 26-27.

Tweedie, ed., A System of Practical Medicine, 329.

Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 79-80. See also Bernadac and Fourcassié, eds., Les possédés, 24. For the story of the young Marie-Elizabeth Giroust, an epileptic woman discovered one night by her father clutching a relic from the deacon Paris's tomb, apparently performing non-epileptic convulsions, see Bernadac and Fourcassié, eds., Les possédés, 25-28.

According to one eyewitness, secours were divisible into five categories: (1) kicking or trampling on the Convulsionary; (2) exercising pressure by heavy weights, or squeezing with tongs; (3) beating with clubs; (4) pricking with swords, spits, etc.; and 154 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE i 7 er = Pr Fig. 105. — Ceinture compressive des ovaires. FIGURE 6.7 ‘Ovarian Compression Belt’. From Paul Richer, L’hystéro-épilepsie, ou grande hystérie (1881). Courtesy the New York Academy of Medicine Library. as Hecquet had disapprovingly argued. ‘I don’t see’, wrote Charcot, ‘what lewdness could have to do with these andiron and pestle blows admin- istered with such violence, although I am cap- able of recognizing that a depraved mind will engender practices such as this. But I think it is much simpler and more legitimate to admit that the secours . . . were administered in response to a very pragmatic and empirical concern, whose sole result was to produce a real improve- ment upon the torments suffered in a hyster- ical attack.’ “* Charcot sought his own means to relieve hysteria’s tympanic symptoms. ‘Ovarian compression’, a technique he sought to perfect, enabled those wearing an apparatus he devised to benefit from continuous compression of the ovaries (fig. 6.7). In Regnard’s wry note, ovarian compression successfully administered might have curbed many a witch’s demons, sparing much of the violence of the Inquisition; unfor- tunately, compression had only emerged as a regular practice at Saint-Médard.*® Ovarian compression, acting on the body, cured appar- ently demonic disorders of mind. This cure was particularly dramatic because hysteria left no material traces: ‘at the autopsy of a hysteric one finds nothing’, wrote Regnard, ‘neither in the brain, nor in any other organ’.*° Hysteria was a condition of excess fancy, he and Charcot thought. It was the imagination that provoked bodily fits. Only these could be observed, com- pared, and decoded. Charcot did not claim to have invented ovarian compression, although his new ovar- ian implement facilitated its exercise. Thomas Willis (1621-1675), he remarked, practiced compression of the abdomen to suspend con- vulsive spasms thought to______ Compression was performed either by embracing the patient closely around the waist or using tightly bound sheets. The Spanish physician Luiz de Mercado (1525–1611) also used abdominal friction as early as the sixteenth century, as noted by Charcot. Mercado believed that the uterus traveled according to the “ancient doctrine.” One of Mercado’s compatriots, Nicholas Monardes (1493–1588), similarly used this method to attempt to keep the uterus from crucifixion.

In Ronald A. Knox, Enthusiasm: A Chapter in the History of Religion, with special reference to the XVII and XVIII centuries (New York: Oxford University Press, 1950), 383. For a detailed account of the secours, see Regnard, Les maladies épidémiques de l'esprit, 191–199.

Charcot, Euvres comatiques, vol. 1, 337.
Regnard, Les maladies épidémiques de l'esprit, 110.
Regnard, Les maladies épidémiques de l'esprit, 110.
Médecine Rétrospective + 155

"rising", by placing a large rock on the patient's stomach. More recently, Dr. Joseph Récamier (1774–1852) used to place a cushion on the patient’s stomach, requiring a medical attendant to sit on it.*

But in spite of Charcot’s success, and this litany of historical precedents with which he framed his practical innovation, the British physician William Gowers (1845–1915) noted in Epilepsy and Other Chronic Convulsive Diseases (1881) that ovarian compression was rarely successful in England. This suggested to Gowers that cultural conditioning influenced patients’ behavior and, ultimately, their “cure”. Gowers preferred to administer iron tonic and pour one or ideally two gallons of water on patients’ heads, a remedy probably as efficient in context as Charcot’s compression belt.

Just as fantasy seemed to provoke hysterical conditions that translated into kinetic deformities, so too their treatment depended on equally powerful fantasies, practiced on the part of physician and patient alike.

CLINICAL THEATRES: FROM MOTOR DELIRIUM TO THE GREAT LABOURING, OR ‘HAMMERING’, CHOREA

Charcot directed, or choreographed, many scenes of hysteroepilepsy reproducing and confirming what he and his colleagues saw in history and the visual arts. Case studies in his clinic abounded, corroborating ancient scenes of corporeal disarray with everyday medical practice. This section turns to Charcot’s clinic, in which images and archives appear ‘live’.

This is not to suggest that archival research held precedence for Charcot and that his patients in all cases mimicked what he read or saw in galleries and picture books; but that the translation between archival and iconographic research and performative practice in Charcot’s clinic constituted neurology as a science at the borderline between repetition and discovery, the past and the present.

Neurology operated as a theatre of repetition, in which the past appeared in the present in neurological form. The present was saturated with the persistence of ancient gesture, just as the past, for Charcot, appeared rife with previously, in his view, undiagnosed neurological disease. Contemporary bodies served as his canvas and testing ground for this hypothesis.

For Charcot, live instances of hysteria and hysteroepilepsy suggested a theatre in which the patient entered the ‘scene’ or ‘stage’ of modern science. This was not only symbolic on a historiographic level, as hysteria came with his research finally, he thought, to be diagnosed; but in a more mundane sense, hysteria occurred onstage presently, via individual performance every day. The patient entered onto the scene of science in Charcot's clinic dramatically, at the culmination of a prolonged, but repeatable and increasingly, through observation, predictable set of acts—a rechoreographable dance. Charcot and his colleagues marked out stages of a hysteroepileptic attack, rendering it more narratable and its stages transposable onto ancient figures and scenes. The patient's seizure presented a dramaturgical arc, from onset to crisis and resolution.

The first, epileptiform stage of a hysteroepileptic attack appeared, Charcot and his collaborators noted, to some extent like epilepsy but was not actually epileptic. (It did not involve insuppressible neuromotor abnormality.) The second phase, which they thought was characterized by contortions and 'large' or 'great movements' ('grands movements'), represented a period of 'clownisme' ('clowning'), involving 'illogical', 'strange', 'unexpected', 'implausible', and 'fantastical' attitudes or poses; these were 'invraisemblables', implausible, not true to life.

The third stage, that of the attitudes passionnelles, worked like a tableau vivant involving 'passionate' or highly affective gestures and often hallucinations in which 'the patient enters himself into the scene and simultaneously (the French enables this double entendre) 'makes of himself a mise en scene' ('entre lui-même en scène') so that 'by the expressive and animated mimicry in which he engages, and the fragmentary phrases which he lets loose, it is easy to follow all the incidents of the drama which he believes he attends and in which he plays the principal role.'

The fourth stage of an epilep- tiform seizure involves the gradual resumption of normalcy: consciousness returns choppily, cut in with leftover hallucinations and brusque gestures, contractions, and cramps. The patient is exhausted and somewhat distressed.

These illustrations resonated, Charcot and his colleagues argued, with the ecstasies depicted by artists in the past, though these artists had sought primarily to portray a religious feeling, prayer or passion, rather than a violent contraction or convulsion, thus distorting the true character of hysteroepilepsy—a medical condition which enjoyed, they wrote, 'all the constancy and inflexibility of scientific law'. Yet this apparently inflexible law found incar- nations in various, at times, they wrote, ‘implaus- ible’ and nearly illegible contemporary scenes. Near illegibility rendered Charcot’s readings all the more magisterial, priest-like. The script he interpreted was obscure, difficult, yet he read it as an expert in decoding unpredictable gestures and cracking gestural codes. Choreomania, like hysteroepilepsy, was essentially an Orientalist fantasy, at once other and governable, unwieldy and tamable, undisciplined and disciplinariz- able. Choreomaniacal gesture represented the final frontier of modern science’s capacity to capture in language what eluded it—the body in a state of anarchic disarray.

The patient Geneviéve B. presented an especially vivid case study of what Charcot called hysteroepileptic chorea. In March 1872, when she was twenty-nine years old, she demonstrated symptoms Charcot classed as acute hysteria accompanied by hallucinations, tympany, and jumping (or leaping) chorea. She first showed a period of delirium, in which she began to perform ‘a bizarre sort of dance’ (‘une espéce de danse sin- guliére’). She would leap into the air and throw her head alternately backwards and forwards. This ‘motoric delirium’ (‘délire moteur’), which was caused, according to Charcot, by her halluci- nations, persisted as long as she was not lying in bed. Her fits continued until he discovered that compression of her left ovary allowed them to subside. He further noted acute tympany, a sure sign that her case was attributable to hysteroepilepsy.

Geneviéve was not performing—or, with his guidance, reperforming—tableaux from the art historical past but showcased gestures that appeared in this case to borrow from everyday dance and popular practice. As with patients whose cases I further outline later, Geneviéve engaged in partly strange but also very com- mon movements, seemingly automatically. The ‘bizarre sort of dance’ she performed suggested to Charcot that she was suffering from chorea, a recognizable and yet to his mind still largely unspecific motor disease, indicated, with some frustration on his part, by the vague ‘sort of’. Yet neurologists were working hard to describe these irregular movements and to ascribe to them names and regular and predict- able forms.

In April 1873, Charcot suggested that Geneviéve suffered from a seizure character- ized by an incessant need to move; she jumped and danced around, holding herself up at the foot of her bed, raising her skirt, endeavouring to embrace everyone around her, and showing ‘extreme lewdness’. By September, she was agi- tated (‘secousses’) and restless, running around the garden, threatening to break everything, while emitting sharp cries, which seemed, how- ever, momentarily to relieve her distress. Again, she complained of sharp pains in her left ovary. Her tympany by then, Charcot noted, was enor- mous. As before, compression in the left ovarian region calmed her fits. But the cure was not con- clusive. By the following April, after an epilepti- form seizure, she was seized again by a ‘leaping’ or ‘dancing’ delirium (‘délire saltatoire’). She began to hallucinate, seeing ravens and speaking to them; she jumped, cried, and pulled her skirt alternately between her legs and over her head, ‘as if to chase snakes away’.®* This chorée saltatoire (or leaping chorea) seemed ‘to be co-ordinated on a definite plan’, Charcot wrote, imitating, for example, specific dances or professional activities. This mimetic aspect led [54] In Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 102. See also Charcot, EEuvres completés, vol. 3, 438-439. [55] Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 102. See also Charcot, Euvres complates, vol. 3, 439. [56] Charcot and Richer, Les démoniaques, 109. [57] In Bourneville and Regnard, Iconographie photographique, vol. 1, 57-58. [58] Bourneville and Regnard, Iconographie photographique, vol. 1, 60.

Médecine Rétrospective + 157 led him to argue that chorea was suggestible, explaining why so many hysteroepileptics performed specific poses, lying in some cases prostrate with both arms outstretched as in imitation of the cross, or piercing themselves with swords without drawing blood. They were succumbing to extreme states of emotion leading to a specific, automatically triggered set of motions. In the case of the leaping chorea, patients engaged in expressive movements ‘such as those of the dance, and particularly character dances’. But another, nearly interchangeable sort of chorea presented a similar set of recognizable everyday activities: in the hammering chorea (‘chorée malléatoire’), patients completed ‘professional actions, such as the movements performed by an oarsman or a blacksmith’. [50] The leaping and hammering chorea in Charcot's writing appear almost interchangeably: dancing and working offered similar gestural models that his patients appeared to imitate. It is not always clear from his descriptions, however, whether the patients deliberately performed these or whether he saw in his patients' movements professional or leisure activities that he then made reference to in describing them, plausibly in so doing further influencing his patients' actions. But that was also the point. For Charcot, susceptibility to influence was a major trait of hysteroepilepsy. He sought for his patients to be suggestible, just as he noticed that they were so. Saying that the patients were performing an action like beating eggs or dancing a mazurka helpfully, to him and his colleagues, described the gestures and simultaneously further influenced the patients' repetition of them as if they had been voluntarily and deliberately doing these specific things at the outset. The measure of cause and effect was often blurry, confirming the extent to which Charcot was studying a special subset of hysteria, in which involuntary gestures and heightened emotional states produced the semblance of a voluntary action, which was in effect, he argued, performed somewhere between a voluntary and an involuntary state—what Freud would later further articulate as the subconscious. [50] ‘The gesture then could be traced through the ages as corresponding to and also revealing specific cultural forms, simultaneously universal and culturally specific. In this way, Charcot believed he was mapping contemporary neurological disorders onto cultural history, carving out new scientific territory and folding into it nearly all gestural culture from the past. In his lecture on ‘rhythmic hysteric chorea’ (‘chorée rythmique hystérique’), Charcot described the case of a young woman who typically performed a rhythmic swaying motion on the right side of her body, which she swung backwards and forwards. She would do this, he wrote, systematically, to a distinct rhythm which—according to those knowledgeable in these things, he wrote—was reminiscent of popular dances known as ‘mazurkas’. This did not mean she was performing one, only that the comparison to the mazurka enabled his scientific description. Elsewhere, Charcot described the case of Flor—, who performed ‘rapid rhythmical movements’, in which, he wrote, she ‘[seemed] to be whipping eggs’. Flor—would also ‘[bend] her fingers, applying their tips to the thumb; and raising her arm, [make] the gesticulation of an orator who is demonstrating’, or ‘[dance] alternately on each foot, very nearly imitating a jig or dance of the Tsiganes, or of the Zingari of Andalusia’. He characterized her chorea as ‘hammering’ (‘chorée malléatoire’), although it suggested dances as well as professional activities. Most important for Charcot was that Flor—’s chorea was distinct from what he called the ‘vulgar’ choreas (chorea minors) described by Sydenham, in which there was no voluntary action or repetition, only a general, slightly disorganized, non-patterned tremor of the limbs. Charcot’s innovation was to see specific patterns and gestures in his patients’ motions and to attempt to describe these in terms of their paradoxically involuntary imitation of specific actions.

Jean-Martin Charcot, Clinical lectures on diseases of the nervous system, ed. with an introduction by Ruth Harris, trans. ‘Thomas Savill (London: Tavistock/Routledge, 1991), 189-190.

Charcot, Euvres completes, vol. 1, 391-392.

Charcot, Clinical Lectures, 192. See also Charcot, CEuvres completes, vol. 3, 217-221.

Charcot, CEuvres completes, vol. 1, 393. Tweedie, like Charcot, described a hammering motion he called ‘malleatio’: it ‘consists in an apparently irresistible disposition to beat the knees with the hands as with a hammer. The action is regular but involuntary’, Tweedie remarked, ‘and occurs in paroxysms. Instances have occasionally occurred of involuntary rotatory motion of the whole or part of the body . . . Propulsion, either forwards, backwards, or in zigzags, has occasionally occurred’. One case was recorded of ‘a man who sometimes went out and walked forwards till he was exhausted and obliged to be carried home in a litter’. ‘The physician Mr. Kinder Wood, Tweedie noted, had also earlier described a woman whose ‘nervous susceptibility’ provoked her to suffer ‘pains in the face’, succeeded by a ‘twinkling of the eye, motions of the legs, and rotation of the arms’. She beat the palms of 158 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE things. In other words, Charcot was diagnosing instances of neurological disorder as a sort of dance theatre: movements that could be described by their repeatability and their participation in a spectrum of gestures from ancient history and everyday life. ‘Labouring’ actions seemed paradoxically purposeful yet automatic and involuntary, and in this sense they resemble what Hewitt has described after Agamben as dance. ‘Dance’, Hewitt writes, reprising Agamben, ‘as movement “independent of any motor purpose”—might be taken as paradigmatic of a Kantian aesthetic of “purposiveness without purpose.”’ Charcot’s patients’ actions were ‘purposive without purpose’, gestural movements imitating specific activities yet involuntary. Taken on a large scale, dance manias and other seemingly epidemic instances of ‘purposive’-seeming—yet in this sense purposeless—gesture constituted a ‘dancing’ disease in the nineteenth century: a disease of involuntary gesture imitating other gestures, including those representing specific activities or past times. For Charcot, the dancing mania and other epileptiform convulsions all represented or appeared to represent gestures previously performed by others, typically elsewhere. Patients were first and foremost interpreters, mimes; they did not initiate, but reproduced what was suggested to them. St. John's or St. Vitus's dance, epidemic possession in Loudun, the tarantella, and the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard could all be attributed, Charcot argued, to participants' susceptible imaginations—to their capacity for automatic and involuntary imitation. But in this capacity, they also, he thought, were able to access and represent for him and his amphitheatre audiences a bodily portrait of past forms: they served as contemporary keys to the corporeal past. Hysteria, Charcot's work submitted, encompassed nearly all the mind and body might conjure and theatricalize in a public show of distress.

His patients' gestures abstracted movements from everyday life, revealing a theatre of hysteria in which an aspect of everyday reality entered onstage, en scéne—specifically onto the scientific stage—performed by the patient, who could not, however, in her depictions, entirely master it. The patients seemed always to be at the edge of uncontrol and of the inexpressible, showing in their gestures a side of reality they seemed unable fully to hold. If many patients willingly helped Charcot's theatrical show by complying, consciously or unconsciously, performing gestures he argued they would show if he suggested them, they may have done this as a way to exercise their own theatrical proclivities, or in order to gain the favor of a powerful man whose influence on scientific and cultural life in Paris was immense.

Significantly, however, they did so at the borderline between apparently voluntary and involuntary gesture—that which marks choreomania as a 'modern' disease of repetition, a hiccupping, hesitant entrance into modernity. This does not mean patients did not also suffer. As Asti Hustvedt has compellingly argued, many of Charcot's patients may have suffered real psychogenic disorders, some of which may also have been lastingly relieved over the course of their stay at the Salpétriére.

The theatrical flourishes that their choreas involved, often triggered and manipulated by Charcot—although many patients themselves were arguably adept at triggering theatrical choreic gestures—won them substantial accolades from a Parisian public dazzled by their convulsive moves. As Gordon has convincingly argued of epileptic cabarets inspired by Charcot's clinic, Charcot's fame increased just as his patients' did through these performative scenarios: all were performers on a Parisian stage where distinctions between patient and pundit, science and art, blurred.

But the not-so-subtle sexualization of these patients' gestures, as her hands on her thighs and beat her feet on the ground, as if to produce a rhythmic cadence. 'On some occasions', Wood added, 'she would move up and down, or from side to side on her chair, and then springing on her feet, leap and jump, or be propelled forwards'. At other times, 'she would go into every corner of the room, striking the furniture'. But her movements were not always violent: Wood noted that she would also 'frequently dance on one leg, holding the other in the hand'. This way, her beating and tapping gestures gained 'musical time': 'In the course of the complaint it was observed, that the blows on the furniture were in musical time, and the involuntary actions, as they were considered, changed to a measured step. Although ordinarily an inexpert dancer', he added, 'she would on these occasions move about elegantly as in a minuet.' It was ascertained that there was always a tune in her mind, impelling her to these movements. When the tune was performed on the drum, she ran up to the instrument and danced with great activity and apparent delight, but the movements were always stopped by the rolling of the drum. Although yielding, as it seemed, unavoidably to the desire of dancing, she nonetheless always wished for the rolling of the drum, that the muscular excitement might be checked.

In Tweedie, ed., A System of Practical Medicine, 330-332. 63. Hewitt, Social Choreography, 83. 64. See Asti Hustvedt, Medical Muses: Hysteria in Nineteenth-Century Paris (London: Bloomsbury, 2012). Médecine Rétrospective + 159 movements—in spite of Charcot’s claims to the contrary—also allied dancing, working, involuntary convulsions, and heightened hallucinations and fantasy in a discomfitingly subterranean world of implicit desires for power and control, in which the work of observation abstracted and governed impulsive movements. As Freud would note, lurking beneath the involuntary movements he himself observed in Charcot's clinic was the spectre of an obscure other side—a 'dark continent', unknowable and ungraspable except through opaque signs that came up to the surface like sylphs.

HYSTEROEPILEPSY, GENDER, AND ANTIQUITY: THE POETIC REDISCOVERY OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

Not all hysterics were women. Charcot and Richer made a point of this in the concluding section to Les démoniaques dans art, although younger women figure prominently in their hand-drawn illustrations. But the confusion between St. Vitus's dance and epilepsy and, in Charcot and Richer's terms, the new catchall diagnosis, hysteroepilepsy, drew on an increasingly feminized conception of disorderly gesturality—gestures queering public space by virtue of being 'too much'. Femininity, characterized by Freud as a 'dark continent', was to him unknown and nearly unknowable. The dancing disease thus became feminine and 'dark' largely through its association with premodern (ancient and medieval) corporealities in distress, hardly legible, but read again and again nonetheless, through the annals and images that nineteenth-century medical writers increasingly relied on to perform their diagnoses. Choreomania became in this way a disorder of the nineteenth-century imagination, at once articulating a present scene of scientific historiography and, in doing so, exposing—excavating—scenes of corporeal mayhem. As an ancient yet strikingly 'modern' disorder ('modern' inasmuch as it was articulated in a contrapuntal relationship to the past), hysteroepilepsy came to signal scientific modernity's capacity to read the past in present bodies, implicitly understood to be attuned to the subtle undercurrents still rumbling through them. Hysteria, Breton famously declared, was the nineteenth century's 'greatest poetic discovery'. But in Charcot's clinic, hysteria signalled poetic rediscovery, a method for rereading ancient gestures in present terms, as a disorder of involuntary recurrence. The late nineteenth century, through hysterical and hysteroepileptic, fitting bodies, tapped into—or believed it tapped into—an ancient, highly feminine past. Yet many hysteroepileptics were also men, feminized through their involuntary gestures, which marked them as not quite modern, not entirely up to the modern-day work culture of hyperproductivity, purposefulness, and speed. As Micale has pointed out, the overlooked prominence of men in Charcot's service suggests that hysteria was not just feminine but also described a general weakening of the nervous system—including weakening from work-related strain—observed at the time. In the 1880s, Charcot published more than sixty case histories of male hysterics, with a quarter to a third of the case studies related to children and men. All hystero-epileptics were curable by ovarian or testicular compression, as well as other forms of blows and bindings. Charcot's theatrical mise en scène of hysteric patients on his lecture-hall stage complemented a cast of iconographic sources and visual collage that allied contemporary and ancient forms of convulsive theatricality.

Micale notes that Charcot's work on male hysterics has been largely eclipsed by feminist and Freudian psychoanalytic literature. However, Micale suggests that robust workers were as liable to succumb to hysteria in Charcot's analysis as effeminate types. Jan Goldstein describes the hysterical diagnosis as an occasion for gender subversion among men, including Gustave Flaubert.

Modern neurology in the nineteenth century was the greatest poetic creation, operating as poesis, making and remaking the fantasy of a just barely graspable origin. Scientific knowing was a work of collage and bricolage, pilfering methods from across art history and anatomy, historiography, and clinical observation. This gesture of abstraction performed a return, articulating a sense that present diseases have always been here, buried in the detritus of pre-revolutionary France or ancient Greece.

Charcot and his colleagues' analyses were corroborated with precedent from characters from the past. Nothing would enable Charcot and his students better to grasp the past's afterlife than fieldwork in places where choreas were reputedly still present. This sideways movement from the archive to the field signals a translatio from a historiographic to an ethnographic plane, prompting the expansion and transformation of the choreomania repertoire into the realm of anthropology, and ever further into colonial lands: yet another repository of fantasies about the past and primal 'other', ever more racially marked. The Dancing Procession of Echternach

Meige, a student of Charcot, visited the site of a reputedly still active medieval dancing procession to see what traces of the hysteroepileptic past might be found there, outside hospital walls. In an article published in the 1904 issue of Nouvelle iconographie de la Salpétriére, 'La procession dansante d'Echternach' [The Dancing Procession of Echternach], Meige suggested that he was disappointed to find the remains scanty. The great medieval leaping procession he had expected to witness firsthand, in its more or less 'still' active state, had been by 1900 almost unrecognizably transformed. Although more well-attended than ever, it was comparatively staid, even controlled—not at all the grimacing expression of spontaneous hysteroepileptic unleashing that he had imagined. There were, however, remnants of the old procession, such as the line formation, made up of rows of people connected to one another by holding a handkerchief, which appeared in an illustration of an early fourteenth-century manuscript of the Roman de la Rose in the Royal Library, The Hague.

References:
Henri Meige, 'La procession dansante d'Echternach', Nouvelle iconographie de la Salpétriére 17 (1904): 248-264 and 320-336.
Paul Krack, 'Relicts of Dancing Mania: The Dancing Procession of Echternach', Neurology 53.9 (1999): 2169-2172, 2169-2170.
J. Schroeder, 'Zur Frage friihmittelalterlicher Kulttanze am Grabe Willibrords in Echternach', in G. Kiesel and J. Schroeder, eds., Willibrord: Apostel der Niederlande, Griinder der Abtei Echternach (Luxembourg: Editions Saint-Paul, 1989), 186-193. Eustace and King point out that this image, and an alternative illustration, in which dancers hold one another by the sleeves, reprises the familiar medieval trope according to which Death holds onto his partners by their sleeves or other parts of their garments (‘Dances of the Living and the Dead’, 55). On the Echternach procession, see also Sahlin, Etude sur la carole médiévale, 160-164; A. Neyen, ‘De Yoriginate et du but véritable de la pro- cession dansante d’Echternach’, Bulletin de l'Institut archéologique liégeois 15 (1880): 223-297; also H. Gaidoz, ‘Le Grand-Duché de Luxembourg’, Nouvelle Revue 66 (1890): 800-817; M. Tresch, La chanson populaire luxembourgeoise (Luxembourg: Victor Buck, 1929): 80-90; H. Attwell, ‘The Echternach Whitsuntide Dancers’, Notes and Queries 7.9 (1890): 381-382; Gougaud, ‘La danse dans les églises’, 240-242.

Médecine Rétrospective + 161 he moaned, ‘at best two choreic little girls and a man with a tic; nothing, nothing of the great hysterical leaping chorea.”” According to legend, Saint Willibrord (c. 658- 739), also known as Saint Witt (or Saint Vitus) in Germany and Saint Guy in France, still held a special status in this small town, dramatized in the annual recurrence of a procession in his honour on Whit Tuesday, the Tuesday after Pentecost. Meige had hoped to see specimens of the chorea major he knew from Charcot’s lectures, which may, they surmised, have represented a hold-over from medieval days. But, as Meige wrote in ‘La procession dansante d’Echternach’, most of the men and women in attendance appeared quite unspectacular. He hypothesized that this may have been due to the presence of policemen lining the procession, ordered to carry anyone away who was suffering from a real epileptic or hysterical seizure. In addition, some participants now sent relatives or hired the services of professional dancers to replace them in the procession. For Meige, who admitted that he still ‘felt some emotion’, the sight was not unimpressive. But the annual dancing procession first mentioned in the Echternach city archives in 1497 and reported to have begun as early as the eighth century, after Willibrord’s death, when his tomb became a site for miraculous occurrences, had diminished, Meige thought, to a mere shadow of its former self.

As the neurologist Paul Krack has pointed out, previous iterations of the procession seem to have offered more spectacular body pos-tures for the interested observer. A seventeenth-century depiction of the procession shows a pilgrim performing an arc de cercle in front of Willibrord’s tomb; and a legend written down in 1858, probably of medieval origin, suggests that an Echternach citizen named Veit (Vitus) had provoked a dancing madness by playing his fiddle; Willibrord had had to intervene against the disease, and pilgrims processed annually in his honour so as to be protected from the dancing madness for a year.”! St. Vitus was at once protector and provoker of the dancing disease. But the event Meige encountered resembled more of a military march, with men and women lined up in neat rows, flanked at the front and the back by musicians, who were also interspersed between them, forming their own tightly choreographed group. Spectators lined the event in neat rows, perhaps mildly amused by the hops the processing participants performed in tune with a brass band (fig. 6.8). The few ecstatic faces, abrupt gestures, and expressions of enthusiasm Meige did observe were not caused______ "Rather, singing, dancing, and laughing, he argued, influence our motor behaviors, especially if we are ‘suggestible’. Because religious enthusiasm increases individual susceptibility to impulsive behaviors, provoking imitation, impulsive behaviors and fits may occur in and around a procession, in an attenuated form." Religious faith is particularly contagious, he argued; this explained why religious dances were often characterized by zealous motor activity.

In Meige’s journey, a new figure of the dancing disease emerges, revealing a will to archive and ‘re-cognize’ choreomania through a methodological process of live returns. With Meige, the modern scientific body encounters a living archive by becoming co-present, experiencing the frisson of what appears to be still past at an ethnographic site that seems to have preserved history better than a modern clinical setting.

Luxembourg was hardly a primitive place in the French imagination, compared to the European imagination of colonial worlds I will discuss in later chapters. But the town of Echternach’s apparent preservation of an ancient tradition promised to reveal kinesthetic histories elsewhere unavailable to the modern neuroscientist. As an effort to recapture the past and re-encounter an original cast of gestural events, this scientific journey was set to fail; yet it dramatized a modern attempt to find the corporeal past over there, in a place that can still be reached.

While this arguably genealogical method did not purport to seek an ‘origin’ for the dancing disease, it sought to find a more ancient, better preserved, and more original copy of present-day variations. The journey to a corporeal past that Meige performed revealed a hope to encounter what Roach has called a ‘mnemonic reserve’: a set of gestures, dances, and imaginaries contained not in written records but in the bodies and movements of people.

The mnemonic reserve—what we may further think of as a repertoire of cultural histories—also reveals a cluster of fictions about the past, articulating a narrative recombining the contortions of earlier generations with present-day scientific imaginaries to constitute 75. "Performance genealogies," writes Roach, describe "expressive movements as mnemonic reserves, including patterned movements made and remembered by bodies, residual movements retained implicitly in images or words . . . and imaginary movements as an archival repertoire, living and in 'drag', as much as events are translated—dragged—across discursive and geographic planes. Although Meige's archival return left little trace of the event, other contemporary narratives enable us to see what it was that he saw and thus to reconstruct the social choreography of the dancing procession as an actually very orderly, deliberate, and planned affair—not at all the scene of mayhem that Charcot's 'demoniacs' suggest.

As in previous narratives describing Bruegel's pilgrims, local traditions in Echternach claimed that the dancing procession was preventative: it constituted a popular theatre of movements engaged in at a designated time of the year to protect participants—even through the intermediary of hired dancers—from suffering choreiform and other movement disorders, as well as epilepsy, for the following year.

The Irish Jesuit Province, in a short article titled 'The Leaping Procession at Echternach', published in 1886, barely more than a decade before Meige's participatory return, suggested that the 'dancing saints' ('saints dansants') making their pilgrimage to Echternach every year did so in the hope of being 'cured or spared by imposing on themselves as a penance, the convulsive movements and contortions accompanying the dreaded illness'."

"'One of the most curious relics of the Middle Ages', the author of this short article noted, 'existing in its primitive form to the present day, is the annual procession in honour of St. Willibrord, held at Echternach, in Luxembourg, and popularly known as "The Leaping Procession."' The village of Echternach had been a 'famous place of pilgrimage', and though 'the origin of this strange devotion is doubtful', was still 'crowded at Pentecost by sufferers from St. Vitus' dance, epilepsy, and similar disorders, accompanied by their friends and relations'."

Most pilgrims, coming from Eifel, Upper Moselle, Saar, or further yet, arrived in bands of thirty, forty, or more, 'headed by their parish priest and a banner-bearer' as well as their own bands of musicians, 'march[ing] the whole way, singing hymns and litanies'. Others arrived by train and were 'conducted to the places prepared for their reception—great barn-like rooms, roughly fitted as dormitories, with beds of straw'.

'Curious sight-seers of a better class are few', the author noted, 'and consequently, have no difficulty in getting accommodation at the inns or in the houses of well-to-do villagers'."

The image offered in this account suggests a significant concourse of people and a dramatic city-wide affair. One correspondent at the Cologne Gazette remarked in 1880 that nine thousand pilgrims took part in the procession, 'without counting the large body unable, through age or infirmity, to leap with the others';" spectators swelled the ranks further. The whole procession was orderly, as the Echternach priests had 'thoroughly organised the smallest details' so as to provoke 'no disturbance nor noisy mirth'," so that the 'exercise' might not 'degenerate into a frolic, and have to be suppressed'." * Young villagers, ‘lads and lasses, sixteen years of age and under’, took part as hired dancers, agreeing to ‘leap and jump not for themselves but for others, being hired by pilgrims who are unable themselves to take part in such vigorous exertions’. They accosted strangers, asking ‘Wolt Ihr mich dangen für zu sprangen?’ (‘Will you hire me to jump for you?’), and danced for a few pennies, all the more vigorously if they had been hired by a few pilgrims at once. By the time Meige visited, expecting dramatic contortions, the procession had become even more orderly and imposing. A few years after that, Willibrord’s tomb was relocated to the Echternach basilica, providing further space for participants and watchers to gather. By 1920, at the height of the dancing procession, over twenty-four thousand people made the pilgrimage to this small town.

But the procession was still comparatively tame, dreamed in minds, not prior to language but constitutive of it, a psychic rehearsal for physical actions drawn from a repertoire that culture provides.

In Roach, Cities of the Dead, 26. 76. C. O'C. E., ‘The Leaping Procession at Echternach’, Irish Jesuit Province 14.155 (May 1886): 257-260, 259.

C. O'C. E., ‘The Leaping Procession’, 257-258.

C. O'C. E., ‘The Leaping Procession’, 257.

C. O'C. E., ‘The Leaping Procession’, 260.

C. O'C. E., ‘The Leaping Procession’, 257-258.

C. O'C. E., ‘The Leaping Procession’, 259.

Kauthen, ‘La procession dansante’, 251.

164 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE including fewer and fewer choreics and other visible sufferers of movement disorders than may have been present at the start. In the coda, I briefly outline my own return to Echternach to perform Meige’s journey in archival drag.

NEW GENEALOGIES: MEDICAL PRACTICE AND EARLY ANTHROPOLOGISTS MOVING OUT TO THE ‘FIELD’

Fieldwork was becoming a prime site for diagnostic observation, prompting what I argue constitutes a shift—a translatio—in the discursive history of the dancing disease. The journey from a broadly medical to an ethnographic field was fittingly fitful, wayward—what I am calling ‘choreographic’, denoting the sideways movements that fields perform and the rhizomatic routes they travel. Scientific articulation of the dancing disease in the last decades of the nineteenth century passes from an ekphrastic and historiographic to an ethnographic mode, criss-crossing (zigzagging across) geographic areas—mostly colonial ones—to become ever more ‘illegibly’ not just feminine but also African.

Anthropology is typically understood to have emerged in the nineteenth century out of the older fields of natural science and natural history, as well as archaeology, marked by the rise of museums; anthropology also arose with the increasing burden on administration in the imperial colonies,** and was as such often complicit with colonial rule.® But anthropology and ethnography were also, I argue, steeped in medicine’s own fascination for antiquity. Colonial medicine and medical history in particular provided an antiquarian pull, setting the stage—providing ‘scenes’—for the new ethnographic study of exotic behaviours and beliefs. Physicians, like anthropologists, stationed all over the world, had a privileged perspective on human movement, positioned to view, as from upon a hill, like a monarch, as Pratt suggests, the plains of what they saw as scientific history stretching out before them. Anthropology and ethnography emerged out of colonial medicine as sites—literally, fields—for observing the dancing disease. This is significant on a few accounts. The concatenation of historiographic and ethnographic methodologies—reaching to the past and the other—continued to embed modern scientific imaginations of choreomania in an elusive field of writing in which ancient history re-emerges as repetition taking place elsewhere. Choreomania in the late nineteenth century became a disorder of historical alterities just as these alterities seemed to erupt not only on ancient and modern European but American and, even more markedly, colonial land. Choreomania appeared antediluvian, primeval—not just historical and superstitious but prehistorical, inarticulate, animal, and pre-discursive. Choreomaniacal bodies festered and erupted, like boils, wherever ‘modernity’ was not—as its imagined other. Anthropology was the science of exotic body politics; but so, too, it perpetuated the study of human movement.

Jean Christian Marc Boudin (1806-1867), one of many under-acknowledged nineteenth-century writers who straddled medicine and anthropology, suggested that movement and travel (‘déplacement’) are at the heart of human history.¹ The relatively untranslatable notion of ‘déplacement’ is suggestive, denoting at once displacement—a usually undesirable sense of being no longer in one’s home territory—and the far more neutral choreographic sense of merely moving aside. ‘Déplacement’ suggests a transfer of people, objects, and ideas between sites (or fields). This provokes a shift: what I am calling translatio. The process of déplacement suggests not only a movement away from one place and towards another but a residual carrying over, a remainder—the drag and dragging—of memories and habits from one location, or field, to another. Boudin calls this sense of movement ‘irresistible’.² But it also suggests a passage—a discursive choreography—between areas of knowing, determined not only by geographies but by methods of reading and knowing. Boudin, who foregrounded travel and movement in his concept of human history, was heavily involved in the early days of the Société d’Anthropologie de Paris, a body initially composed mainly of medical professionals. Founded in 1859 and formally established in 1864 by the government of France for the ‘scientific study of the human races’, the Société d’Anthropologie translated early medical comparativism into the increasingly systematic study of human populations in colonial outposts overseas. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Other founding members of the Société besides Boudin likewise came from medical and psychiatric ranks. Further professions listed among those practiced by the Société's founding members included geography, history, geology, public administration, Orientalism, linguistics, law, art, archaeology, and literature. But the majority of listed affiliates were from the medical world, from pharmacists and anatomists to military physicians. The ubiquity of physicians affiliated with the military and imperial orders in particular multiplied the number of medical professionals having access to exotic behaviors and disease, accounting for the vast majority of early publications on the new anthropological scene.

In 1865, a year after the French anthropological society's founding, over a third of the titulary members residing in Paris were primarily active in medicine; two thirds of the members outside Paris (including the British physician Thomas Aitken) were also medical professionals. Among national correspondents, half listed medical affiliations. By 1895, with the gradual institutionalization and professionalization of the new anthropological field, medical affiliations waned: out of roughly 550 members, only about 90 (less than one-sixth) were primarily active in medicine and related sciences.

Similarly, in England, the Anthropological Society of London, founded in 1863 by James Hunt (1833-1869) of the Ethnological Society of London (with which significant rivalry would ensue), claimed an affinity with the natural and medical sciences. The German Anthropological Society and the Berlin Society for Anthropology, Ethnology, and Prehistory, founded by Virchow, himself a writer on movement and dancing epidemics, likewise boasted interests in the intersection between medicine, culture, and society.

Although the development of anthropology in Germany, which had virtually no colonial presence, revolved around the concept of Völksgeit, national character, articulated by Johann Gottfried von Herder among others, and Bildung, learning for self-edification, believed to foster a spirit of curiosity about the world's people and to inspire novel approaches to culture, it similarly boasted a foundation in biological science and travel. Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859), who wrote a preface to Hecker's essay 'The Dancing Mania' and whose voluminous 1822), also an imperial navy surgeon, was stationed in Senegal; Adolphe Bourgarel was a surgeon in the imperial marine; D. M. P. Chanot was the former imperial marines surgeon of the Ile de la Réunion. See Bulletin de la société d'anthropologie de Paris 1865, 1880, and 1895.

90. See Bulletin de la société d'anthropologie de Paris 1865, 1880, and 1895.

91. On the early history of anthropology in Britain, see Alfred C. Haddon, History of Anthropology (London: Watts, 1910). For a comprehensive review, see especially Kuklick, ed., A New History of Anthropology, 52-78. Haddon (1855-1940) noted in his preface to a collection of essays edited by E. E. Evans-Pritchard (1902-1973), Raymond Firth (1901-2002), Bronistaw Malinowski (1884-1942), and Isaac Schapera (1905-2003) that the pioneer ethnologist C. G. Seligman (1873-1940) himself had come to anthropology from medical pathology, having earned his M.D. in London on pathological research conducted in New Guinea. The famous Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits in 1898-1899, which Haddon had organized, introduced him and a small cast of other medical practitioners—among them, W. H. R. Rivers (1864-1922)—to the new discipline and methodology and the questions and investigations characterizing the anthropological field. Rivers, celebrated as a physiologist, similarly experimented with ethnology and psychology after his participation in the Torres Straits expedition and his fieldwork there. See Alfred C. Haddon, 'Appreciation', in E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Raymond Firth, Bronistaw Malinowski, and Isaac Schapera, eds., Essays Presented to C. G. Seligman (London: K. Paul, Trench, Tibner, 1934), 1-4. See also Alfred C. Haddon, ed., Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1901).

166 + EXCAVATING DANCE IN THE ARCHIVE writings were collected in the influential five-volume Kosmos (1845-1862), covered nearly every field of scientific inquiry in his research, from zoology and botany to plant and physical geography, minerology, chemistry, anatomy, and political economy, largely inspired by his journeying through Central America." These anthropological and ethnographic endeavours represented a seismic shift in disciplinary understandings of corporeality and movement, as writers translated colonial and missionary medical observations to a new discursive plane, foregrounding what Clifford has called a 'travelling culture', which involved research increasingly performed 'in the field'.% Moving bodies in anthropology were being described in cultural terms, at once grounded in and abstracted from the places where they were observed. And whereas these anthropologists were engaging in the increasingly professionalized world of medium-term travel and in the 'circulatory system' Gilroy has described as characterizing the modern transatlantic (and modernism more generally), they were also methodologically entrenched in a collecting culture. From this perspective, non-European natives seemed to reach back to—to re-enact— pre-European time. As such they were representational, artefactual: history's excess and residue, its remainders. Foucault noted that the early ethnographic sciences imagined non-European cultures to exist outside of what they imagined as modern, linear (European) time; non-European cultures were considered to be ahistorical.°** Choreomania, conceived as an ancient and non-European disease, was also thus 'ornamental': a disorder of superfl______ Choreomania was fantasized as ahistorical in its tendency to re-emerge and repeat; it did not belong to (linear, European) time but offered, through European bodies, a theatrical re-enactment of pre-civilized other states. Choreomania thus represents movement at the limits of modern, imperial Europe and the migration and circulation—the choreography—of ideas about these limits across fields. In the next chapter, comparativism comes to the fore as a methodological force that further meshes ideas about chorea and choreomania in the obscure otherworld of colonial medical fantasy.

The tarantella, long described in early modern medical literature by writers as a popular practice designed to expel a spider's noxious poison, emerges on the nineteenth-century medical scene as a site of bacchanalian revelry. The next chapter moves not only to southern Italy, imagined as Europe's gateway to Africa, but also to the African 'dancing disease', the tigretier, described by the British explorer and travel writer Nathaniel Pearce (1779-1820) as a tradition that, like tarantism, primarily implicated unhappy women.

Further excavating the genealogical links between fantasies of African tarantellas and colonial others, the chapter moves to a modern case of an African 'dancing disease', imagined as a tarantella by government officers worried that it was performed, deceitfully, to mock them. Lies, sex, and dance form the trio that set choreomania apart in the Italian south as a holdover dubiously connecting northern Europe to a 'dark' and—to many of its observers—inscrutable African past.

92. See H. G. Penny and M. Bunzl, eds., Worldly Provincialism: German Anthropology in the Age of Empire (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2003).
93. See esp. James Clifford, 'Spatial Practices: Fieldwork, Travel, and the Disciplining of Anthropology', in Clifford, Routes, 52-91.
94. Michel Foucault, Les mots et les choses: Une archéologie des sciences humaines (Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1966), 388.

Médecine Rétrospective + 167 PART II Colonial and Postcolonial Stages Scenes of Ferment in the Field 7 'Sicily Implies Asia and Africa' Tarantellas and Comparative Method At the end of Naples, begins Africa. —Traditional Italian saying, in Jerri Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse (2010) Each work on the Orient affiliates itself with other works, with audiences, with institutions, with the Orient itself. —Edward W. Said, Orientalism (1978) TRAVELLING CULTURES: POSTCOLONIALISMS AND DARK CONTINENTS

Part II delves deeper into the colonial and postcolonial spheres within which choreomania moved. No longer only a European fantasy of prior disorderly movements—among post-plague dancers, the Convulsionaries of Saint-Médard, and 'hysterics', as well as French revolutionary hordes—coming up to haunt a figure of modernity imagined contrapuntally against these prior 'disorders', the concept of choreomania now comes to signal a whole new amalgamation of bacchanalian fantasies, with uprisings in Africa, the Americas, and the South Seas. As I will show in the ensuing chapters, 'choreomania' travels with its translations in and out of colonial outposts and missionary, medical, and government archives—coming out always slightly transformed. From Orientalizing marginalia to eyewitness accounts, new archival repertoires emerge, contributing to moving the discourse on choreomania along to new shores. These discursive choreographies—always linked genealogically by scientific writers to discursive precedent—transform the language of choreomania from a slightly awkward medieval hold-over into a dark, feminine, and archaic return. If Europe was moving forward, the rest of the world, it seemed, was dancing impulsively far behind. Choreomaniacs in the literature surveyed in the following chapters, however, do not just move too much or display too much enthusiasm, as in previous cases; they increasingly epitomize an antediluvian force of duplicity, an ungovernable propensity to shamming as well as to insurrection. Still jagged and erratic, apparently purposeless and unpredictable, the gestures of choreomania come with the new fieldwork to signal an ever more thrilling—and dangerous—Dionysian proximity to ancient times, suggesting foreign bodies served as imaginary access points to an ever-receding past: Europe met its own (dancing) history of misrule in the exotic ‘East’. * 171

Not all writers in this genealogy were European, though many were European-trained; thus while many bodies and narratives I consider moved from west to east and north to south, some travelling researchers offered observations far outside Europe, contributing to an increasingly transnational set of scientific narratives cross-pollinating between regions, systems of practice, and thought. Choreomania's discursive history thus further zigzags, picking up an ever more indiscriminate array of case histories to add to and to confound its paradigmatic scenario, its ur-example—the St. John's or St. Vitus's dances of the European Middle Ages.

Underpinning this travelling history of ideas about the dancing disease is a persistent cluster of myths about unintelligible others. In order to think through the fantasy of colonial and postcolonial unknowability, and its imbrication in discourses about disorderly bodies moving through the new scientific disciplines, I borrow from postcolonial feminist theorist Ranjana Khanna, who describes, after Said, Foucault, and Frantz Fanon (1925-1961), the colonial legacies underpinning the 'dark continent' of psychoanalysis. Reprising Freud's claim that woman is a 'dark continent'—mysterious, obscure, and other, like Africa—Khanna traces psychoanalysis's lineage back to colonial anthropology and archaeology, situating modern psychoanalysis at the heart of the colonial enterprise and, significantly, in a melancholic longing to return to a primeval womb-like state of comfort and unknowing. But modernity cannot unknow what it knows, and so the trauma of colonialism serves as a powerful 'specter', she writes, haunting postcolonial legacies and aspirations.

So, too, spectres of alterity and prehistory haunt choreomania, as disruptive others emerge onto the scene of scientific modernity as figures of the alluringly unknowable past. Choreomaniacs appear abstruse and uncannily familiar, perpetually erupting in a cacophonous display of vitality on history's stage. Modernity thus construes itself in relation to a past and an other conceived as dark, odd, and inchoate. This chapter situates colonial modernity's 'dark' other—African and feminine—in southern Italy and the African continent seen to lie at its door. It argues that nineteenth-century medical and ethnographic literature on tarantism crafts an Orientalist fantasy by which tarantellas, and their imagined African variants, notably the tigretier, signify ancient practices that could be observed and reconstructed over the course of colonial travel and fieldwork, by which 'primitive' bodies could be 'excavated' for the benefit of scientific and artistic reproduction in the present.

Continuing thus the previous chapter's reflection on reperformance, historiography, and visuality, this chapter shows a new brand of comparativism emerging in the nineteenth century as a choreographic process multiplying sites for comparison: across discursive fields (translatio studii) and geographic ones (translatio imperii), in the construction of an ever more disjointed modern body, subject to proliferating origins and recentrings. The history of colonial-era comparativism concerning 'dance' and disease moves Said's contention, via Foucault, that the West construes the East through Orientalist structures of knowledge and power familiar from traditional learning and government structures—including the classics, the Bible, philology; public institutions, trading companies, geographical societies, and universities; writing in travel books, exotic literature, and so on?—and towards a concept of comparativism taking place transversally, across fields and geographies. My argument is that comparativism in the age of torque emerges motionally, choreographically, as a perpetual decentring, rather than as the paradoxical transposition of 'new' spheres of knowledge gained from colonial administration in Africa and the East onto older structures of knowledge acquisition and power.

'The relative novelty of colonial modernity as an emergent globalism performs a slightly different paradoxical motion: that of the semi-haphazard collection of comparatives. Rather than suggest a structure of accumulation of knowledge about others, which are fitted into pre-existing categories, modern structures of knowing comparatively emerge through series of proliferating encounters, each of which maps only somewhat onto a pre-existing scheme. The paradigmatic quality of prior models (St. Vitus's dance, or the Italian tarantella, also described in nineteenth-century medicine as a form of St. Vitus's dance) thus shifts, perpetually displaced and replaced—in Roach's terms, surrogated—by new models that nonetheless reach back to the old. Surrogation, unlike repetition, or imitation, suggests the imperfect mapping of a present onto a displaced, lost, or abandoned past; with surrogation, the novel copy of the old removes what came before by merely setting it to one side rather than eliminating it completely.'

So whereas the 'old' structure (St. Vitus's dancing, or classical philology) remains, formally—if only in name—its coordinates also shift in the process. 'St. Vitus's dance' or the 'tarantella' comes to signal something quite different with repetition and does so by virtue of the series of encounters and translations performed through it. This suggests a vital model of concept formation by which terms, figures, and forms coalesce into conceptual or discursive nodes, things about which a certain collection of things are said. In this chapter, the 'tarantella' becomes paradigmatic of a whole subset of concerns about the dancing disease, namely fakery, forgery, and deceit (generally but not always among women), as well as a particular sort of 'madness': colonial depression, to use a term anachronistically in order to designate a whole complex of affects and conditions, including fatigue, listlessness, and a (right) sense of oppression.

Following Foucault's contention that the history of madness, and of the human sciences more broadly, is a 'history of the Other'—simultaneously construed as internal and foreign—as well as of the order imposed on things, that is, as a creation of sameness where there may be none, the chapter proposes a look at the tarantella as a concept that moves between orders of otherness and sameness without ever revealing a stable or unchanging core—an origin. The tarantella rather comes to be construed in nineteenth-century colonial medical and anthropological literature as a disorder broadly signalling modernity's alienation from a supposedly prior, carefree, classical dancing self that it tries to recapture; modern colonial travellers attempt to find the remains of what they read in classical literature in colonial backyards and are disappointed not to find it matching up. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

But in the differential relation between the imagination and the encounter lies a space of transfer, a translatio, the movement of the concept from classical reproduction to a different sort of theatre—the theatre of forgery and lies, according to which colonized and lower classes seemingly represent the classical past but fail to do so properly in their execution. ‘Choreomania’ then comes to signal the impoverishment of the classical past in a present too gauche, too poor (for most), to match up to it. Thus furthering Burt’s contention that the ‘alien’ body of early twentieth-century modernity sought roots in faraway places to empower a rootless and disenfranchised modern self—Katherine Dunham, for instance, travelling to Haiti to bolster her African-American community in the present°—this chapter shows broadly Western (mostly European) scientists and anthropologists, travellers, and administrators marking modernity out as a space between sameness and difference, self and other, also with respect to the imagined other contained within the supposed modern self. Writers, artists, and scientists found people and events in other places that could, they thought, deepen and enrich their present with an order many felt had been lost. This suggests the experience of modernity in the age of torque as diminished, materially and spiritually, yet seeking to augment itself with less alienated, more natural, and more authentic other places (in Foucault’s terms, heterotopias), which nevertheless revealed themselves to be frustratingly (to their observers) never quite right. Thus the rhizomatic history of an emergent global modernity suggests travellers imagining themselves in an ‘uncanny’ relationship to faraway places and other histories: neither at home nor quite not at home in them. Conversely, colonial subjects encountering travelling physicians may have doubled themselves in an attempt to remember what was asked of them to reperform, discovering an uneasy mismatch in their own concepts of self and other and their own situation as objects of desire and distrust. Increasingly in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, otherness became ‘uncanny’, Burt argues, inasmuch as modern bodies—those experiencing themselves in relation to and yet as being different from a past nonetheless still accessible, many thought, in other lands—sensed that the divide was not so great. And so the experience of modernity became that of reconciling differential relations—what Said has described in terms of contrapuntal negotiations. Gilroy writes: ‘the anti-modernity of these [black musical] forms, like their anteriority, appears in the (dis)guise of a premodernity that is both actively reimagined in the present and transmitted intermittently in eloquent pulses from the past.’® The contrapuntal movement, then, is double: simultaneously an insuppressible re-emergence, even eruption, of (typically darker and more ancient) alterities in a present never quite able to contain them and the wilful recu-peration, even restoration or (violent) repossession, of these alterities in a self-styled upright present that is perpetually anxious nevertheless to know (and to master) them.

Beginning with a discussion of the emergence of comparativism as a method of choice in the nineteenth century, first in medical geography and then in comparative literature, the chapter goes on to discuss Orientalist fantasies about the Italian South, widely perceived to be more ancient and dark than the North, closer to Africa and Greece, and thus ideal for comparative analyses and recuperations. The chapter then discusses travellers’ encounters with the tarantella there, and Nora’s tarantella in A Doll’s House (1879), by Henrik Ibsen (1828-1906), as well as Pearce’s encounter in colonial Abyssinia (present-day Ethiopia) with a dance, the tigretier, he thought reminiscent of the tarantella.

Attentive to the Orientalist marginalia in Babington’s translation of Hecker’s writing, the chapter traces the expansive and transformative movement of ‘choreomania’ on North African and ‘Arabian’ terrains. Finally, I consider more recent ethnographic recuperations of the ‘tarantella’ in Nigeria, similarly cast as forgeries and fakes. Medical and anthropological literature, all these cases show, increasingly associated the reperformance of popular dances with feminine and colonial deceit, marking a new turn in the literature on the dancing disease as a disorder of colonial duplicity and ultimately resistance to rule.

COMPARATIVISM AND COLONIAL RULE
Said points out the origins of comparative literature in a period of high imperialism, specifically the nationalisms emergent across Europe in the period between 1795 and 1830.° But far less salient in contemporary literature on comparativism is another history situating these cross-cultural interests in medical research. Thus, although comparativism had become by the end of the nineteenth century the de facto method of choice for literary and cultural analysis, this chapter shows that comparativism also began in medicine, specifically in medical geography and medical history, two fields that I argue sit at the heart of concerns now prominent in cultural, performance, and especially dance history and theory: concepts of movement and archiving first and foremost.

The translatio from a broadly medical to an anthropological and now a ‘performative’ and dance field suggests not only (certainly not primarily) a continuity between these areas of research, methods, and conceptual problems; but, more saliently, a fundamental mobility between discursive fields of analysis and therefore an important historicization and destabilization of the disciplinarity of our disciplines. Rereading the history of dance in medicine allows us to rethink both—as well as a host of affiliated—fields’ myths of origins, including any notion suggesting that these fields have as 6. See e.g. Said, Culture and Imperialism, 66-67. Said offers a further account of the ‘contrapuntal’ in Edward W. "Said, Freud and the Non-European (London: Verso, 2003), 23-24. Said, Orientalism, 41. Said, Culture and Imperialism, 43. 174 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES their primary task is not anything other than to read bodily movement and forms. In this sense, dance and medicine share a common heritage, and participate in a shared sphere of cultural prejudice, including suspicion concerning (and attempts to smooth out) jerky and uncontrolled movements, such as those that characterize what are now commonly referred to as movement disorders: conditions marked by tics, jerks, spasms, contractions, paralyses, and sudden, unbidden falls. So although some contemporary dance practice embraces such alterkinetic aesthetics, and the whole domain of hip-hop, krumping, and popping relies on quick contractions and highly controlled, virtuosic muscular spasms as well as improvisation, the relative marginalization of these movements socially coheres with what I describe as choreomania, a pervasive prejudice against sudden, irregular gesture.

Hecker saw choreomania as a 'disease of nations', one that arose out of specific times and places—often cataclysmic ecologies—but nonetheless shared traits across histories and cultures. This comparativism set the stage for further analyses and a new fashion for finding examples around the colonial world. Hirsch, who edited Hecker's essay on the dancing mania in an 1865 German edition, declared the need among the scientific class to study what he called 'public' or 'national' diseases from a comparative standpoint. He wrote in the preface to his Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology (1881-1886) that medical geography and medical history were gaining a new currency among his peers as commerce with colonial peoples was enabling physicians to grasp entirely new realms of research. In particular, his English-language translator noted: 'the English-speaking race are most directly interested in the subject of this book, and their observations in various parts of the world have supplied a large part of the materials for it'.

Indeed, although Germany had long engaged in worldwide exploration, and travel narratives gained a new currency in the wake of Humboldt's journeys through equatorial America between 1799 and 1804, the absence of any widespread colonial presence had typically oriented German scientific interests towards what was thought of as learning for its own sake (Bildung). Still, Humboldt was interested in what Hecker had to say, and provided the 1832 German edition of Die Tanzwuth with a short foreword that extolled the virtues of comparative medical research. By 1879, the German psychiatrist Ludwig Witkowski (1849-1927) argued that all dance frenzies should be studied from a comparative standpoint. Borrowing liberally from Hecker, Witkowski called St. Vitus's dance a 'psychic infection' 'analogous' to earlier cases of mental or spiritual illness (Geisteskranke) and 'melancholic delirium', from the Sufi brothers to the Jumpers in England.

Thus, Hirsch noted, English and American but also French physicians contributed to the publication of monographs, official reports, and journals, aiding in construing the expanding field of medical geography. The Health Reports of the War Offices of England and the United States and the Archives de médecine navale in France, among other state-run publications, offered medical professionals new platforms for acquiring and disseminating information on the medical anthropology of parts of the globe 'formerly unknown in these respects, or known imperfectly'." New research in epidemiology offered comprehensive coverage of diseases previously unheard of in Europe, through reports issued by the English Health Department, the Transactions of the Epidemiological Society of London, and the Official Sanitary Reports of Sweden. These labours have not only added on the grand scale to our knowledge of the distribution of diseases, but also revealed the causal connection between them and the human environment. Modern increase in world travel prompted comparisons of climate, diet, and disease. By the end of the nineteenth century, comparison was arising as a method of choice for literary and scientific endeavours.

The steam-engine, telegraph, and daily press brought the local and central, the popular and the cultured, life of each European country and the general actions of the entire world face to face. Habits of comparison have arisen such as never before prevailed so widely and so vigorously.

References:

1. Felicia McCarren, French Moves: The Cultural Politics of Le Hip Hop (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013).
2. Charles Creighton, translator's note, in Hirsch, Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology, vol. 1, xi.
3. Alexander von Humboldt, ‘Foreword’, in Hecker, Die Tanzwuth, eine Volkskrankheit im Mittelalter, v-vi.
4. Ludwig Witkowski, ‘Einige Bemerkungen uber den Veitstanz des Mitelalters und iuber psychische Infection’, Allgemeine Zeitschrift fiir Psychiatrie und Psychisch-Gerichtliche Medizin 35 (1879): 591-598.
5. Hirsch, Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology, vol. 1, v-ix.
6. Hutcheson Macaulay Posnett, Comparative Literature (1892). The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

'© Comparative thinking heralded a paradigmatic shift in the way people and nations related to and interpreted one another, particularly for those with the financial and technological means to do so: northern Europeans travelling, for the most part, south. Orientalism provided ideal grounds for pursuing this comparativism, linking sameness and alterity, Greece and the East. In Said’s terms, Orientalism was founded on a series of comparisons, ways in which, to the westerner, ‘the Oriental was always like some aspect of the West’.1° Orientalists, Said notes, make it their business to ‘[convert] the Orient from something into something else’:2° something strange into something familiar and then, one may add, back into something strange again, as the imagined negative of the imagined self. Orientals are created as objects of discursive interest, imagined by way of mimetic doublings: the other’s alterity is annulled, rendered same, and yet their alterity is highlighted as being like the self but, to reprise Homi K. Bhabha, ‘not quite’.1 All All this phantasmatic projection occurs through the mechanisms of professional and amateur societies and associations, presses, vocabularies, and the like. These mechanisms yield what Said sees as a process of ‘schematization’, though as I show of choreomania, this process also comes with a concomitant ambiguation, as choreomania passes through various associated and correlative spaces—spaces of recombination—encountering new material and disciplinary topologies within which it continues to move.2 Put in other terms, choreomania continues to be reconstituted through various encounters between disciplinary zones of intensity (colonial medicine, medical geography, etc.) just as it is inscribed in new scenes. Choreomania is always reconstituted;15

15. Hirsch, Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology, vol. 1, vi. See also an early account in Muhry and Davis, Observations on the Comparative State of Medicine in France, England, and Germany, who note that they are interested in ‘the conditions under which diseases are distributed over the world, or are confined to certain districts’, suggesting that ‘when the laws which regulate health and disease among the human family began to be elucidated by the facts of physical geography, combined with those of vital statistics’, a ‘new branch of medical etiology opened up’, ‘variously named medical geography or noso-geography’ (897-898).

16. Hutcheson Macaulay Posnett, Comparative Literature (New York: D. Appleton, 1892), 73.

17. Posnett, Comparative Literature, 75.

18. Posnett, Comparative Literature, 76.

19. Said, Orientalism, 67.

20. Said, Orientalism, 67.

21. In Bhabha’s by now iconic formulation, ‘colonial mimicry is the desire for a reformed, recognizable Other, as a subject of a difference that is almost the same, but not quite. Which is to say, that the discourse of mimicry is constructed around an ambivalence; in order to be effective, mimicry must continually produce its slippage, its excess, its difference’. Homi K. Bhabha, The Location of Culture (London: Routledge, 1994), 122.

22. Said, Orientalism, 67-68. In this sense, the history of choreomania, as of virtually any other concept, I submit, is a history of transfers and associations, a variation on the notion of ‘displacements and transformations’ that Foucault, borrowing from Canguilhem, employs to describe the history of a concept as a history in motion." I call this movement a choreographic process: a movement of ideas in relation to other ideas, bodies, and geographies constituting an always shifting network or node, a zone of intensity according to which concepts do not just become displaced onto other fields but also become associated with new sites and other indigeneities. In this sense, concepts— including the ‘tarantella’, as a notion associated with St. Vitus's dance in medical history and geography—transform through repetition and association across what Foucault calls the ‘order of things’, categories of sameness and difference, which I construe as perpetually shifting, not only according to deep-seated (archaeological) a prioris but also by virtue of myriad aporias and black holes, a near infinite string of readings, rereadings, and misreadings that constitute the choreomania concept ‘again and again’ on the fly.

BABINGTON'S MARGINALIA: GEOGRAPHIC THRILLS AND COLONIAL EXOTICA

Addition, annotation, and marginalia constituted some of the most fecund means by which choreomania expanded and moved. Babington in particular offered a growing cast of narratives freely appended to Hecker's own, opening the floodgates to further tales emphasizing Oriental others. Freshly back from his travels in India, as interest in colonial administration was buzzing in the medical halls of London, Babington, a widely read polyglot who dabbled in poetry, published a volume of sonnets, stanzas, and songs and translated folktales from the Tamil, as well as a Tamil grammar translated from the Latin. He integrated into Hecker's compendium a range of anecdotes and asides from England's imperial realm, adding a flavour of exoticism and thrill to Hecker's already outlandish mix.

Hecker himself had set the stage for such comparisons, employing a number of foreign sources to compile his study, notably Pearce's autobiography and travelogue The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, written by himself, during a residence in Abyssinia, from the year 1810 to 1819 (1831), published fortuitously as Hecker was composing his essay. Hecker used Pearce's story as 'testimonial', an 'eye-witness' account of the African 'dancing mania', the tigretier. Quoting from Pearce at length, Hecker employs the example of the tigretier to reinforce the notion that dance manias occurred everywhere: one had only to reach to the nearest edition of the local newspaper or the nearest reprint of a traveller's tale to find studies of wild and disinhibited dancing. In this respect, Hecker drew from the past, but also the exotic present, inviting more such exoticizing asides.

Babington was zealous in his use of footnotes and appendices, employing his status as translator to advance what had become an increasingly global comparative project. Besides adding bibliographic references and details—such as mention of wax figures (‘peri cunculas’) believed to have been used by witches at the time of Paracelsus's writing on St. Vitus's dance—Babington provided entire case studies of the condition. An eleven-year-old girl in Renfrewshire in 1696, whose account he has learned of from the Glaswegian physician Robert Watt (1774-1819), ‘had violent fits of leaping, dancing, running, crying, fainting, &c’. But, as Watt put it, because 'the whole narrative is mixed up with so much credulity and superstition . . . it is "impossible"', he lamented, 'to separate truth from fiction'. Watt's account, published in Edinburgh in 1698 as 'A true Narrative of the Sufferings of a Young Girl, who was strangely molested by evil spirits, and their instruments, in the West, collected from authentic testimonies', attributed this episode to witchcraft. A Privy Council held on 19 January 1697 had issued a warrant, Babington 23. Michel Foucault, Larchéologie du savoir (Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1969), 11. 24. Nathaniel Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, written by himself, during a residence in Abyssinia, from the year 1810 to 1819, ed. J. J. Halls, Esq., 2 vols., vol. 1 (London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, 1831). 25. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 94n1. 'Sicily Implies Asia and Africa' + 177 notes, on the 'grounds of suspicion of witchcraft in Renfrewshire'; the commission, signed by eleven privy councillors, issued a further warrant on 5 April 1697 'to try the persons accused of witchcraft, and to sentence the guilty to be burned, or otherwise executed to death'. This historical footnote, indebted to Watt's article, 'Cases of Periodical Jactitation, or Chorea', published in Medico-Chirurgical Transactions (1814), recuperated Watt's story of witchcraft and delusions into a comparatively new biomedical and biohistorical sphere, between dance, disease, and the history of 'superstition'. The girl's fits of leaping, dancing, running, and crying—erroneously, Babington reasoned after Watt, attributed to witchcraft—could now be folded into the arena of neurological science and the renewed science of epidemic disease: specifically, the dancing mania. Babington's examples, like Hecker's, appeared pell-mell.

This story was followed immediately by another lengthy example, which Babington appended to Hecker's mention of 'Lycanthropy', a phenomenon discussed, Babington suggests, by Burton in his Anatomy of Melancholy, as well as by Avicenna (980-1037), Pliny (23-79), and a wide range of other classical authors."' In the example Babington puts forward, a group of nuns reportedly began mewing like cats; one nun had begun this trend, and was followed by her peers. In Germany, a similar case of so-called zoanthropy occurred in which a nun 'fell to biting all her companions'; soon 'all the nuns of this convent began biting each other'. As 'the news of this infatuation among the nuns soon spread', it 'passed from convent to convent throughout a great part of Germany', reaching Holland and Rome." Babington saw this as a case furthering the scope of Hecker's interest in lycanthropy (belief that one has turned into a wolf), which had served as a particular example of pathological imitation not necessarily involving dance. Babington's comparative transcultural approach to events analogous to St. Vitus's dance extended Hecker's transcultural and transhistorical study to form a second history of the 'dancing mania' in the margins of Hecker's essay, providing readers with a taste of Orientalist exoticism largely absent from the original. In a footnote appended to Hecker's general comment about the existence of 'similar fanatical sects [exhibiting] among all nations of ancient and modern times the same [dancing] phenomena'—an implicit invitation to further Hecker's narrative with new case studies—Babington offered yet another example of his own. He described a case of 'religious fanaticism' in Cairo, narrated in Recollections of Egypt, by the Baroness Von Minutoli (1827). The narrative, which he reproduced verbatim, described a monk 'singing, or more properly crying . . . while dancing on his heels, the name of Allah, till, completely exhausted, he sank down insensible'. Wolfardine Auguste Luise von Minutoli (1794-1868), Babington noted, wrote that 'these unhappy visionaries . . . often expire at the end of this holy dance', prompting Babington to add, again 26.

Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 99-100n2. 27. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 101n1. The article is by Robert Watt, president of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons at Glasgow, physician to the Royal Infirmary, and lecturer on the theory and practice of physic at Glasgow, in Medico-Chirurgical Transactions 5 (1814): 1-23. Watt opens his essay with a brief story of dancing at St. Vitus's chapel, near Ulm, adding that although this tradition and 'the convulsive disease to which children are liable' may be 'considerably different' phenomena, 'yet the two affections are perhaps nothing more than different species or varieties of the same disease'. He proceeds to note that he had the opportunity to see 'one of these restless people', an account of which he submits to the Medical and Chirurgical Society of London, adding that this disease, which seems to have a range of subspecies and varieties, is always characterized by an 'ungovernable propensity to motion' and is always relieved by 'muscular exertion' (1).

28. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 117-118n4. Further species of pathological con-tagion were noted by Hecker in cases describing the human imitation of wolves (lycanthropy). He wrote that it is 'an extraor-dinary species of insanity, which, having existed in Greece, before our era, spread, in process of time, over Europe, so that it was communicated not only to the Romaic, but also to the German and Sarmatian nations, and descended from the ancients, asa legacy of affliction to posterity'. Calmeil, De la folie, describes cases of lycanthropy from the annals of French history, 87-88, 279-283, 310, and 416-427. Esquirol cites cases of lycanthropy and cynanthropy (belief that one has turned into a dog) in Des maladies mentales (1838). For Esquirol, this behaviour was attributable to 'demonomania', a form of monomania descended from pagan cults in which animal sacrifice was a socially sanctioned way to give thanks to the gods. Esquirol, Des maladies mentales, 521-522. See also Jules Bernard Luys, Etudes de physiologie et de pathologie cérébrales (Paris: Bailliére, 1874); T. K. Osterreich, Possession, Demoniacal and Other, among Primitive Races, in Antiquity, the Middle Ages, and Modern Times, trans. D. Ibberson (New York: Richard R. Smith, 1930), 191-192. Georges Devereux, in 'Le diagnostic en psychiatrie primitive: Théorie générale du diagnostic' (1963), describes the 'chien fou' (mad dog) syndrome, a term used to designate behaviour accepted in Crow culture as a means to express anger. Georges Devereux, Essais d'ethnopsychiatrie générale (Paris: Gallimard, 1970), 286-316, 310. Exhausted and sweating profusely, they fell down in the middle of a crowd of pious onlookers, who gathered around them, quickly lifting them back to their feet. The ecstasies were dangerous, Babington wrote, for unsuspecting Christian onlookers, who were forced to witness these events because of their unhappy public location. But Babington was not too concerned with the Christians' moral sanity, simply noting the discomfort this enforced proximity produced in them; his stated concern was to depict cases of dancing manias and similar events around the world and thus to extend Hecker's already comparative project with illustrations further proving its global range.

In his 'Translator's Preface', Babington warned his readers that he had taken the liberty of adding footnotes to Hecker's text that he trusted would be 'not inapplicable' to his readers' interests and might shed further light on the cases described. His footnotes and appendices consisted 'chiefly of parallel accounts in illustration of what is set forth in the text'. An appendix, consisting of a detailed account of 'fits of dancing' from the Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal, excerpts from Felix Robertson's medical thesis (chapter 5 here), an article by Mr. Kinder Wood (1785-1830) published in Medico-Chirurgical Transactions, and other contemporary sources, completed his substantive contribution to Hecker's study.

But Babington was also not impervious to the entertaining quality of his stories for the curious modern reader. He remarked in his preface that the purpose of the compilation—by which 'the physician may enlarge his knowledge of disease, and the moralist may gather a hint for the intellectural improvement of his fellow-men'—also resided in 'leisure', a term he used repeatedly to characterize the activity that consisted of reading these accounts and the danger among those doing so to succumb to the 'disorders' the narrations described.

"There is no class', wrote Babington, 'even in this age of boasted reason, wholly exempt from the baneful influence of fanaticism. ... And instances are not wanting, in our own days, and in this very capital, to prove, that disorders (how can we more charitably designate them?) much resembling some of those described in the following pages, may make their appearance among people who have had all the advantages of an enlightened education, and every opportunity of enlarging their minds by a free intercourse with refined society'. This medical history served doubly to enlighten and to entertain—as well as to counsel—his readership, constituted, in Babington's view, as much by physicians as by 'moralists'.** His project was to caution as well as to please. Building on the legacy of 'polite' leisure that the eighteenth-century reader of geography had enjoyed, Babington noted that his own modern reader suffered a new sort of pleasure, a real frisson in the face of dangers—each more exotic than the next—looming on every page. This interesting science . . . [is] at once instructive and entertaining, by conveying the most useful information in the delightfullest manner, and giving to precepts of the utmost importance all the captivating graces of a refined amuse- ment.** Geography presented its readers with the spectacle of faraway lands peopled by extraordinary creatures, customs, and landscapes.

29. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 139n5. See Baroness von Minutoli, Recollections of Egypt, by the Baroness von Minutoli, trans. S. L. H. (London: Treutell & Wirtz, Treuttel, Jun. & Richter, 1827), 69.

30. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 139-140n5.

31. B. G. Babington, ‘Translator’s Preface’ [The Dancing Mania’], in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 76-78, 78.

32. Babington, ‘Translator’s Preface’ [‘The Dancing Mania’], in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 77.

33. Babington, ‘Translator’s Preface’ [‘The Dancing Mania’], in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 77.

34. Charles Theodore Middleton, ‘Preface’, in A new and complete system of geography. Containing a full, accurate, authentic and interesting account and description of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. . ., 2 vols., vol. 1 (London: J. Cooke, 1778-1779), n.p. ‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’ + 179

It was a tool for exercising the imagination, ‘by contrasting the manners of savage and civilized nations together . . . insensibly [to] [benefit] by the bright side of the comparison’.** But as Middleton writes, this sort of comparativism ‘fed’ and ‘grew rich’ on ‘captivating speculations’ born from the ‘polite’ contemplation of climates and revolutions, political and commercial interests of state, and the rise and fall of empires. It concerned the historian, the politician, the philosopher, the naturalist, the antiquarian, the merchant, and the literatus, as well as the ‘simply curious’ person.

By the nineteenth century, a far more sensationalizing approach to world geographies had gained ground as extensive colonial administration prompted physicians to disseminate their findings to audiences world-wide. Babington, after Hecker, was at the helm of this boat, which travelled on what appeared to be far rockier waters.

Babington’s most sensationalizing contribution to Hecker’s work may be an extensive footnote to a passing comment Hecker makes regarding the tarantella. Hecker describes the Persian habit of counteracting the ingestion of venomous substances—such as the tarantula’s poison—by drenching the wounded person in milk ‘and then, by violent rotary motion in a suspended box, [compelling] him to vomit’.% Babington argues in his footnote that among the Psylli of Egypt, ‘another illustration’ tells of a sect that, ‘according to the testimony of modern writers’, ‘continues to exhibit the same strange spectacles as the ancient serpent-eaters of Cyrene’. ‘A band of these seeming madmen’, Babington writes, ‘with bare arms and wild demeanour, held enormous serpents in their hands which writhed round their bodies and endeavoured to make their escape. These Psylli, grasping them by the neck, tore them with their teeth and ate them up alive, the blood streaming down from their polluted mouths. Others . . . striving to wrest their prey from them’ struggled ‘mightily’, offering the ‘populace’ (which ‘followed them with amazement’) performances ‘believed .______ Although the example otherwise bore little resemblance to the tarantella, the public spectacle of poison extraction warranted a lengthy comparison. Examples proliferated in Babington’s version of Hecker’s text. Serpent-eating, associated with dramatic performances of poison ingestion, constituted a marginal form of choreomania in Babington’s view. A recent explorer’s narrative provided by the French naturalist Charles-Nicolas-Sigisbert Sonnini de Manoncourt (Sonnini) (1751-1812) and published in Hunter’s Translation of Sonnini’s Travels (1799) offered a further eyewitness account, enabling Hecker’s scenes to resonate with contemporary history and once again offering medical practitioners and the general public a stimulating read.

Although Babington did not add any further gloss to Sonnini’s tale and merely integrated it into his marginalia verbatim, his decision to append it to the word ‘imposture’, which Hecker employed to describe tarantism, underscored the analogy of these events with reported practices in the Orient. Sonnini’s account, recuperated by Babington, likened the practices of an Egyptian sect and a late medieval Italian form of a so-called dancing mania exhibiting similar types of venomous ingestion and imposture. The tale underscored three variables: poison; convulsions and frenzy; and the theatrical imposture governing the whole affair, staged as a public event putatively to inspire terror and awe. There was notably little dancing involved.

But for Babington, the mise en scène of the expulsion of poison presented an occasion to describe what looked like contemporary remnants of an early modern phenomenon, especially dramatized in the flamboyant East. Sonnini was ‘not so fortunate as to witness a public exhibition of such performances’, Babington noted, but his account of a private encounter with members of the sect offered him ‘a remarkable specimen of the extravagance of man’, albeit orchestrated by himself.

Every year, Sonnini noted, the Saadi (serpent-eaters) ‘walk in procession through 35. Middleton, ‘Preface’, n.p. 36. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 119-120. 37. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 120-121n4. Von Minutoli describes the Psylli as a ‘separate class, descended from the ancient Psylli, mentioned by Pliny, Celsus, and other writers of antiquity’, further linking, as Babington and others would do, modern Egyptians to a broadly Mediterranean antiquity recuperated into the history of the modern (often northern) European West (in Recollections of Egypt, 67). 38. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 121n4. See Charles-Nicolas-Sigisbert Sonnini de Manoncourt, Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt, undertaken by order of the old government of France, by C. S. Sonnini, engineer in the French navy, and member of several scientific and literary societies. Illustrated with forty engravings; consisting of portraits, views, plans, a 180 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES the streets, each holding in his hand a living serpent, which he bites, gnaws, and swallows piecemeal, with frightful grimaces and contortions. Sonnini then ‘contrived to procure [himself] .. . in [his] own house [such] a spectacle’. As Babington recounts it, Sonnini tells of a Saadi coming to his apartment with a priest of the sect. This entailed the performance of a sort of snake-dance, in which the Saadi bit the snake’s head off, ingesting its poison, which caused him to writhe and convulse. Sonnini's words, translated by Rev. Henry Hunter (1741-1802), were reprised by Babington in the same footnote: With a vigorous hand the Saadi seized the serpent. . . . He began to appear agitated; his countenance was discomposed; his eyes rolled; he uttered terrible cries, bit the animal in the head, and tore off a morsel, which we saw him chew and swallow. On this his agitation became convulsive; his howlings were redoubled, his limbs writhed, his countenance assumed the features of madness, and his mouth, extended by terrible grimaces, was all in foam. . . . Three men endeavoured to hold him, but he dragged them all three around the chamber. His arms were thrown about with violence on all sides, and struck everything within their reach.* As the priest took hold of the 'madman' and 'recited some prayers', his agitation diminished, and subsided into a state of complete lassitude.

Sonnini went on to note that the Turks who were present at this 'ridiculous and disgusting ceremony' firmly believed in the reality of the 'religious fury'. He added that it might have been either 'reality or imposture', but conceded that it was 'impossible to see the transports of rage and madness exhibited in a more striking manner' or to have before one's eyes 'a man more calculated to inspire terror'.**

Poison ingestion produced theatrical convulsions—real or fake—and while these were clearly spectacular for observers in the East, their narrative recuperations in the medical literature on the dancing disease made them more spectacular still, examples of a transhistorical epidemic that could seize readers themselves unawares. This additive trope, suggesting the possibility of a near infinite number of further studies, provided the illusion of universality. Yet pathologists saw in the reiterations and repetitions of choreomania a sign of continuous change, indeed a type of surrogation or reperformance, by which choreomania always became itself—or something slightly different—again. Choreomania was, in its proliferating centres, mobile.

Challenging the idea that diseases were biologically fixed, the French pathologist and historian Charles Anglada (1809-1878) argued that new diseases often appeared just as ancient ones became extinct. Some diseases underwent resurgences but often transformed as they did so.** Choreomanias appeared to be as old as human history, or older—animal, geological—and as the particular purview of the time and place at which they arose. "SICILY IMPLIES ASIA AND AFRICA': LIVING RUINS AT EUROPE'S EDGE

In this sense, 'choreomania' emerged in the interstices between literature and medicine, performance and ethnography, as their imaginary empty middle, the chasm out of which global scientific modernity arose. But globalism was not homogenization; rather, it constituted myriad pockets and nodes, zones, and gulfs. No writer has been more credited with inventing a planetary scale of comparative literature than Goethe; yet even his analyses of Weltliteratur (world literature) suggest differential relations." geographical chart, antiquities, plants, animals & c. Drawn on the spot, under the author's inspection. Translated from the French by Henry Hunter, D. D., 3 vols., vol. 2 (London: John Stockdale, 1799), 38-43. 39. In Sonnini, Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt, 38-39. 40. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 121n4, See Sonnini, Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt, vol. 2, 40. 41. Babington, translator's note, in Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 121n4, See Sonnini, Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt, vol. 2, 41. 42. Charles Anglada, Etude sur les maladies éteintes et les maladies nouvelles, pour server a l'histoire des évolutions séculaires de la pathologie (Paris: J.-B. Bailliére, 1869). Anglada argued that demonomania, lycanthropy, spectropathy, choreomania or St. Vitus’s dance (danse de Saint-Guy), tarantism, and convulsive theomania were not epidemics, as Hecker had thought, but neuroses originating in mental processes and propagated by what he called the instinct of imitation; they did not present real anatomical alterations among those affected, however intense the mental aberrations and sensorimotor troubles (50). 43. See e.g. David Damrosch, What Is World Literature? (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003). ‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’ + 181 In writing of his travels through southern Italy in the second half of the eighteenth century, Goethe wrote that for him, ‘Sicily implies Asia and Africa’.* The Italian South, as performance ethnographer Jerri Daboo among others has pointed out, was widely imagined as a land of exotic rustics, an Oriental backwater more closely associated with the ‘“dark lands” of the Indies’ than with Western Europe. It was a ‘ter- ritory of passage’, between east and west, north and south, yet in its relative isolation it bore a greater relationship to India than to northern Italy, according to Jesuit authorities who in the sixteenth century sent their missionaries there first to train for positions further east.” Jutting out into the Mediterranean at the southernmost tip of Europe, southern Italy bordered Africa to the south and the southern Balkans to the east. The Orientalist fantasy of the southern Italian peasant as a dark African or Asiatic other was counterbalanced only by the equally pervasive image of southern Italy as a land basking in clas- sical antiquity. Southern Italy and Greece, for cultivated northerners, stood not only for Africa but also for all that was ancient. The ruins at Pompeii and Herculaneum were being excavated throughout the nineteenth century after their rediscovery in 1748, and travellers wishing to gain a taste of the exotic past looked to Europe’s southerly backyard for an experience of ancient times. In this antiquarian and archaeological fever, European visitors similarly ‘discovered’ the dance of the tarantella as living human remains conjuring Dionysian bacchanals. As Daboo has suggested, travellers such as Goethe and Henry Swinburne (1743-1803) found in the free movement of women dancing to tambourines a form of excess and eroticism that recalled to them ancient Maenads.** The past had seem- ingly stopped in these arid lands, and antiquity, with some prompting, came into view. Writing Travels in the Two Sicilies, by Henry Swinburne, esq., in the years 1777, 1778, 1789, and 1780 (1790), Swinburne described his experience, like Sonnini, commissioning a performance of the tarantella for his own edification. Finding no peasants presently engaging in this ancient practice, he located a tarantata—a woman who had been bitten by a tarantula—and bid her ‘act the part’.*” She complied and, accompanied by a ‘great many musicians’ summoned for the pur- poses, offered what she could of the ritual—per- forming it, he was assured by ‘all present .. . to perfection’—until Swinburne finally terminated the event, judging it distasteful: At first she lolled stupidly on a chair, while the instruments were playing some dull music. They touched, at length, the chord supposed to vibrate to her heart, and up she sprang with a most hideous yell, stag- gered about the room like a drunken person, holding a handkerchief in both hands, raising them alternately, and moving in very true time. As the music grew brisker, her motions quickened, and she skipped about with great vigour and variety of steps, every now and then shrieking very loud. The scene was far from pleasant; and, at my desire, an end was put to it before the woman was tired.

This woman’s performance of the tarantella— ‘stupid’ and ‘dull’—was far removed from the fantasy he had of it. For Swinburne, the tarantella revealed the crude remains of ‘heathenish rites’ and, more gloriously, Dionysian ecstasies. Tarantella dancers were in his view ‘exact copies of the ancient priestesses of Bacchus’ whose ‘orgies’ provided ‘so darling an amusement’ to worshippers. The rites of Dionysus, Swinburne 44, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Italian Journey (1786-1788), trans. Elizabeth Meyer and W. H. Auden (London: Collins, 1962), 212; cited in Dabo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 20. 45. Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 15, 20. On the Jesuit missionaries’ imaginary of the region as an ‘Italian India’, see esp. Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 19-24; and de Martino, La terra del rimorso, 22-24. See also Jane Schneider, ed., Italy's ‘Southern Question’: Orientalism in One Country (Oxford: Berg, 1998). Daboo notes that the image of southern Italy as gateway to the past still holds. Conducting ethnographic research on the revival of tarantella music and dance practices, particularly with the Notte della Taranta festival held in the region since 1998, now attracting hundreds of thousands of visitors, she spoke to a man from Bologna (in the north) who admitted that ‘he loved coming to Salento to experience the ancient past, the traditional life that was no longer present in the industrial North, but which he could hear in the music of the pizzica, now captured on his [MP3] player’ (Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 232). 46. Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 32. 47. Henry Swinburne, Travels in the Two Sicilies, by Henry Swinburne, esq., in the years 1777, 1778, 1789, and 1780, 2nd ed., 4 vols., vol. 2 (London: J. Nichols for T. Cadell and P. Elmsly, 1790), 304-305. See also Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 152-154. 48, Swinburne, Travels in the Two Sicilies, vol. 2, 305. 182 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES wrote, though ‘memory of [their] ancient name and institution’ had been ‘effaced’ after ‘the introduction of Christianity [had] abolished all public exhibitions of these heathenish rites’, were recuperated into the southern Italian tarantella and translated into the worship of St. Paul, who by the early modern period had become widely adopted as the tarantati’s Christian saint. But Swinburne’s fantasy and the practices he encountered failed to mesh. Peasants seemed to be poor copies of the ancient past; even when bidden, they seemed not to be able to remember the ancient history he thought their primitive bodies and minds so perfectly preserved. The exalted image of the ancient dance of the tarantati carefully cultivated by foreigners poorly matched the reality of tarantella practices on the______ The southern Italian peasants' rituals seemed enigmatically to arise out of the past, preserving and performing antiquity, while disappointing the modern traveller anxious to catch a glimpse of what he thought he knew. By Swinburne's account, the Neapolitan tarantella, 'a low dance, consisting of turns on the heel, much footing, and snapping of the fingers', provided a 'holiday-diversion' for young women who, without knowing it, he contended, mimicked the 'ancestral' 'pictures of Herculaneum'.*° Yet the tarantella also participated at times in actual physiological disease, he surmised, and had not entirely left behind those traces.

Swinburne saw two types of dances: for the most part, the dances were, he wrote, religious and spiritual holdovers from ancient Greece, elegant and refined. But in rare cases, they still revealed a grotesque and rather pedestrian form of nervous disorder, which resembled but could not be equated with the religious rites of ancient Greece. 'If at any time these dancers are really and involuntarily affected [by the spider's poison]', Swinburne remarked, 'I can suppose it to be nothing more than an attack upon their nerves, a species of St. Vitus's dance.'*' St. Vitus's dance, in this usage, denoted chorea, later Sydenham's chorea (and eventually Huntington's chorea), terms ascribed to a range of spasmodic neurological conditions, as I have shown.

When it appeared as 'nothing more' than this nervous disease, the tarantella bore little historiographic or artistic merit in Swinburne's mind; it was an 'attack upon the nerves', the mechanical result of animal toxicity, involuntary and fitful. It did not reveal any special insight into the ancient past, he thought. But those cases were exceptional; and for the most part, Swinburne remarked, the tarantella offered a special sort of knowledge about the moving past.

It may be that some women and men did suffer from chorea. But this neurological disorder is relatively rare, and Swinburne's desire to find in the tarantella a key to ancient history suggests a colonial drive to plumb history by way of contemporary bodies. These bodies, he, like his contemporaries, believed, resided more closely to the past by virtue of their residence at the imagined hinterlands of modern industrialized space. Peasants in the south of Italy were seen to be doubly removed from northern European visitors—by their class and their geography. As such, they appeared to observers to possess a special capacity to perform naturally and artlessly what northern Europeans reproduced by scholarly design.

Reconstruction of ancient dances through the careful imitation of pictorial evidence from vase paintings and ethnographic narratives enabled some scholars, hobbyists, and artists to create imaginary versions of tarantellas or other 'ethnographic' dances. The figure of the tarantella, moving from southern Italy north, was by the nineteenth century becoming a crucible for phantasmatic imaginings of exotic alterity. Dancers took note. The Austrian ballerina Fanny Elssler (1810-1884) famously rendered a lithe and graceful tarantella for the stage in La Tarentule [The Tarantula] (1839), a ballet pantomime set in the exotic province of Calabria. In this story, a young man is bitten by a tarantula and attended by a dirty old charlatan. "51. Swinburne, Travels in the Two Sicilies, vol. 2, 306-307. ‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’ and 183 Omeopatico (Homeopath), who promises to cure him in exchange for the hand of the young man’s fiancée. Horrified, she feigns being bitten by a tarantula herself and in imitation of her lover performs a convulsive dance. Faking death at the end of her performance, she is then swept away by friends and relatives, soon to be reunited with her fiancé.** The themes of lovesickness, deceit, peasant life, and feverish pain, treated lightly on the operatic stage, conjugate high romance and comedic misunderstanding with the spectacu- arity of convulsive disorders. Elssler’s portrayal inspired Irish-born, self-styled ‘Spanish’ dancer Lola Montez (1821-1861) to render her own version of a tarantella-like dance in her glee- fully erotic performance, Spider Dance (1855), in which she notoriously lifted her skirt above her head to reveal that she was wearing nothing underneath. Both works articulated the taran- tella as a dance of seduction and femininity and, in Montez’s case, dangerous sexuality and taboo. The tarantella on- and offstage projected a host of fantasies about the sexual life of ‘savages’ onto the Italian South, also crystallizing the imagined connection between exotic dance, antiquity, and nervous disease.

ORIENTALIST FANTASIES: TABLEAUX AND ATTITUDES

Swinburne’s graphic imagination of the orgiastic Greco-Roman world derived from his encounter with classical literature and fanciful reconstruc- tions popular among northern Europeans in the late eighteenth century. Some of these recon- structions were choreographed theatrical events, performed not onstage but in everyday life. Clad in a Grecian robe, Lady Emma Hamilton (1765- 1815), wife of the British ambassador to Naples, Sir William Hamilton (1731-1803) and an expe- rienced actress and hostess, presented visitors to their Neapolitan villa with what she called attitudes mimicking—like Charcot’s hysteroepi- leptic maenads—Greek vase paintings, statues, and frescoes. She was depicted as a bacchante by the French rococo painter Louise Elisabeth Vigée Le Brun (1755-1842) (fig. 7.1) and as a tarantata by the English portrait painter George Romney (1734-1802) before returning to England to teach her version of the tarantella to young women of the upper classes.°* Lady Hamilton’s endeavour to mimic Grecian attitudes suggests a contrapuntal movement transforming the tar- antella just as these imitations sought to grasp it. Her exercises represented at once a north- ern European performance of antiquity trans- planted onto a modern Neapolitan context and the artistic and scientific research processes by which this mimicry enabled the fantasy of greater access to an ‘other’—portrayed as one’s own special colonial heritage and bequest. Literary and pictorial representations rein- forced the image Europeans had of the ancient, Oriental tarantella and its proximity to the Bacchic past. In the novel Corinne, ou I'Italie (1807) by Madame de Staél (1766-1817), the heroine dances a tarantella in a ballroom in Naples, suggesting by her ‘ritual steps’ and ‘sen- sual’ movements the ‘power exercised by the temple dancing girls over the Indian [sic] imagin- ation’. The ‘charming tableaux’ that her ‘grace- ful’ poses suggested would not be familiar only to De Staél’s readers, who might experience a frisson implied in the comparison of Corinne’s moves to those of voluptuous harem girls. The tableaux were also familiar to Corinne herself, who in her______ Corinne embodied the modern woman’s discovery of classical antiquity and her ability simultaneously to capture and to transcend the magic of ancient and modern art—sculpture, drawing, and painting—in her sensual moves. In Corinne, the power of imitation met an implicit prior knowledge of these forms in her erotic dance, underscoring her intellectual and carnal knowledge of antiquity and the East.

La Tarentule, ballet pantomime en deux actes. Par M. Coralli. Musique de M. Casimir Gide (Paris: Chez Jonas, Libraire de lopéra, 1839).

Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 32-34.

Germaine de Staél (Madame de Staél), Corinne, or, Italy, trans. and ed. Sylvia Raphael (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), 90-91. Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 35-36.

De Staal, Corinne, 90-91.

184 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES FIGURE 7.1 Portrait of Emma, Lady Hamilton as a Bacchante, by Louise Elisabeth Vigée Le Brun, c. 1790. Tarantellas throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were purported to serve, paradoxically, both as a means by which women could know the past and as a window onto an ultimately unknowably ancient other. Tarantellas, more than any other form of chore- omania, epitomized to their medical observers female knowledge and feminine deceit at once: animal automatisms and the careful ruse of the woman (as well as the colonial person) craft- ily ensnaring observers in her elaborate play. Wrapped into a medical discourse on hysteria, tarantellas corresponded to what Diamond describes as a ‘modernist hunger for “primi- tive” experience’ and to what she notes were the ‘accusations of fakery’ that accompany hys- teria of all sorts.°’ In Diamond's terms, ‘hysteria marks the eruption of the lower, the animal’, the dangerously sexual and, as such, the ‘inexplic- able’.** Hysteria, as a characteristic disorder most dramatically manifest among those understood to be intensely, even pathologically attuned to the ancient world through travel, imagination, or their own culture—implicitly tied to the geo- cultural territory associated with it—suggested a form of alterity that could be organized and described but, significantly, revealed resistance to the sort of knowing Said construes as character- istic of Orientalist structures of implicit power. The tarantella, widely understood in medicine and travel literature as a ‘hysterical’ form of dan- cing disease, presented to its observers a her- meneutic impasse, ultimately a performance of that which resisted scientific knowledge and thus 56. Diamond, Unmaking Mimesis, 39. 57. Diamond, Unmaking Mimesis, 9. See also Liidtke, Dances with Spiders, 42, 56. 58. Diamond, Unmaking Mimesis, 9. ‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’ + 185 compelled observers to collection and compari- son. Dancing diseases—like the Italian South, which played host to them—served as a litmus test, an imagined border, against which the fan- tasy of reason struck before tumbling into what (typically northern) Europeans perceived as child- like, animal irrationality: a force that was vaguely ‘African’, bodily, fitful, uncontrolled, and femin- ine in the ostensibly seductive impossibility of its being known. As Said has argued of the long nineteenth century’s Orientalist discourse, the imagina- tive distinction between ‘our land’ and ‘barbar- ian land’ ‘does not require that the barbarians acknowledge the distinction’.®® On the contrary, ‘modern and primitive societies seem . To derive a sense of their identities negatively, societies are defined primarily in terms of what they are not or, far more powerfully, what they imagine themselves not to be. More than this, Said notes, degrees of distance and proximity determine our sense of ourselves; and these too can be imaginary, fictitious. Our 'imaginative geography and history', Said writes, help us to 'intensify' our own sense of ourselves 'by dramatizing the distance and difference between what is close to it and what is far away'.* Sometimes, dramas depict tensions between imagined or felt senses of proximity and distance, sameness and alterity, kinship and foreignness, as in the many Attic tragedies that portray Oriental others: most prominently Dionysus, the emphatically Asiatic god whose excesses epitomized what may have been experienced as real threats from the ecstatic religions and mystery cults of Asia Minor and the Levant that were introduced into Athens during the Peloponnesian War.

Translated into nineteenth-century medical culture, southern Italy's status as a gateway to Africa excited and worried observers who were projecting nearly unknowable antiquity onto it. A Doll's House: Wormholes onto Modernity

Nora, in Ibsen's play A Doll's House, performs a symbolically curative dance at a hinge moment in her narrative, as she is poised finally to leave her husband, Torvald. Ibsen, like Goethe and Swinburne, was aware of the myth surrounding the tarantella. Travelling through southern Italy while preparing this landmark play, Ibsen found in the dance of the tarantella a wormhole to the past which might catalyse an alternative reality for his modern heroine. In her sexually charged dance of seduction, Nora reveals what we may understand, following Daboo's analysis of the tarantella, after ethnomusicologist Paolo Toschi, as a pizzica de core (also known as a pizzica pizzica), a pizzica of the heart; but Nora also symbolically purges herself of Torvald's poison in what may be construed as a pizzica tarantata, a term used to denote the tarantella as a dance of possession and healing.

For Torvald, Nora's dance was not nearly symbolic enough. She danced just 'a trifle too [realistically]' for his taste; her tarantella was 'a little more so than was, strictly speaking, artistically necessary'. His patronizing language fires her up further. Where he saw a 'wild and excitable' and 'childlike' temperament, signalling a discomfiting 'transformation' yet to come, she finds recourse to an ancient and foreign tradition, which she signals with her Italian shawl.

Though 59. Said, Orientalism, 54. 60. Said, Orientalism, 54. 61. Said, Orientalism, 55. 62. Said, Orientalism, 56. 63. On pizzica de core and pizzica tarantata see Daboo, Ritual, Rapture and Remorse, 24-29. Daboo notes that both originated in Taranto, in southern Italy. She also, after Toschi, notes a third pizzica, the pizzica scherma, typically performed by men and resembling a martial art representing a sword fight. According to de Martino, whose landmark study on the tarantella brought together a neuropsychiatrist, a psychologist, a cultural anthropologist, and an ethnomusicologist, in La terra del rimorso (and accompanying documentary film), harsh socioeconomic realities in the Italian south accounted for much of the persistence of the tarantella in the area. De Martino and his team noted histories of young women as well as men—particularly those working in the fields, more likely to be stung because of their economic precarity (their tendency to work long hours in the summer heat)—suffering from anxiety and depression, exacerbated by the real effects of socioeconomic stress and, resulting from this stress, difficulty maintaining self-esteem and securing love. In de Martino’s view, the tarantella transformed from a ritual performance into a symbolic one, serving effectively in the twentieth century as a social salve, with the music and dance enfolding sufferers—of real and symbolic spider bites—back into a supportive community. See de Martino, La terra del rimorso, 53-54.

Henrik Ibsen, A Doll’s House, in A Doll’s House and Other Plays, trans. Peter Watts (London: Penguin Books, 1965), 202, 205, 210-213.

Nora is, Torvald says, his ‘little Capri girl’. . . his ‘capricious little Capri girl’, she understands that her world is lurching forward without him. It can do so, paradoxically, because she finds a way out of the inertia and alienation of her pre-sent condition by counterposing it with an alternative temporality (and geography)—in Burt’s terms, with an uncannily alien other, facilitating the arrival of another modernity. The West finds in its Orientalizing vision of the primitive other not only its own biocultural prehistory, which it imagines it has surpassed, but a means for achieving self-determination by reconnecting to a supposedly purer state. This suggests a reading of Ibsen’s work away from notions of modernism as radical break with the past. Ibsen’s plays are harbingers of modernism—in this case, modern feminism. But the tarantella scene shows this modernism dramatized by a contrapuntal movement ‘backwards’, connected to ancient and faraway modes of being erupting in a decisive moment of recurrence. Modernity, in this regard, moves forward and looks backward—as well as around—just as it seeks points of convergence between parts of the globe and points in history, ‘connecting dots’ on what Roach calls the ‘geohistorical matrix’.

EXUBERANT COMPARATIVISM: THE TIGRETIER, MEDICAL GEOGRAPHY, AND COLONIAL TRAVEL

The tarantella was imagined in medical literature as transhistorical yet tethered to the land out of which it arose. It was conceived as a disease of southern Italy and the African South, a colourful (often coloured) variation on a broader dancing condition, choreomania. The grounds for comparison were tenuous, often based on anecdotal evidence. The following section turns to a dance understood by Hecker to be reminiscent of the tarantella, even identical to it, in his ‘order of things’, his choreomania taxonomy. Although he eventually disavowed the connection, the ground for transposing early modern Italy onto the African continent was laid with his work, providing the basis for a further set of comparisons linking feminine and colonial duplicity and deceit. In the 1865 edition of his work on the dancing mania, much of the discussion of a so-called dancing mania in Abyssinia—the tigretier—disappeared, replaced with a cursory remark by the French physician Alfred Courbon (1829-1895). Courbon, in his 1861 Observations topographiques et médicales recueillies dans un voyage a l'isthme de Suez etc. [Medical and Topographical Observations Collected during a Voyage to the Isthmus of Suez etc.], denied the existence of the tigretier altogether, discussing instead what he called ‘superstitious practices used in Abyssinia with the goal of treating dis- eases indistinctly, and often employed profitably through the work of deceit [ruse]’.© Courbon boasted that he had performed many investigations into this putative disease—the same described by Pearce thirty years prior, reprised by Hecker—and discovered, he surmised, that it did not exist. "Everything that Pearce said of it is a fable, and most of the circumstances that he supposed, such as the bands of musicians and cold baths, are not even realizable in Abyssinia." His pronouncement, however off-handed, seems to have convinced Hecker and Hirsch to pull discussion of the tigretier out of Hecker’s study. Yet Pearce’s narrative had, both in Hecker’s work and Babington’s Orientalizing English translation, invited other writers I will discuss in the following pages to bring further comparisons to bear on dance-like diseases— and disease-like dances—from various parts of the world. Pearce’s tale of Oriental Corybantes in Abyssinia offered anecdotal evidence that Bacchic manias were alive and well in the present day. Dancers apparently mimicking the gestures of their ancient and medieval forebears in a ritual in which sufferers were bedecked with borrowed jewels in the cathartic performance of a public dance provided ethnographic evidence for comparative medical history: Europe’s past was to be found in its supposed African backyard. The truth-value of the tigretier was insignificant in this respect. Its story revealed the image of

65. Ibsen, A Doll's House, 213.
66. Roach, Cities of the Dead, xi.
67. Alfred Courbon, Observations topographiques et médicales recueillies dans un voyage à l’isthme de Suez, sur le littoral de la mer Rouge et en Abyssinie (Paris: Imprimerie Rignoux, 1861), 39.
68. Courbon, Observations topographiques, 39; quoted in Hecker, Die Grossen Volkskrankheiten, 123.

Sicily Implies Asia and Africa

Africa mimicking, reproducing, and preserving an ancient and medieval Europe. Yet with these mimicries came accusations of doubling and, more grievously, deception. The tigretier, Hecker noted, bore an indubitable resemblance to the late medieval and early modern tarantella, providing him—via Pearce’s travel narrative—with vivid evidence for his comparative study of the dancing disease. Anecdotal information, drawn up in scenes that could be collated and compared, provided the illusion of scientific universality. Diagnosis took shape through anecdotal accumulation. Even when cases were eventually dismissed, like the tigretier, the traces their narratives left in the discursive journeys of the dancing disease made of choreomania an increasingly global complaint. Evidence through travel narratives also made the dancing disease all the more patently transhistorical, transcultural, and urgently contemporary.

"Comparison is the mother of observation", Hecker wrote, "and may elucidate one phenomenon by another"—in particular "the past by that which still exists". Social and political conditions in medieval Germany and early modern Italy, he argued, "operate on the Abyssinians of the present day" in similar ways, so that "in regard to superstition", for example, "the conditions of the Abyssinians of modern times is . . . a mirror of the condition of the European nations in the middle ages". In Tigray province (what is now northern Ethiopia, bordering Eritrea and Sudan), where the Abyssinian "dancing mania" was supposed to be most widespread, two occurrences "completely in accord" with those of the European Middle Ages were observed: a type of Christian flagellation and belief in zoomorphism, "which presents a lively image of the lycanthropy of the middle ages". These analogies enabled Hecker to offer further generalizations about choreomania, although his objects of analysis were only nebulously similar: the Abyssinian tigretier resembled the tarantella and St. Vitus's dance was only notable because its 'victims' showed a spontaneous urge to dance. They also displayed signs of lethargy and listlessness, as in the tarantella, and executed their movements to music provided by hired hands. Hecker used various sources to compile his narrative account, drawing primarily from Pearce's freshly published autobiography and travelogue.

Pearce had introduced the strange tale of his wife's affliction by likening it to events depicted in biblical scripture. "There is ...a holy water at the church Oun Arvel', he wrote, 'which is greatly esteemed for the cure of persons afflicted with evil spirits'" (Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 290). However, he was aware that his readers might find his description unbelievable: "This is a very wonderful disorder", he noted, "which I cannot pass over in silence, though the reader may think it fabulous and ridiculous; yet we have accounts of something of the same kind in the New Testament, which the priests and learned men of Abyssinia believe to be the same complaint" (Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 290).

Although many dances are mentioned in the Old and New Testaments, including Aaron's sister's dance after the passage through the Red Sea, David's dance before the Ark, and Judith's triumphant dance after the defeat of Holofernes, what mattered to Pearce was the convergence of modern-day Africa with the ancient Judeo-Christian past, granting credence, he thought, to this otherwise outlandish tale. However, the comparison only highlighted the supposedly ancient status of the Africans, who met Europeans such as himself, he thought, in the performance of an uncannily reliveable past.

And though Pearce characterized this dance as 'wonderful', 'fabulous', and 'ridiculous', he also, like Swinburne when he encountered the tarantella, thought it unseemly. Pearce's description revealed an affliction cured by the public performance of a dance that relieved the dancers of their dispiritedness. He first experienced its effects on a female acquaintance, presumably white and European like himself, and then on his equally white wife—further proof, as far as he was concerned, that this was not just a local superstition confined to darker races but a potentially universal disorder and an ancient type of disease.

"This complaint", he noted, "is called tigretier". It "seizes the body as if with a violent fever, and from that turns to a lingering sickness, which reduces the patients to skeletons, and often kills them, if the relations cannot procure the proper remedy" (Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 290). The remedy, he added, consists of the victim's relations joining together to defray the expense of a cure by calling upon a doctor who reads the Gospel of John and drenches the patient in cold water daily for seven days, although this unfortunately often resulted in the patient's death. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

If this approach was not effective, the family hired a band of trumpeters, drummers, and fifers and bought liquor. “Then all the young men and women of the place assemble at the patient’s house to perform an extraordinary ceremony,” one of which he attended, not without some apprehension. The display of ‘wild’ behavior on the part of the gaunt and sickly young woman he observed at first surprised and appalled him, although he acknowledged the effects of the cure on her. She had been lying for three months in a ‘lingering state,’ her speech reduced to unintelligible stuttering, ‘seized with acute agony, and a flood of tears’ if a book or a priest were brought before her. She did not refuse Pearce’s medicines, though he noted that they had no effect. When his neighbor, whose wife this was, decided finally to ‘employ the usual remedy,’ a band of musicians was arranged and silver ornaments were borrowed from neighbors. Pearce sat near her as she lay, at first, very still; but within two minutes of the music’s start, she began to move very slightly, eventually sitting up and then standing, as if the rhythm of the music revived her. Pearce described the event’s progression from her initial state of lethargy to her concluding leaps and bounds in a dramaturgical arc that made the whole affair a captivating theatre of emotional recovery. The liveliness of his description in a scenario in which he stages himself as a slightly sceptical but duly observing character offers one of the clearest choreographic accounts of a so-called dancing mania, suggesting an overall rather controlled and even subdued affair, with little of the involuntary tremors, contractions, or paralyses characterizing the choreas and other neuromotor disorders that were continually likened to these cultural practices. But Pearce emphasized bodily disjointedness, excessive gesture, and (disdainfully) the appearance of egregious uncontrol. He wrote: The evening that the band began to play, I seated myself close by her side as she lay upon the couch, and about two minutes after the trumpets had begun to sound, I observed her shoulders begin to move, and soon afterwards her head and breast, and in less than a quarter of an hour she sat upon her couch. The wild look she had, though sometimes she smiled, made me draw off to a greater distance, being almost alarmed to see one nearly a skeleton move with such strength; her head, neck, shoulders, hands, and feet, all made a strong motion to the sound of the music, and in this manner she went on by degrees, until she stood up on her legs upon the floor. Afterwards she began to dance, and at times to jump about, and at last, as the music and noise of the singers increased, she often sprang three feet from the ground. When the music slackened, she would appear quite out of temper, but when it became louder, she would smile and be delighted. This account describes a woman stimulated by the sound of the music, progressing from a head, neck, shoulder, and chest nodding or shrugging motion to motion in the hands and feet, as she went from a lying to a sitting and eventually a standing position, soon dancing and springing around the space. He remarks that eventually the young woman’s strength overpowered the musicians’, so that they could not keep up with her and had to rest while she continued to dance and bound about the room, more and more stimulated when the music intensified. Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 124.
Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 127.
Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 125.
Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 292; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 125.
Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 291; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 125.
Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 292; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 125.
Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 292; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 125.
"Sicily Implies Asia and Africa"
If the home remedy was not sufficient, a third level of cure took place the next day, involving the whole town. In this third stage, the woman was again loaded with silver jewelry and stripped it while she danced; the pieces were returned to their owners by a helper. These performative loans may have offered a symbolic means for family members and friends to demonstrate their support for the afflicted person through a public show of support. She wore their jewels, gaining social and emotional recognition from the performance of material provision, before returning them, in a gesture of thanks. It seemed to work. But for Pearce, who was dumbfounded, it was also mildly insane. He describes the dance as an outlandish charade, a "strange disorder," in which the dancer displayed the "maddest postures imaginable":

Next day, according to the custom in the cure of this disorder, she was taken into the marketplace, where several jars of maize or tsug were set in order by the relations, to give drink to the musicians and dancers. When the crowd had assembled and the music was ready, she was brought forth and began to dance and throw herself into the maddest postures imaginable, and in this manner she kept on the whole day. Towards evening she began to let fall her silver ornaments from her neck, arms, and legs, one at a time, so that in the course of three hours she was stripped of every article. A relation continually kept going after her as she danced, to pick up the ornaments, and afterwards delivered them to the owners from whom they were borrowed.** The performance culminated in a sprint, after which the woman fell to the ground in a state of exhaustion, finally to recover her name and be rebaptized, "proof" that she was cured.™4 The expenditure of energy seems to have enabled her recovery, revitalizing her through the music, dancing, running, and performative demonstration of social and kinship support. But not all so-called victims or patients were responsive. Pearce wrote: "some are taken in this manner to the marketplace for many days before they can be cured, and it sometimes happens that they cannot be cured at all".*5 Were they suffering from a different sort of fatigue, not receptive to these practices? What sort of fatigue was this? In Pearce's editor's terms, this was mostly a "sham" put on by the Abyssinian ladies, who were "fond of decking themselves out with trinkets and finery of all sorts", the "lady's degree of importance" being "weighed by the value and number of the ornaments and attendants, furnished by her relatives and friends".®° Like soldiers who shammed anomalous disorders and like schoolboys, these ladies were, this editor argued, "malingerers", not suffering from actual disease.*' But as with the tarantella, the supportive spectatorship and dancing do seem to have relieved real states of boredom and depression; the dance was not a disease but, arguably, its cure. As Khanna argues, reprising Fanon’s analyses of colonial melancholy, ‘faking’ illness was a frequent accusation levied against North Africans believed to be pretending exhaustion in order to ‘swindle’ their way to a warm hospital bed. But as Khanna and Fanon rightly note, colonial conditions often resulted in real states of alienation and depression that colonial employers and doctors dismissed out of hand. The tarantella, like the tigretier, was in part a way socially to counteract the nefarious effects of such alienation. As a sort of therapy emphasizing music, dancing, and social support, the practice of dancing to music seemed to viewers to be absurd, beside the point. It ran counter to a more broadly scientific notion of disease that emphasized altered behaviors taken as signs, proof, of a disorderly state curable only through discipline or drugs. For Pearce, the listlessness and dancing were one dancing disease, governed by sham; but for the women whose stories he reported, the dancing seems to have provided real reprieve.

Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 294; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 126.

Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 293; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 125-126.

Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 295.

Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 294-295.

Khanna, Dark Continents, 176.

Pearce's wife, seized with the same affliction as the woman he had earlier observed, seems to have been struck by a not dissimilar sort of discomfort and caused him some embarrassment. She had, like this other woman, been listless and unhappy; he had, he admits, tried to whip her, thinking, he further admits, that it might help. She only fainted, and his attendants, hearing about her condition, called for some music, which he had been denying them for a while. That, Pearce was forced to observe, 'soon revived her'.

She underwent the same ceremony as the woman he had previously described, and although the cure took slightly longer in his wife's case, it was ultimately efficacious. 'One day I went privately, with a companion', Pearce wrote, 'to see my wife dance, and kept a short distance, as I was ashamed to go near the crowd. On looking steadfastly upon her, while dancing or jumping, more like a deer than a human being, I said that it certainly was not my wife; at which my companion burst into a fit of laughter, from which he could scarcely refrain all the way home'.

Pearce added: 'men are sometimes afflicted with this dreadful disorder, but not frequently'.

Pearce's wife may have been bored, lonely, and depressed in a colonial outpost where her primary companion was a man who thought little of whipping her. The tigretier offered a temporary theatre of re-collectivization, repositing her at the centre of another social circle and another concept of distress. The tigretier reconfigured her condition as shared, suggesting that her despondency merited routine public attention and care. So we have to imagine in the whoosh of her dance's shadow.

COLONIAL HYSTERIA: MANIA, DEPRESSION, AND FEMININE REVOLT

In the Tunisian postcolonial writer Albert Memmi's terms, the colonial subject's drama is to be never quite aligned with oneself. At the cusp of revolt, the subordinated subject identifies with the oppressor to the point of an uncanny doubling—uncanny because it is never entire, never consummated. The subject remains split, even while, in Memmi’s analysis, the colonizers eventually project themselves onto the figures of the colonized, needing the colonized’s subaltern status to assert their own economic, social, and political superiority, and their own seemingly illustrious work ethic, deployed in supposed contrast to the purported laziness of the colonized people. In this double portrait of two mutually dependent and monstrous beings, the colonial relation emerges as a grotesque mimicry, a farce that fails to reconcile colonial subjecthood with a perpetually alienating and alien reality in which both parties are continually displaced, reterritorialized, and never quite at home.

Colonial melancholy in this respect acknowledges the affective and performative rift that such displacement continually produces, resulting in what Memmi and Fanon describe as the colonized person’s eventual ‘neurosis’, treated—to disastrous effect—in psychiatric hospitals that fail to help colonized people for what is never properly diagnosed as perfectly justified rage. In Khanna’s analysis, women found themselves even more caught in the crossfire between psychiatric and psychoanalytic analyses of the ‘life of savages’ and ‘dark continents’ of colonial and psychoanalytic myth.

Imagined to be as enigmatic and unwieldy as the African continent as a whole, women presented colonial medical writers with the figure of a ticking bomb waiting to explode in a hysterical attack, just as women’s attempts to conform to oppressive structures fatigued them to the point of overwrought submission and bursts of acting out—singing, dancing, shouting, crying—that were branded as buffoonish and sick.

Political conditions sit at the heart of the so-called dancing disease. This does not mean that Pearce’s wife’s dance or Nora’s signalled direct political action. The tigretier, like the tarantella, appears in tightly controlled performances taking place within codified bounds, but these enabled participants to shift their places in a wider political ecology. The dances represented the controlled eruption of jubilant, socially 89. Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 295-296; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 126. 90. Pearce, The Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pearce, vol. 1, 296; Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages, 126-127. 91. See Albert Memmi, Portrait du colonisé, précédé du Portrait du colonisateur et d'une préface de Jean-Paul Sartre suivi de Les Canadiens frangais sont-ils des colonisés, ed. revised and corrected by the author (Montréal: Les éditions l’étincelle, 1972), 125; Albert Memmi, La dépendance: Esquisse pour un portrait du dépendant (Paris: Gallimard, 1979). Bhabha, The Location of Culture, 122-123. See also Richard C. Keller, Colonial Madness: Psychiatry in French North Africa (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007). 92. Khanna, Dark Continents. ‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’ + 191 sanctioned corporeality following states of inertia and despair. Although these dances were cast as a dancing disease, the anger and depression of ‘choreomania’ represented the normal consequences of abnormal conditions and the relief that came from the performative recollectivization of social life. SHAKERS AND FAKERS: THE AFRICAN “TARANTELLA”

In spite of repeated narrative evidence that tarantellas in many cases helped those who were bitten by poisonous spiders or were otherwise engaging in social dances symbolically representing such injuries, what marked modern analyses was a decisive emphasis on the sh______ So while Baglivi influentially argued that some dancers—especially women—took advantage of the tradition to have a good time (chapter 3 here), later authors set this feint at the heart of their readings. In his article on the ‘African Tarantula or Dancing Mania’, in Eastern Anthropologist (1952-1953), the South African anthropologist and British senior district officer in Nigeria, M. D. W. Jeffreys (1890-1975), argued that the Italian tarantella was ‘feigned for commercial gain’. His argument, borrowed from an account by the British zoologist Sir Ray Lankester (1847-1929), drew on Lankester’s claim that the dancing was staged. No one suffered from spider bites, Lankester wrote in 1914. ‘The tarantella was put on for the sake of credulous travellers only: The whole story of the ‘Tarantula’ x x x [sic] is now discredited. It was believed that the bite of this spider caused a peculiar sleepiness and also painful symptoms in men and women, only to be cured by music, which set the bitten one dancing. The . . . whole thing was an elaborate imposture on the part of the Tarantese peasants who, for a fee paid by a credulous traveller, would be bitten, simulate apparent collapse, and then pretend to be restored by music and the violent dancing of the ‘tarantella’ which they declared they felt compelled to perform.” Lankester’s belief that there really was no tarantella—or none derived from a real impulse to dance or from any actual spider’s bite—folded a vehemently anti-theatrical prejudice into older accounts of this Apulian cure. So while we may surmise that peasants in some cases were very plausibly taking Lankester for a ride or, as in the case of the hapless woman Swinburne convinced to act out a tarantella for him, responding to the pressure to perform with a reasonable sense that this show would provide a financial opportunity for them, the exchange itself was seen as a sickness characterized, among others, by a tendency to sham. These travellers sought out a theatre of antiquity but balked when they found any theatre at all. They wanted naive acts, not creative opportunism. Lankester took his accusations further. “That there was no connection with this frenzied dancing and the bite of this spider’, he added, ‘could have been deduced from the fact that the habitat of this spider is widely spread and as a consequence has been in contact with the human race for countless years’. Only in Apulia, Lankester wrote, are humans bitten by this spider compelled to dance. They must, therefore, he concluded, have been shamming.°° Lankester’s anti-theatrical and choreophobic prejudice, recuperated in Jeffreys’s travel narrative, shifted the discussion on tarantelas from scientific interest in toxicity, convulsions, and contagion to a social scientific stance foregrounding incredulity: this was now to be understood as mere tourist theatre. At the same time, the story offered grounds for further comparison, as an account of a disorder that indicated colonial duplicity: the colonial peasant’s supposed pathological propensity to cheat. Once an indication of pathological spontaneity, the dancing disease now signalled its opposite: lies. Jeffreys found further evidence for this in the colonial peasant’s supposed pathological propensity to cheat. The tarantella's venomous etiology is not dismissed on the grounds that the same practice was not found elsewhere, suggesting that a few hundred years and thousands of southern Italians must have been lying about their urge to dance and counterfeiting their movements. This underestimates the complexity of the tarantella. For example, British epidemiologists Donaldson et al. wrote about the "Dancing Plague." They argued that the seasonal 192 + COLONIAL AND POSTCOLONIAL STAGES in Nigeria. There, a species of tarantula was used for divination in events involving frenzied dances, but the connection between the two was questioned.

Jeffreys, in his essay, compared the African tarantula's supposed Italian counterpart. Both phenomena involved gyration, frenzy, dancing, trances, and epileptic (or epileptiform) fits. However, both were feigned, artificial, theatrical exercises put on for the sole purpose of beguiling naive travellers. Jeffreys's account, proffered at arm's length, took anxiously into account the uncomfortable colonial relation in which he appears as an interloper and possibly a fraud.

Jeffreys borrowed heavily from British government archives, including a 1938 Annual Report on the Bamenda Division by the district officer, Mr. Swabey. His description of the Nigerian 'tarantella', or Makka, was quoted by Jeffreys: "The Makka movement [in Nigeria] originated in the neighbouring area of Mambilla in the Gashaka district of the Northern Provinces. It manifested itself in a frenzied dance in which most of the population, men and women joined. The dancers would gyrate in a frenzy to the drum, waving their arms like a windmill. They would then begin to shake as in an epileptic fit: their eyes began to stare as in a trance and then some would fall to the ground, apparently senseless."

Just as Jeffreys employs a comparative structure to frame his tale, so too similes serve Swabey to connect behaviours performed by Nigerians to a language used in medical literature and popular culture to describe similar events. The epileptic fit, the frenzy, and the trance, as well as motion resembling a windmill, painted a poetic portrait of familiar but incomprehensible behaviours accessible only through the medium of comparison afforded the learned colonial man. In the four sentences reproduced here, four qualifiers remove the activity from its geographic location, compared with structures that might be recognized by Jeffreys’s readers: ‘like’, ‘as’, ‘apparently’, and the subjunctive (‘would fall’) portray the event—distant in place if not time—while explaining that the Nigerians engaged in such a performance only for commercial gain, like the Apulians, with whom readers were presumed already to be familiar. The Nigerian dancers, Jeffreys noted, ‘would be pelted by the onlookers with anini (nickel tenths of a penny)’. He glossed: ‘The reason for so doing was obscure but the money was apparently collected by a member of the society and subsequently spent on drink. Anyone who fell down in such a trance was admitted a member of the society’. He had difficulty penetrating this society, making the elucidation of such a practice challenging—but all the more vital for his attempt to write at the recurrence of tarantellas may be more than simply perpetuated by tradition or symbolism: a population of large venomous spiders thrives in the area due to its hot, dry climate and deforestation; more important, the venom’s presence in the victims’ bodies could account for its reactivation during periods of excessive heat, compelling them to engage in the curative dancing that Baglivi prominently described (202).

96. Jeffreys, ‘African Tarantula’, 98.
97. Jeffreys, ‘African Tarantula’, 98.
98. Jeffreys, ‘African Tarantula’, 98.

‘Sicily Implies Asia and Africa’ + 193 limits of scientific knowledge, which Britain’s imperial reach appeared to facilitate. Scientific knowledge was enabled by and was enabling the further collection of case histories, trophies for the colonial traveller and the emerging disciplines he endeavoured to cultivate—in this case, social anthropology, deriving from comparative medicine, drawing the contours of a relatively spurious psychology of feint abstracted from colonial cultural history.

‘The immediate purpose of the society’, Jeffreys noted, ‘was difficult to discover as the people were very reticent but it appears that Makka would purge the country of witches, cure all illnesses, increase the yield of the farms and even raise the dead from the grave. In the village of Mbem’, he added, ‘a boy of about 12 years of age, who had fallen in the dance became a medium and interpreted the orders of Makka and these the people obeyed. The people would dance sometimes for three days on end and during this period all farm work and other activities ceased. Bands of people went about crying that now they had a new God’.

Jeffreys explained that the function of these sorts of dances—everywhere in the world—was to achieve the ‘physical catharsis of nervous tension by dancing’. With this statement, he was effectively entering the social scientific ‘order’ of the dancing disease into the discursive realm of psychoanalysis and sexology: dancing, linked to sex, as its public sublimation, operated as a sign of the subterranean rumblings of primitive life within civilized bodies unable to contain their own animal forces. Dance, in this view, was an expression of disease, the eruption of automatic impulses into social space: dance in general—and excessive dances in particular (lasting three days, or involving visions and falls)—signalled the pathologically unspent energy of sex. This functionalist view of cultural life positioned ‘dance’ at the heart of society and politics, as the direct expression of their disorderly underside. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Following Foucault’s line of thinking on biopolitics and governance, by which discourse on sex makes otherwise unremarkable sexual activity into an object of scientific analysis and control, I submit that dance comes to represent the sign of a nation’s biosocial underside: disorderly dancing signals that the nation is, under the surface, uncontrolled. Dance is thereby attractive and titillating to all those attempting to read and to diagnose cultures comparatively; it is subject to scientific fascination and vicarious pleasure, as well as to nominal reprimand.

Comparative analyses implicitly linked African and American expressions of sexuality, suggesting that both were equally disordered and similarly manifested as an excessive propensity to dance—dancing in both cases was a symptom of sexual abstention. Comparing Uyo dancing in Calabar province in southeastern Nigeria to American Shakers, Jeffreys argued, revealed a ‘great emphasis . . . laid on “sin,”’ usually ‘carnal or sexual sin’, present in both contexts, provoking a similar use of dancing to achieve ‘catharsis’.

Physiologists know, he added, that ‘if such repressions occur the nervous and muscular tension rises, rises until there is some form of catharsis, and violent exercise, such as prolonged dancing will discharge the pent up nervous and muscular energy and lower the threshold of the excitability of the psyche’. The denunciation of marriage among Shakers, like the introduction of the Christian God and emphasis on abstention in Nigeria, forced the redirection of energetic flows into this sort of dance.

The simple biological ‘fact’ of ‘an overaccumulation of sex hormones in the system’, explained in the 1930s by the army physician and sexologist F. A. E. Crew (1886-1973), Jeffreys noted, accounted for the similarity of frenzies in various parts of the world where extreme religiosity had altered the course of people’s regular source of physical release.’ Repressed sexuality, resulting in grotesque deceit, was in his view at the heart of the tarantella and its Sub-Saharan relations. Once again, the dancing disease served as a litmus test for knowing—and in doing so colonizing—an almost unreachable state of history and biology imagined to reside, in a cruder and more observable form, elsewhere.

Sex erupted in dance; or so the complex node linking the ‘dancing disease’ to colonial depression and unrest suggests