 Jerri Daboo P| Ritual, Rapture and Remorse: A Study of Tarantism and Pizzica in Salento

In the region of Salento in Southern Italy, the music and dance of the pizzica have been used in the ritual of tarantism for many centuries as a means to cure someone bitten by the taranta spider. This book, a historical and ethnographic study of tarantism and pizzica, draws upon seven hundred years of writings about the ritual contributed by medical practitioners, scientists, travel writers, and others. It also investigates the contemporary revival of interest in pizzica music and dance as part of the 'neo-tarantism' movement, where pizzica and the history of tarantism form a complex web of place, culture, and identity for Salentines today.

This is one of the first books in English to explore this fascinating ritual practice and its contemporary resurgence. It uses an interdisciplinary framework based in performance studies to ask wider questions about the experience of the body in performance and the potential of music and dance to create a sense of personal and collective transformation and efficacy.

Jerri Daboo is a Senior Lecturer in Drama at the University of Exeter. She worked as a performer and director for many years before joining the university in 2004. She has trained in acting, music, and dance, and her research publications and practice focus on the body and culture in performance.

Cover image: "The Tarantula, with the method of curing those stung by it, which is effected by music and dancing" Part of engraving from Middleton's Complete System of Geography. Courtesy of the Wellcome Library, London.

ISBN 978-3-0353-0089-5
© Peter Lang AG, International Academic Publishers, Bern 2010
Hochfeldstrasse 32, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland
info@peterlang.com, www.peterlang.com, www.peterlang.net
All rights reserved. All parts of this publication are protected by copyright. Any utilization outside the strict limits of the copyright law, without the permission of the publisher, is forbidden and liable to prosecution. This applies in particular to reproductions, translations, microfilming, and storage and processing in electronic retrieval systems.
Printed in Germany

'To dance is to live'
ISADORA DUNCAN

Contents

List of Illustrations
Acknowledgements
Introduction
CHAPTER ONE Embodying Pasts and Presence
CHAPTER TWO Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism
CHAPTER THREE Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited
CHAPTER FOUR Revivals, Roots and Raves: the Performance of Pizzica in Contemporary Salento
Conclusion
Afterword
Bibliography
Index

Illustrations

Illustration 1
Illustration 2
Illustration 3
Illustration 4
Illustration 5
Illustration 6
Illustration 7
Illustration 8
Map of Salento
Images of Salento
Diagram of the Piazza San Pietro in Galatina on the night of 29 June 2008
Galatina: the altar in the chapel of St Paul, examples of pizzica pizzica dancing, and the former tarantata walking into the church
Images from Kircher's treatises
Tamburelli for sale in Otranto
Torrepaduli: the /uminarie, statue of San Rocco, and stall selling le zacareddhe
Examples of the pizzica scherma

Acknowledgments

There are many people who have been extremely generous with their time and sharing of their knowledge and experience, which have all contributed to this book. I would like to thank all of them, and apologize for any unintentional omissions in the following list. I offer my grateful thanks to all those within Salento who have been so helpful in my time there. Firstly, thanks to Antonella Rizzo, who acted as my research assistant in a field trip, and subsequently became a friend. This is in acknowledgement not only of her skill as an interpreter and intermediary when interviewing people, but also for the hours of travelling around Salento to find a person or attend a festival. Thanks are also due to Massimiliano Vellico for his friendship, and for offering to spend much time driving to different places, which was invaluable. I am very grateful to Antonio Rizzo, Giulia Erminio and Carmine Rizzo for so generously opening their home for me to stay in, and their wonderful hospitality. I would like to give particular thanks to Ada Metafune for her time in speaking with me, her skill as a dancer and musician, and her inspiration as a woman, and also to her husband Biagio Panico and their family for allowing me to visit their home. Thanks are also due to Pamela Maglie and Edoardo Winspeare for their time and thoughts, as well as to all those with whom I spoke, played and danced, formally and informally, over the years.

Special thanks are given to anthropologist Karen Liidtke for her generosity and helpfulness during the time of my research. It was her introduction to some of the material, as well as Salento itself, that made much of this work possible for me at the beginning. I greatly respect her own very deep field research which she has undertaken with such dedication in Salento, reflected in her recent publication Dances with Spiders.

Within the UK, Peregrine Horden was my first introduction to tarantism through three chapters in his edited collection Music as Medicine, which he allowed me to read before publication, and subsequently introduced me to Karen Liidtke. [I also offer thanks to Dorothy Louise Zinn for her painstaking work in translating Ernesto De Martino’s La terra del rimorso, and her suggestions concerning images.

For my archival research, I would like to thank all the staff at the Wellcome Institute Library, London; the Bodleian Library, Oxford; and the Exeter Cathedral Library for their assistance. In the spirit of ‘think local, act global’ I have been especially grateful to those many academics within the University of Exeter who have been so helpful and supportive during the years of my research and writing.

Within the Department of Drama, I would particularly like to thank Graham Ley, whose insightful and generous reading of drafts, as well as his answers to random questions ranging from fourth-century BCE Greek vases to the structuring of chapters, has been invaluable. Additionally, I thank Christopher McCullough for his thoughts on Gramsci, and all those within the Department who have offered advice and listened to me patiently through the good and difficult times, including Dorinda Hulton, Peter Hulton, Mick Mangan, Pam Woods, Rebecca Loukes, Sarah Goldingay and Gabriella Giannachi.

Special thanks to Chris Mearing for his time and help in preparing the images for this book. Thanks are also due to Nick Kaye and Michael Wykes for their help with grant applications. Within other departments, thanks to those who have shared their work, particularly Andrew Sparkes and David Brown from the School of Sport and Health Sciences for introducing me to the work of Chris Shilling. Elena Isayev in Classics and Tia de Nora in Sociology have been particularly helpful in interdisciplinary discussions, as have events hosted by the Centre for Mediterranean Studies and the Centre for Medical History. 1. Map of Salento
2. Introduction
3. A Traveller in Southern Italy
4. The Story of the Dancing Woman
5. The Dancing Woman and the Tarantula Spider
6. The Continuation of the Tarantella

In the book "A Traveller in Southern Italy," H. V. Morton shares a story about a dancing woman he encountered in a small town in Apulia, Italy. While stopping to visit a church, he hears music playing and stumbles upon a crowd watching a woman dancing alone. The woman's expression is entranced, and she holds a red cotton handkerchief in her hand, waving it as she danced. The gravity of the crowd is surprising, as they are not smiling and display a painful expression.

Morton recounts the story to a friend in Taranto, who reveals that the woman was "taken" by a tarantula spider, and she was dancing to expel the poison. The friend explains that this phenomenon is rare and most often occurs in villages and houses. The friend clarifies that the tarantella is still danced by hundreds of peasants in the region of Lecce who believe they have been poisoned by the spider.

When Morton asks what being "taken" by the tarantula means, the friend explains that it simply refers to being bitten by the spider. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

[...] Women are particularly exposed to tarantula bites because they work in the harvest fields after the corn has been cut, when these spiders are common. “But I have read that the tarantula is not poisonous, or that it is no more dangerous than a bee-sting,” said my friend. “Perhaps,” he conceded. “This has been going on for centuries. Who can say what is at the back of it?” (Morton, 1969: 180-1)

Introduction

Morton was later informed that the woman had danced all that night and the next day, before sleeping. When she awoke, she said that she felt well again. What Morton is describing is an example of the ritual known as tarantism or tarantismo in Italian. This ritual has been performed over many centuries as a cure for someone bitten by the tarantula spider (called a taranta in the Salentine dialect, or tarantola in standard Italian). The person who is bitten, known as a tarantato (or tarantolato) if male, and tarantata (or tarantolata) if female, falls into a state of illness as a result of the poison from the bite. Symptoms can include nausea, paralysis, lethargy, spasms, headaches, irregular pulse and breathing, and fainting.

If this happens, the family or friends of the tarantata will call for musicians who are skilled in playing an indigenous form of music called the pizzica. When the musicians arrive, they try out different melodies, rhythms, and types of songs until they begin to see a response from the ill person, such as the hand beginning to move in time to the music. Sometimes they will also respond to certain colors such as red, green, or yellow. The particular melodies and rhythms, as well as the specific colors which affect the tarantato, are supposedly connected to the type and nature of the spider that bit them, so that in this way, the symbol and embodiment of the spider becomes the agent of both the illness and the cure.

The musicians continue to play in a crescendo, as the tarantato gradually becomes more and more active, seeming to “wake up” from a state of trance, crawling along the floor, beating the ground in time to the rhythm of the zamburello (tambourine), sometimes arching into a bridge position, imitating the movements of a spider. As the music rises, the tarantato gets up from the floor, and begins to dance in hopping, skipping, and circling movements, the musicians encouraging them to keep going. They may continue this for many hours before resting, and then beginning the dance again. The ritual can last for three days, until the tarantato feels well again, and does not need to dance any longer.

The bite led to the tarantato being “possessed” by the spider, and the cure is one of a fight with this possession which leads to the expelling of the spirit of the spider from the body. If this does not happen, or if the music and dance cure is not undertaken, then the tarantato may die from the effects of the bite. In this way, the ritual is often described as being one of both possession and exorcism. As well as this private ritual, there was a more public and collective display caused by the symptoms of the condition reoccurring, usually during the summer months, and often around the period of the festival of St Paul on 29 June. As discussed in Chapter Two, St Paul is associated with the ritual of tarantism. The chapel dedicated to him in Galatina became the focus for the annual repetition of the cure, where the /avantati (male and collective plural) would be brought by their families from surrounding areas to relive the dance of the ritual cure within the chapel. Oral, written and film records give examples of tavantate (female plural) dressed in white, symbolically becoming the brides of St Paul, dancing in the chapel, climbing over the altar, crawling on the ground, and sometimes attacking the crowds who gathered to witness the spectacle during the annual repeti- tion. In the same way as the spider is the cause and cure of the condition, so St Paul also becomes a magical-religious symbol who both curses and heals the tarantata.

Chapter One contains an ethnographic ‘moment’ of my experience of the festival of St Paul in Galatina in 2008, where the 3 Throughout its history, there have been cases of both men and women undertaking the ritual. In Chapter Two, I discuss the ‘feminisation’ of tarantism, with an empha- sis on the women who became saranztate. Partly because of this discussion, and also due to the particular changes in socio-cultural circumstances for women in Salento, there is a tendency for this study to focus on the tarantate. However, this does not deny or ignore that men have become farantati, and this will also be seen during the discussion of the historical documents in Chapter Two.

4 Introduction sacred and secular intersected, and the brief glimpse of a former tarantata affected all those watching, bring-ing the past histories into collision with contemporary identities and practices. Throughout its history, there have been questions as to whether the condition of tarantism is ‘real’ or not, and if the sarantata is ‘faking’ rather than being genuinely ill, or even in a state of madness or hysteria. Although there is often no evidence of an actual bite from a spider,’ the ‘bite’ and subsequent illness and cure can be seen asa culture-specific means of coping with socio-cultural and economic difficulties found within Salento. As Horden states, the spider’s symbolism is more potent than its bite [...]. We are dealing with a culture- bound syndrome, or folk illness; with social and psychological ‘poisoning’ rather than a biological threat. (Horden, 2000: 250) In this way, it is important to frame tarantism as beinga culture-specific phenomenon. There have been records of the use of music to cure the poison from the bite ofa tarantula dating back to the fourteenth century.’ These records, 4 The dialect word ‘la taranta’ can be used to describe not only a tarantula, but any type of spider or scorpion which inflicts a poisonous bite. It can even include other types of biting insects, such as ants, as well as snakes and vipers. There have been recorded incidents of tarantism being induced by all these types of venomous bites. ‘There are two types of spider that have been prevalent in Salento which have been discussed in relation to tarantism. One is the /ycosa tarantula, or wolf spider, which is considered to be harmless. The other species is the much smaller Latrodectus tredecimguttatus, or European black widow spider. While less fearsome in appearance, its bite can cause symptoms similar to those found in tarantism. The Lycosa appears larger and more menacing, but its bite would not result in the same adverse effects as the Atrodectus. In this way, the symbol of a taranta can be seen as a combination of the appearance and effects of both Aycosa and Latrodectus (Bartholomew, 2000; Lewis, 1991; Liidtke, 2009; De Martino, 2005).

Although this study focuses on the phenomenon of tarantism in Apulia, it also occurred in other locations, particularly in the South of Italy. Some of these cases are discussed in Chapter Two, with various perspectives from doctors, scientists, ecclesiastical figures, and curious visitors. These records offer a fascinating debate on shifting discourses of the body, medicine, science, religion, and philosophy over a period of seven hundred years. The voices of the tarantati themselves are not heard, as their stories and personal experiences are appropriated and debated by writers to expound their own framework of thought.

The ritual began to decline during the nineteenth century, and by the middle of the twentieth century, there were only a few instances of performances. According to anthropologist Karen Liidtke, there were only five or six former tarantati still alive in 2006, though these are not seen publicly performing the ritual anymore. However, the occasional glimpses of one of these prior tarantati can recall a past into the present, offering a glimpse of a vestige from older times that has a strong resonance for the younger generation of Salentines today.

Although the ritual as such no longer takes place, there was a revival of interest in pizzica music and dance beginning in the 1970s, gaining momentum through the 1980s and 1990s. This, along with an increasing amount of research and publications on tarantism, has led to a growth in both tourists and researchers visiting the region, as well as the development of music and dance festivals, sometimes under the label of the so-called ‘neo-tarantism’ movement. This resurgence, which is discussed in Chapter Four, offers an example of the revival or reinvigoration of a form of ‘folk’ or ‘traditional’ music and dance, which raises questions of authenticity, ownership, and performance forms as cultural products. The case study of both historical and contemporary Salento shows the complex relationship of past and present, and a multiple layering of times, places, practices, and identities in each of the ‘moments’ explored in this study. The history of tarantism and the contemporary phenomenon of neo-tarantism and performances of pizzica in Salento today are closely interconnected, offering valuable insights into the development of ritual and performance forms. This book aims to provide a comprehensive overview of both the historical and contemporary aspects, focusing on the discipline of performance studies. By adopting an interdisciplinary approach, this work combines historical and ethnographic research with a focus on performance forms, providing a unique perspective on the embodied experiences of those participating in the music and dance.

The book's emphasis on embodiment and the interconnection between the inner and outer environments of the performances offers new insights into the experience of both historical rituals and contemporary expressions. This perspective can be beneficial to those working in the social sciences, providing new frameworks of thought that can be applied to the study of tarantism and pizzica in Salento and beyond.

The remainder of the Introduction contextualizes the land of Salento, its history, mixture of cultures, and its positioning within Southern Italy in relation to the idea of the "Southern Question" and magic and superstition. The book also discusses pizzica, describing the dance and music of the social form, the pizzica pizzica, as well as the differences between this and the "tarantella." The book is divided into four chapters. As the intention is to provide an interdisciplinary approach to its subject matter, Chapter One offers an examination of the methodological frameworks that will be used. Based in performance studies, and drawing on other disciplines including anthropology, sociology, and cultural studies, there is a discussion of the importance of exploring tarantism and pizzica through the embodied experience of the participants, while also having an understanding of how the specific socio-cultural positionings of the individual and community will have an impact on this experience. Culture is seen as something that is inscribed on and in the body, as well as in the process of the embodiment of the ritual in the past, and the contemporary experiences of playing and dancing pizzica. The chapter ends with an ethnographic ‘moment’ of my observation and participation in the festival of St Paul in Galatina in June 2008, to illustrate the points made.

Chapters Two, Three, and Four are a chronological examination of the history of the ritual of tarantism, and the revival of interest in pizzica music and dance leading to the ‘neo-tarantism’ movement in the late twentieth century. Chapter Two is an extensive historical overview of the many and diverse writings on tarantism by doctors, scientists, and travel-writers from the fourteenth through the twentieth centuries. These writings demonstrate the appropriation of both tarantism and those who perform it in a gradual medicalization, feminization, and Christianization of the ritual. The documents discussed offer a fascinating account of the changing attitudes towards the body, religion, medicine, and science over the periods examined, most particularly from the vast paradigm shift brought about by the Age of Enlightenment.

Chapter Three focuses on the work of Italian historian Ernesto De Martino, whose book La terra del rimorso [The Land of Remorse] is so significant in the history and changing views of tarantism in the twentieth century. De Martino conducted an ethnographic study of tarantism in 1959 for which he gathered an interdisciplinary team to examine features of the ritual. The title is a play on words, for ‘torso’ is the Italian word for ‘bite’ hence ‘ri/re-morso’ has the sense of both ‘remorse’ in a religious context, and ‘re-bite’ in terms of the sarantati re-experiencing the symptoms of tarantism and needing to repeat the cure each year. This book has been of great importance in reframing the understanding of tarantism and cultural practices in Southern Italy; however, it has also been criticized more recently for its reductionist approach, despite De Martino’s own development of the notion of ‘critical ethnocentrism. This chapter examines some of De Martino’s key ideas, and how these were framed in his writing on tarantism, as well as ways in which his work has been used by others in different contexts, and some of the critiques that have been made of his approach. I then offer an examination of the experience of the ritual through aspects of performance studies. The purpose of this is to suggest ways of exploring the ritual through the body and the processes of embodiment, and aims to provide a framework to discuss such issues as ‘presence’, ‘liveness’ and ‘embodied experience’ in relation to forms of cultural performance, while also needing to take account of the particular socio-cultural features of tarantism in its specific context. Chapter Four is an examination of the revival of interest in pizzica music and dance, which began in the 1970s, and the development of the neo-tarantism movement. This covers a range of areas including the sense of local identity in relation to the music and dance, as well as the history of Salento and its connection to the land, and how these are manifested in the present. The notion of ‘neo-’ traditions, the development of new music and dance festivals as part of the burgeoning tourist industry, and the debate between authenticity and contamination, which is often central to the idea of ‘revival,’ are also discussed.

There is also a discussion of the pizzica scherma and its performance at the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli. Although this may not be seen as necessarily having a direct connection to tarantism, this unique form of dance contributes to the overall debate on contemporary Salento. It is a fascinating combination of martial arts and dance, performed by different communities, and can be a means to resolve disputes through the space of the ronda, the circle in which the dance is performed. There has been very little written about this in English, so this section investigates the history of the scherma, as well as analysing some of the movements of the dance.

The Conclusion brings together of some of the ideas and themes from throughout the book, questioning what the notion of ‘healing’ might mean in the different contexts discussed. With a book of this nature, which offers both an historical and ethnographic study of a specific location over a long period of time, there are many considerations which are involved.

The author first encountered tarantism as a practitioner in January 2000 when making a piece of dance-theatre, and this initial interest led to further research and visiting Salento for the first time in 2001. This research, both documentary and field trips, has continued over the years and contributed to the writing of this book.

Having been initially introduced into Salento as a practitioner, and then occupying a shifting role into being a researcher, there have clearly been ethical issues which the author has had to address. In the context of the research and writing of this book, when undertaking field studies, the author sees themselves as a participant-observer, and has been very fortunate in their encounters with local people who have been immensely generous both with their time in conducting interviews, as well as their skill and openness with playing and dancing the pizzica.

There have been times when the author has felt that being seen as a practitioner as well as an ‘academic, thereby joining in with the playing and dancing, as well as sharing their own practical work, has perhaps led some informants to being more open with them than might have been the case otherwise. Therefore, it has also been important to be clear about the times when the author is gathering information for the book, and how they are going to use this material.

The shifting position between practitioner and researcher has proved both interesting, and at times difficult: when do the author put down the camera at a festival and join in the dance? It is the author's hope that their understanding of music and dance from both an academic as well as practical perspective will offer an interesting viewpoint to the discussion.

In Chapter Two, the author notes that during the time of the early Christian Church, the playing of music became separated from its study and understanding. The author suggests that within academia today, it is possible and useful for this division to be reconsidered, and that it can be acknowledged that a practitioner can think and write, and that an academic can engage with practice. With an increasing number of practitioners entering academia in the fields of performance, there seems to be a great opportunity for this form of interrelated dialogue, understanding, and approach to be undertaken and accepted. Although I have conducted field research at points over a period of eight years, there is never a sense that this is ‘enough’ either in terms of time, or the range and breadth of people I have interviewed, and the places and events I have visited. Nevertheless, I trust that the amount of time I have spent in Salento is sufficient for the purposes of this book, and that the field work will continue, leading to further discoveries.

The historical research for this study has encompassed the whole of Apulia, including ThaveaBA in Drama and Music from the University of Bristol, and an MA in Physical Theatre from the University of Surrey and Royal Holloway, University of London, which included studying dance anthropology. I have trained in and practiced a range of forms of theatre, dance and music, and therefore move between and across these performance forms in my academic and practical work.

Introduction to the important sites of Taranto and Brindisi in the history of tarantism. However, my field research is centered on Salento, partly in order to create a focused area for study, and also as this is where so much of the contemporary revival has taken place. In terms of language, I have chosen mainly to use English translations of Italian places and words, for example, Apulia for Puglia. I have also decided to place the Italian text of quotations first, followed by the English translation. This seemed very important in relation to using material from interviews with informants; I wanted their voice in the original language to be heard first, and for the sake of consistency, this practice is followed throughout the book.

Therefore, the English translations are placed in square brackets afterwards. Unless otherwise stated, I have undertaken these translations myself, with help from Bianca Mastrominico, John Dean, and Antonella Rizzo. However, I have made the final decisions on the English versions myself, and I take full responsibility and apologize for any errors or misunderstandings with the translations as a result.

‘The study of tarantism and pizzica, and the research and writing for this book, have embraced and engulfed me for the past nine years. I hope that this book may spark interest in the reader for further research of their own, and encourage the first-hand reading of the texts discussed, as well as personal experience of the music, dance, culture, and people of Salento. I have only been able to offer my own glimpse into this rich world, and many other views are available.

Context and background: Salento and pizzica in perspective

Where worlds collide: Salento as a site for study
In this land whose name means ‘never-ending silence’ and ‘land between two seas, the ancient and the modern blend together. Land of sea, land of different peoples, dialects, voices that cover the echo of other voices, other sounds. [...] We must find the right time, the right shades of colors in the sky where the crescent Turkish moon 12 Introduction is a white, dazzling comma on a carpet of lights, and when the north wind blows the horizon is clear on the coast looking over the East. (From the tourist brochure ‘Salento: all year round, produced by Viaggiare and the Azienda di Promozione Turistica di Lecce, Apulia, 2008)

Salento is indeed the ‘land between two seas’, and one that faces and inhabits both “West’ and ‘East’ in its geography, history, and culture. However, this is far too simplistic a duality for the complexity and layerings found within this comparatively small area. The region of Apulia covers the ‘heel’ of the ‘boot’ of Italy, and Salento lies in the bottom half of this ‘heel’ (see Illustration 1). It is also known as the Province of Lecce, which, along with the Provinces of Brindisi, Taranto, Foggia, and Bari, make up the region of Apulia. This is part of the South of Italy, also known as the Mezzogiorno, Italia Meridionale, or Meridione. Salento covers an area of approximately 2,500 square km, a narrow peninsula at the tip of Western Europe, with 200 km of coastline, ending at its bottom point in the town of Santa Maria di Leuca, also known as Finibus Terrae, or the end of the earth. To the east is the Ionian Sea, and to the west, the Adriatic. The coastline is a combination of rocky cliffs, sandy beaches, and deep caves, some of which contain the remains from previous civilizations. The land in-between the seas is mainly a flat plain, home to the region’s main traditional industry of agriculture, with an abundance of olive groves, grape vines, and almond trees. Hundreds of kilometers of dry-stone walls snake the landscape, interspersed with masserie, farm buildings, and more glimpses of past inhabitants in the shape of dolmens and menhirs. As well as rural hamlets and villages, Salento hosts some larger towns and cities, including the region’s capital Lecce, also known as ‘the Florence of the South’ for the splendor of its seventeenth-century Baroque architecture, designed by Francesco and Giuseppe Zimbalo, and Cesare Penna, amongst others. As the former Roman settlement of Lupiae, the centro storico also contains a large amphitheater, only part of which has been excavated, as well as a smaller Roman theater where performances still take place. The statue of one of the city’s patron saints, San Oronzo, stands on a tall column that was once part of the Appian Way, which ended near Brindisi.

Introduction B

As well as agriculture, one of the other important Salentine industries, that of fishing, is found along the coastline, and the two ports of Gallipoli on the west and Otranto on the east act as both gateway and guard to the two-way facing peninsula, which has seen many invasions from both directions. Otranto lies only 70 km by sea from Albania, and contains evidence of the many cultures that have lived there, with a Norman cathedral which has a Romanesque facade, an Aragonese Castle, a Byzantine Church, and white-washed houses reminiscent of Greek villages amongst narrow streets, winding up from the harbor. It was in Otranto in 1480 that Mehmed II’s Ottoman soldiers landed and attacked the city. When eight hundred of the inhabitants refused to convert, they were decapitated on top of Minerva Hill. Alfonso of Aragon managed to liberate the city the following year, and the bones of the martyrs now lie for viewing in the chapel of the cathedral. This cathedral also houses an extraordinary mosaic floor, made by the monk Pantaleo in the twelfth century, which covers the aisle and transepts of the building. The central feature which runs along the middle from the doorway to the altar consists of the image of the Tree of Life. Branching out from this are a mixture of images taken from Greek mythology, the Bible, mythological legends such as King Arthur, the signs of the Zodiac, and real and fabulous animals including elephants, lions, centaurs, and unicorns. This floor seems to symbolize the merging of different peoples, cultures, and stories that are so much a feature of the land of Salento and the Mediterranean itself. The Mediterranean has operated as a linking point, the central passageway between different lands. The Romans called it Mare Nostrum, or "Our Sea," and for Horden and Purcell in their extraordinary history of the Mediterranean, The Corrupting Sea, this "claim of the Romans to 'their' sea was part of a political and cultural process by which they progressively defined the place of Rome at the heart of the Inhabited World—an Oecumene or Orbis Terrarum with the Mediterranean at its center" (Horden and Purcell, 2000: 12).

Certainly, for the many empires and cultures that have been based on its shores, the Mediterranean acts as the connector and travel-way between not just countries but continents. For Horden and Purcell, in "the ancient geographical tradition the sea shapes the land, not the other way about" (ibid.: 11). Abulafia states that this "fundamental geographical feature of the Mediterranean is thus the enormous complexity of the region. Complexity means richness, diversity in a very positive sense, facilitating exchanges over short and long distances" (Abulafia, 2003: 19).

The region of Salento shows just such diversity, partly due to its geographical location as being a "territory of passage," a stepping-stone between East and West, as well as North and South. As such, throughout history, it has been vulnerable to attacks and colonization, becoming a battleground for warring countries and rulers attempting to gain power and control of passageways and territories. The many invaders and settlers in the land of Salento have each left their mark on the landscape and culture, as well as in the memories and identities of the people, through to the present.

Evidence of megalithic civilizations is found in the stone structures of menhirs, dolmens, and specchie, or funeral cairns, as well as the prehistoric cave paintings seen in some of the caves, including those in the Grotta dei Cervi, the Cave of the Deer, in Porto Badisco, one of which has been appropriated as a symbol of the neo-tarantism movement, which is explored in Chapter Four. A significant group of early settlers were the Messapians, who possibly came from Illyria, and whose name means "land between two seas," which was adopted by the tourist brochure cited earlier as the name for Salento as a whole. The word "Messapi" itself is potentially an essentialist term for what were actually many tribal groups, and as Edward Herring suggests, they were seen as one collective by the later Greek inhabitants, and thus the term represents "an etic perspective" (Herring, 2007: 271) which places them in opposition to the "civilized" world of the Greeks. They were also known as the Iapyges, and the region was called Iapygia or Messapia. The Messapians left behind an array of artifacts, including pottery with distinctive geometric patterns, statues, and jewelry. In addition, there are the remains of some large-scale settlements, including the vast stone walls outside Ugento, in the south of Salento. The Messapians are perceived as being part of the land and identity by many Salentines today, with some of the geometric patterns being repeated on contemporary artworks. In Ugento, one local pointed to the great walls, telling me that they had been built by the ancestors of the land, and that today people walk in the footsteps of those former giants who are part of their history and culture. The famous fifth-century large bronze statue found in Ugento is often attributed as representing Zeus, but the local informant insisted on pointing out that instead, he considers it to be Poseidon, the god of the sea, which is such an important feature of the surrounding area.

The next main civilization to invade and settle in Salento was the Greeks, from around the eighth century BCE. This colonization lasted much longer in Salento than in other parts, which will be seen in the history and discussion of the origins and manifestations of tarantism in Chapter Two. The Roman Empire replaced the Greek, and this, in turn, was followed by the strong influence of the Byzantine Empire from the East. Additionally, during the Iconoclastic Wars, monks from Greece and Eastern Europe fled to Salento for refuge and founded monasteries in the region. The impact of this Greek and Eastern infiltration held sway until the arrival of the Normans, bringing Catholicism with them, in the early eleventh century. However, the Greek influence managed to continue beyond this and was found in a swathe of towns and villages across Salento from Gallipoli to Otranto, which became known as the Grecia Salentina. Today, this area still exists, but has been reduced to consisting of nine small towns situated south-east of Lecce. This area still holds particular festivals and rites that show the Greek influence, and many of the elders speak Griko, a dialect that resembles modern Greek. Although this language had been dying out, its survival has been strengthened recently in part as a response to the revival of interest in pizzica and traditional songs in Griko.

Remains from the Greek era have been discovered throughout Apulia, one example being the red-figure vase-paintings found especially in the Greek city of Taras, later called Tarentum by the Romans, and now known as Taranto. It is this city that supposedly gives its name to both the taranta ox tarantola spider and the condition of tarantismo. Taras became an important city for the Greek diaspora, and there is evidence of many plays being performed in its theatres, whether imported from the homeland or adaptations that became popular in the colonies, sometimes creating new dramaturgical forms. In Apulia (notably Tarentum and other towns nearby), another comic theatrical form came to enjoy great popularity in the early fourth century, the so-called phlyax farces, perhaps derived originally from Laconian tradition in the Peloponnese. Several scenes from these plays are preserved on vase-paintings. With padded, phallus-wearing actors wearing grotesque masks, as well as some straight heroic-looking characters too, these plays were performed on temporary wooden stages which could be set up quickly and transported from one town to another. In any case, it is clear that the language in which these plays were performed was Greek; and from c. 300 Rhinthon and others produced written versions of some phlyax-plays, as the genre adopted a more highbrow tone, combining farce with more serious mythological themes. (Griffith, 2007: 28-9)

After the demise of the Roman Empire, theatrical performances still continued until theatres were closed by Justinian in 526, and the Byzantines were defeated by the Lombards in 568, which ‘spelled the end of classical drama in the West for the next eight hundred years or more’ (ibid.: 33). In the early part of the Christian era, Salento was fought over by the Roman (Western) and Byzantine (Eastern) Empires as an important landing-place between both, eventually being won by the Eastern Empire. The influence of both Greek and Byzantine, along with later invasions by the Saracens, Arabs and Turks, have resulted in Salento being identified as a place of being between, and also embodying a mixture of, both West and East, Occident and Orient. This was seen as much in religion as in culture, which became a mixture of Christian and ‘pagan’ a feature found in the writings of tarantism in Chapter Two, as well as between Roman and Orthodox forms of Christianity:

In Puglia, e in Salento in particolare, si ¢ verificata per lungo tempo la prevalenza della civilta cristiana bizantina, che, nonostante in conflitti culturali con il cristianesimo romano ¢ le alterne supremazie politiche, ha connotato il territorio con una serie notevolissima di giacimenti culturali. (De Giorgi, 1999: 255)
[In Apulia, and particularly in Salento, the civilization of Byzantine Christianity prevailed for a long time and, in spite of its cultural conflicts with Roman Christianity and successive political supremacies, defined the region with a very notable series of cultural deposits.]

18 Introduction
De Giorgi describes this meeting of Orient and Occident in Salento as being a ‘concordia discordante’ (ibid.: 256), in that the different worlds live together in both unity and tension. The blending of East and West is found in the food and culture, with the Greeks spreading the cultivation of olives for oil and grapes for wine, both of which are now such a fundamental part of Salentine industry and identity; Arabic influences in some foods, particularly sweets; the architecture of Greek, Byzantine and Arabic features and buildings; and the festivals and rites with the Springtime carnival processions in some parts reminiscent of those found in Greece today, alongside those of the Roman Catholic processions of religious statues around towns at Easter. Later invaders and settlers have likewise influenced culture, language and practices in their adding to the melting-pot of Salento. These include the Lombards, Visigoths, Swabians, Normans, Aragonese, French and Bourbons, up to the time of the Risorgimento and the unification of Italy in 1860. This was also reflected in the changing names for the region, which at various points has been known as or part of the Terra d’Otranto, the Kingdom of Naples, and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. The many battles fought over the territory of passage of Salento, the different rulers, and traces of the cultures left behind, have both contributed to the identity of Salentines, whilst also leading to a strong sense of regional pride and independence in their being ‘Salentine’, rather than Italian. The Salentine dialect is still spoken throughout the region, though today mainly Italian is commonly heard, with Salentine phrases or words being included in a conversation, with the exception of the elders who often still tend to speak Salentine rather than Italian. There are actually many different variants of the dialect in local areas, such as Leccese in Lecce, and this is sometimes reflected in the singing of pizzica and other traditional songs, which in their modern transcription can have several different versions of the lyrics.

The identification of being Salentine is not just with the language and culture, but also with the surrounding environment of the land and sea, which is discussed further in Chapter Four. This can lead to a romanticising of the idea of local and community identity and the relationship to the land, as was seen in the description of Salento by the tourist industry brochure cited above. However, this has also been a means of local resistance to the many invaders of the land who have threatened this identity, and more recently has been used as a way to bring together the younger generation of Salentines.

This is seen in the work of Salentine poet Antonio Verri (1949-93) who has become a symbol of Salentine identity and creativity. He is known for writing on the notion of ‘i sibilo lungo’, or the ‘long’ or ‘deep murmur’ or ‘hiss’ which is heard in the sound of the sea and land, as well as the sibilant ‘s’ sound in speech, thus connecting the people to the echo of the land. As Del Giudice explains, this extract of Verri’s writing focuses attention on the land, on man’s communion with that land, and on the silent, barely audible sound of the bond:

"Cambia, cambiera di molto il volto della campagna, degli aggregati umani, di interi paesi ... quel che non cambiera mai sara idea del dialogo con la terra che 'uomo ha stabilito dal tempo dei tempi, il grosso respiro, il “Sibilo lungo” che si pud udire solo di mattina, mirando nella vastita dei campi, con accanto sentinelle silenziose gli alberi d’argento ..” (‘It changes, it will change much, the face of the land, of gathered humanity, or entire towns ... what will never change is the idea of dialoguing with the earth, that humanity has established from time immemorial, the long breath, “the deep murmur” which can be heard only in the early morning, while looking out over the vast fields, while standing next to the silver trees, the silent sentinels ...’). (Del Giudice, 2005: 264-5, fn. 68)

If, as is suggested in Chapter Two, myths were used as a means to unite the diaspora during the time of the Greek colonisation, then the identification with the sound and pulse of land and sea, as well as the music and dance as will be seen in Chapter Four, are the ways through which Salentines today may find a sense of unity both within the community, and to the terra, meaning ‘earth, ‘land’ and ‘country’ of Salento, with all its diversities as a point of passageway in the wider territory of the Mediterranean.

The ‘Southern Question’: orientalism, politics and magic

In his Introduction to La terra del rimorso, Ernesto De Martino discusses the perception of Southern Italy found in the writings of some of the Jesuit missionaries sent to the Mezzogiorno during the sixteenth century. They described this part of the country as being the ‘Italian India, and De Martino cites some examples from correspondence by the monks who had been sent to this seemingly remote and foreign land: Branca, replying to Nadal, considers it opportune that the college be established there ‘for the needs of this Italian India? Giovanni Xavier [. "Bemoans the condition of the people: These people are so accustomed to evil, so licentious, arrogant, without justice and government, it is as if they were all from the backwoods. As for the priests, I do not want to even begin on the subject: word of mouth will be sufficient to give our brothers the chance to come to this India. (De Martino, 2005: 4)

Michele Navarro suggested that those missionaries who were due to travel to the Indies should be sent to Southern Italy first as a testing ground, as “anyone who proves himself worthy in these Indies of ours [Indias de por aca] will also be suited to those across the Ocean, and that he who finds it difficult to travel and endure in these Indies will not find it very easy in the others” (in ibid.: 5).

The correlation of the South of Italy, despite being part of Western Europe, with the ‘dark lands’ of the Indies, is representative of some of the ways in which the South has been perceived and defined, particularly in relation to the North, that has become known as the ‘Southern Question’ Although this term usually refers to the period around and after the Risorgimento, the origins of the division between North and South existed much earlier.

The idea that the North was the place of learning, culture, industrialisation and modernity, whereas the South was the land of poverty, the rural peasant, corruption, the Mafia, and a world filled with superstition and magic, has contributed to some of the ways in which the practice of tarantism has been discussed. The South was the place that contains the ‘primitive’ evidence of an older world, often the classical world with the remains of the Greek and Roman civilisations. It was also a place seemingly at the very outer perimeter of the known world, its people and way of life equated more with Africa and Asia than Europe.

Goethe, in his Italian Journey (1786-1788) stated that: “To me Sicily implies Asia and Africa’ (Goethe, 1962: 212), and the well-known Italian saying reinforces the view that ‘at the end of Naples, begins Africa’ It is the land that western civilisation has seemingly not reached, seen in Carlo Levi’s book Christ Stopped at Eboli, the very title defining that religion and civility have not Introduction 21 reached the small village in Lucania to which he was exiled, and that for Levi, it was ‘that other world, hedged in by custom and sorrow, cut off from History and the State [...] where the peasant lives out his motionless civilization on barren ground in remote poverty, and in the presence of death’ (Levi, 2000: 11).

The South was the place of the hot sun, where the temperament of the people was reflected in the landscape and climate. They were people of nature, as opposed to those of cultured learning from the North. They were also people who were seen as being inherently, and some believed racially, different from those of the North.

Mary Gibson discusses the work of the late-nineteenth-century criminologist Cesare Lombroso, who based his theories on the reasons for a greater criminal tendency by people in the South to their racial connection with those groups who were from other places. In his work Criminal Man from 1896-7, he states:

Iv is to the African and Eastern elements (except the Greeks), that Italy owes, funda- mentally, the greater frequency of homicides in Calabria, Sicily and Sardinia, while the least occur where the Nordic races predominate (Lombardy). (Lombroso, Vol. 3: 30, in Gibson, 1998: 99)

Gibson points out that Lombroso’s ideas on positivist criminology were based in social darwinism, and he divided the people of the North and South between lighter and darker colourings." In this way, he posited that the ‘darker’ people of the South had greater criminal tendencies and levels of immorality in comparison to the ‘whiter’ and more civilized people of the North (Gibson, 1998: 102). He analyzed these differences in facial features, and even in skull measurements, to show that those from each side of his divided Italy had racial origins from different regions. Gibson states that the ‘attempt to identify race based on the measurement of skulls was typical of the period throughout Europe’ (ibid.: 103), and this is also an uncomfortable presage of what was to come in Europe during the succeeding decades.

The notion of the ‘Southern Question’ is inherently relativistic, as the South is seen in relation to the North, thereby reinforcing the perceived dichotomy between the two. After the time of the Unification of Italy, this division was highlighted by the claim that the modernized North was being held back and drained by the impoverished and backward South, which still held remnants of feudalism, as well as organized crime, along with a lack of education and infrastructure. This perception continued, and was further increased during the twentieth century with mass emigration, particularly to America, as well as increasing unemployment, causing further poverty.

Despite efforts during the 1950s to help develop the South, this view by the North never completely left, and in the 1990s, the Northern League began an anti-Southern campaign, wanting to create a separate North from the South that was seen to be draining its resources. Not only is this binary view relativistic, it is also essentializing of the ‘South’ which, as Petrusewiczm suggests, should be seen instead as being many ‘Souths’ rather than one (Petrusewiczm, 1998: 28).

In addition to those from outside the South having such opinions, there have also been instances of some from within and sympathetic to the South, most particularly from the political left, who have also contributed to the division in terms of suggesting that it should be the peasants who create a socio-political revolution, and empower and free themselves. The discussion in Chapter Three on the work of Gramsci and De Martino illustrates such views. However, it was a disappointment to many of the Marxist-influenced writers supporting the South that it appeared that the peasants were incapable or not energized into such a revolution, thereby effectively aligning themselves with seeing the South as a primitive and impoverished ‘other’ and reinforcing the stereotype.

The work of Pasquale Villari, particularly in his Lettere Meridionali (1875), is an example of someone who is both situating themselves within the South, and yet is an intellectual élite who is also highlighting the poverty and problems of the region, thus contributing to the reinforcement of the idea of the ‘Southern Question.’ Carlo Levi likewise suggests that the inherently passive nature of the peasant, unlike the active and engaged people from cities, leads to a political powerlessness:

This passive brotherliness, this sympathy in the original sense of the word, as suffering together, this fatalistic, comradely, age-old patience, is the deepest feeling the peasants have in common, a bond made by nature rather than by religion. They do not and can not have what is called political awareness, because they are literally pagani, ‘pagans,’ or countrymen, as distinguished from city dwellers. "They live submerged in a world that rolls on independent of their will, where man is in no way separate from his sun, his beast, his malaria. (Levi, 2000: 78-9) For Levi, the downtrodden subaltern of the peasant had the ability, but not the will, to create a Marxist overturning of power: “Unless there is a peasant revolution we shall never have a true Italian revolution, for the two are identical' (ibid.: 239). One of the key features which was part of the view of the South as 'other' and even 'exotic' was the practice of magic and rituals, of which tarantism was a part. Examples of this include the notion of the evil eye (malocchio), studied and written about by De Martino, as well as the use of magical charms, spells, amulets and potions. Some of this will be discussed in Chapter Two through the historical records of tarantism, which became a battleground between magic and medicine. Levi notes that in his small village in Lucania, magic was used to 'cure almost any ill, and usually by the mere pronouncement of a spell or incantation' (ibid.: 225), the most common spell being 'abracadabra, written in the geometric pattern of a triangle on an amulet. Barbara Littlewood, who conducted field research on practices of magic in Apulia in 1969, tells of witnessing cases of locals who were described as being affected by the evil eye, or by being given a magical potion. She frames these practices, as well as that of tarantism, as being part of a particularly female world dominated by Catholicism and clientelism (Littlewood, 2007: 236). Both these, she explains, foster concepts of misfortune, victimhood, and the establishment of notions of honour and shame, particularly in relation to women, which will feature in this study in the history of tarantism. The language and ideas of magic can still be found in some of the discourses surrounding the performance of tarantism and pizzica today: many informants spoke to me about the 'magic' that can take place within the circle, the ronda, in which the dance takes place, even if the notion of 'magic' has perhaps changed in meaning and context. However, the perception of the world of magic found in the South, even if understood somewhat differently today, reinforces the idea of Southern Italy as a place of alterity. Bearing in mind the notion of the 'Italian India from several centuries before, it could indeed be suggested, as Schneider states, that 'Italy was certainly affected by Orientalism' (J. Schneider, 1998: 5), and that this has been a feature of the history of tarantism. Pizzica: a way of seeing the world The form of music and dance which is commonly perceived to be connected to the ritual of tarantism is the tarantella. The very word appears to imply an origin in the city of Taranto, the taranta which bites, and the tarantata who is bitten. There are many forms of the tarantella throughout Southern Italy, each with regional variations, the most famous being found in Naples. The final section of the Introduction will discuss some of the ways in which the tarantella has been perceived and used by writers, musicians and choreographers, but it is important to make a distinction between this dance and the particular use of music and dance within Salento, both socially and in connection to the ritual of tarantism. In Salento, the word 'tarantella' is hardly heard. Instead, it is the pizzica which is the basis of the ritual of tarantism, as well as being of great significance in the revival of music and dance in Salento as part of the neo-tarantism movement." The term 'pizzica' is used to describe a genre of popular traditional music and dance found within Salento. There are many different kinds of pizziche, such as songs connected to work, love, and religion, including funeral laments, each with particular characteristics. There are other traditional forms of music within Salento, but the pizzica is significant as being the music and dance used within the ritual of tarantism. It has become common practice to talk of there being essentially three forms of pizziche: the pizzica pizzica (sometimes called the pizzica de core [pizzica of the heart]): the social form of the dance, which will be discussed in this section; the pizzica tarantata: the particular music and dance used therapeutically within the ritual of tarantism, which are analysed in Chapters Two and Three; and the pizzica scherma: a fighting form of the dance seen particularly at the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli, which will be examined in Chapter Four. These three categorisations are usually attributed to the ethnomusicologist Giorgio di Lecce (1953-2003), and although potentially being a reduction of the complexities found with the broader genre of the pizzica, also offers a convenient way to discuss the forms through these divisions, even whilst acknowledging that this is artificially imposed on the variety of music and dance that can be found.

The word 'pizzica' comes from the verb 'pizzicare', which means to bite, nip, sting or pinch. The movement implied within this translates into the fast hopping and skipping movements within the dance, and the rapid rhythmical beat found in the music. The movement of a violinist performing a pizzicato plucking of the strings also gives a sense of this light, fast, uplifting dynamic. The most common instruments used in playing pizzica today are the violin, guitar, flute, pipes, bagpipe (zampogna), accordion (organetto), and probably the most important, the tamburello. This is essentially a large wooden frame drum with bells, variations of which can be found throughout the Mediterranean. The tamburello has come to represent the essence of pizzica music, and for Salentine historian Aldo D'Antico, its physical structure as well as its sound is the symbolic representation of life itself. He describes pizzica as being 'a way of seeing life' (D'Antico, 2001), in that it reflects the play of human life as moving between order and chaos, an idea found within classical Greek philosophy. He states that this can be seen within the samburello itself, with its circular structure representing order, and the bells as chaos. Likewise, the beating of the hand on the drum skin is the sound of order, and the shaking or rattling of the bells is that of chaos. The rhythmic pattern which the tamburello player makes is the rhythm of life, the heartbeat, which increases when someone is faced with the chaos of a state of crisis, and returns to normal when order is restored. This is reflected within the ritual of tarantism where the condition that arises from the crisis of the 'bite' results in an irregular pulse, which is then altered by the dancing in response to the rhythm of the music to an increased rate,° then finally returning to a normal, regular pulse-beat when the cure has taken place, leading to a state of order within the bodymind. For D'Antico, 8 Kay Gardner suggests that the time signature of such music used in the ritual of tarantism is dotted crotchet equals 216, which corresponds to the pulse-rate of someone who is in a high fever (Gardner, 1997: 99). The introduction of the zamburello both represents and expresses this way of seeing life, of the movement between order and chaos, wellness and crisis. The specific rhythmic beat of the samburello contributes to the particular quality of pizzica music. The rhythmic pattern is usually in 6/8, with the accent on the first and last beats of the sequence, a lighter accent on the final beat and a heavier one on the first, matching the pattern of the heartbeat. This 6/8 or triple rhythm often accompanies a melody that is essentially in 4/4 or duple beat, thus leading to an ambiguity within the rhythmic framing.

The regular ostinato beat of the tambourine contrasts with a much freer, often improvised melody with varying accented beats, whether sung or played by an instrument. This also leads to a feeling of order and chaos, or structure and freedom within the music, which will be discussed further in Chapter Three in relation to the experience of the dance within the ritual. Ambiguity is also found within the melodic and harmonic nature of the music, which is mostly tonal, ‘though sometimes revealing a modal origin of a vocal character (diminished fifth, augmented fourth, tritone, etc.)’ (Carpitella, 2005: 299). This leads to a play between major and minor keys, and the use of the interval of the tritone, which is often heard within pizzica music, can be sustained for a length of time before being resolved into a diatonic chord, giving a poignant, and what is often described as a painful or sorrowful quality to the music.

Chapter Two observes that the songs used within tarantism were often noted as being in the Phrygian mode, which is sometimes seen as the most ‘Eastern’ sounding of the modes, particularly when turned into the Phrygian Dominant which is used in flamenco, Arabic and Jewish music, and this play between “Western’ and ‘Eastern’ sounds is also a feature of pizzica. The melodic lines within the songs are often freely improvised with particular forms of ornamentation around the basic notes of the melody. Salentine musician Roberto Raheli states that when he first heard the local elders singing the songs, he observed that their style of singing contained ‘many grace notes and embellishments, rhythm which was very changeable, and singers who often did not express some notes, but defined the notes by circling around them’ (Raheli, 2005: 125). This particular vocal quality is created by singing from the throat rather than the chest, which Raheli suggests is due to the songs being sung by workers in fields who were bending over, leading them to sing from their throat rather than the chest. However, this particular style of singing is also found in parts of Eastern Europe, as is the tendency to embellish notes in a similar way to that found in pizzica.

The movements of the dance found within the pizzica pizzica are strongly connected to the rhythms of the music. The pizzica pizzica is a social dance, traditionally performed at weddings and festivals. As these events were some of the few occasions where women were allowed to be seen dancing in public, this has led in part to the pizzica pizzica becoming a particular form of expression for women. It is often a couple-dance between a man and a woman, though also sometimes danced between two women, and very rarely two men. When danced by a man and woman, it is seen as a dance of corteggiamento or courtship, with flirtation and enticement between the couple. Although the dance is improvised, there are some established steps and movements which are often used. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

These mainly reflect the triple and syncopated beat of the music, with the foot-work embodying a contrast between both stamping firmly onto the ground and light hopping or skipping movements that move away from the ground. There is a promenade step which consists of one foot stamping flat, followed by the other stepping lightly on the toes, mimicking the triple accented and unaccented beat. The skipping movements include one foot hopping in place, while the other leg crosses over and back with the toes lightly touching the ground; one foot crossing over the other with the whole body turning to the side, and back; as well as skipping and hopping in place and in circles. In addition, there are turning, circling, and spinning movements using the whole body. The woman will often lift up and swirl her skirt, and hold a fazzoletto, a handkerchief or head-scarf which she uses to tease and entice the man. Her arms can also be held above the head, sometimes both waving together from side to side; alternating with one arm up, the other down at the side or behind the back; outstretched in front of her, the hands moving from the wrists; or else with her hands on her hips. The head will sometimes shake from side to side while dancing. The posture of the man is quite unusual, in that it often consists of him leaning forward from the waist with bent knees towards the woman, with his arms outstretched to her, while performing the hopping and skipping movements. He moves in circular patterns around the woman, while she stays in the middle, 28 Introduction thus both encouraging and supporting her to dance (see Illustration 4). Traditionally, they would never touch each other, as this is a dance of flirtation and seduction rather than resolution, although today it is possible to see couples who will take each other's hand or dance in closer proximity to the other than would have been the case in the past. Salentine dancer and musician Ada Metafune describes the relationship between the movements performed by the man and woman by stating that the woman must be like a flower, which the man as the bee dances around (Metafune, 2001). This image reinforces the aspect of courtship, as well as providing a space for the woman to express herself through the dance at the center of the circle. Ada explains that the music of the pizzica pizzica, by its very nature, makes a person want to dance. She uses the verb scazzicare, a word from the Salentine dialect which will be discussed further in Chapter Three, to explain the excitement and enticement that the music produces in the body, which leads to an irresistible urge to dance in response: ““pizzica-pizzica’ penso che significhi questo, una danza che senti dentro e ti spinge a saltare, ti “scazzica”’ (in Tarantino, 2001: 89) [‘I think that “pizzica-pizzica” means this, a dance that you feel inside and that drives you to skip, to “scazzica” yourself’ ]. In other words, the body is excited or urged (scazzica from scazzicare) to dance by the music. The dance takes place in the configuration of a circle, a ronda, usually defined by the musicians and onlookers at the circumference, with the dancers stepping into the middle of the ronda to perform, and then stepping out afterwards to allow for new dancers to enter. These ronde are seen as being transformed into ‘magical’ spaces through the action of the dance in response to the music. As Liidtke explains, in ‘the Salentine musical traditions, such rounds, Daniele Durante writes, “were attributed with a magical valence, which assured a cure from any kind of illness to all active participants” (Liidtke, 2005: 46), thus connecting the social form of pizzica to both magic and efficacy. Liidtke states that some elders in Salento today feel that this element of magic has been lost in the different types of performance contexts in which the pizzica is played (ibid.: 46), and this will be examined further in Chapter Four. The inherent joy and freedom of expression that can be found in playing and dancing the pizzica pizzica forms an important part of the embodied experience of those taking part, as well as potentially creating a sense of liberation and efficacy, particularly for women, in the movements of the dance in response to the urgings of the music.

The Tarantella: secularising the sacred

In the published proceedings from the Congress held by the International Folk Music Council in Venice in 1949, the summary of Paolo Toschi’s paper is titled: ‘A Question about the Tarantella’ In this, he states:

Almost all students of the matter have confused the Tarantella with a dance which, on therapeutic grounds, is danced by those who have been bitten by the tarantula, a large, poisonous spider of the Apulian countryside. It is therefore necessary to point out some of the differences. The Tarantella is a courtship dance with all the figures inherent to this, its character. It is danced by a couple and is graceful and elegant. It is, furthermore, of fairly brief duration and has its own music. On the other hand, the dance of those who have been bitten by the tarantula has the character and object of being curative, in that it is supposed to neutralise the effect of the poison. It is danced by one person alone and has a very agitated, sometimes violent movement in accordance with what it is proposed to achieve. It has a duration not only of several hours, but often of whole days. Then, also, the music is quite different. One is therefore bound to ask whether these are not two completely different dances. The confusion which has arisen up till the present comes from the fact that both the courtship Tarantella and that of the ‘tarantolati, or person bitten by a tarantula, derive their name from the city of Taranto. (Toschi, 1950: 19)

Toschi points out that there is a difference between the dance that has become labelled as the ‘tarantella, found throughout the South of Italy” in 9 Ithasbeen suggested that the tarantella possibly originated in some forms of Spanish dance, particularly the fandango. With the influence of the Spanish occupations in Southern Italy, there may well have been a level of impact of Spanish music and dance on the Italian. However, there may also be some confusion caused by the fact that there is a form of song accompanied by guitar within the genre of flamenco from Andalusia called the ‘taranta. This is quite different to the tarantella and pizzica, but the name may have implied a connection. Additionally, the Spanish ‘taranta’ is 30 Introduction various forms, most particularly in Naples, Sorrento, Sicily and Calabria, and the form of pizzica music and dance used in the ritual of tarantism. De Giorgi describes the pizzica pizzica and pizzica tarantata as being ‘un tipo arcaico di tarantella’ (De Giorgi, 1999: 88) [‘an archaic type of tarantella’}, whereas ethnomusicologist Diego Carpitella distinguishes between what he proposes should be called the ‘liturgical’ tarantella which is used in tarantism, and the ‘profane’ version which he suggests is probably the origin of the modern-day tarantella (Carpitella, 2005: 286). This establishes a ‘sacred’ and ‘secular’ division between the forms of the dance and music, depending on the context. The Toschi posits that part of the confusion that exists is due to the name. "Tarantella" means "little taranta" or "little spider," which appears to establish a connection to the symbol found within the ritual. However, the tarantella is essentially a social dance, usually understood as relating to courtship, rather than being used in a therapeutic context in the way that the pizzica is within tarantism. As previously indicated, there is a social form of the pizzica, the pizzica pizzica, however, musically and choreographically, it is very different from the Neapolitan, Sicilian, and Sorrentine forms, which are the most commonly recognizable styles of what is now called the "tarantella." De Giorgi gives a range of examples in his book to indicate these musical differences in terms of rhythm, melody, and harmony (De Giorgi, 2004: 245-52).

It is not completely clear at what point a dance called the "tarantella" became established as something separate from the music and dance used within the ritual of tarantism or when a distinctive form that came under this generic label, covering dances from the different regions of Southern Italy, became common use. Chapter Two indicates that the word "tarantella" was used in relation to the ritual from the seventeenth century; however, the word is used within the songs to indicate the spider, the "¢aranzta," rather than the actual music or dance. It is possible that this word was then used by "derived from or similar to the fandango" (Katz, 2001: 922), so this might also have resulted in the assumed link between tarantella and fandango. Although there are some external characteristics that may appear similar, such as the arm positions and circling movements, the two forms are also quite distinct.

Introduction 31 the range of writers on the ritual to describe the particular music and dance within the ritual. Whether it was through this that this type of dance spread throughout the South, or if the name, derived from Taranto as Toschi suggests, became attached to previously existing traditional social dance forms found in variations throughout the South in 6/8 time and incorporating hopping and skipping movements, is not clear.

What is apparent is that by the end of the eighteenth century, a dance called the "tarantella," found particularly in Naples, Sorrento, and Sicily, had become widely known for its nature as a courtship dance, which extended into often being perceived as erotic, and particularly licentious in relation to the exhibition of women within the dance. The "story" of the bite of the tarantula may still have been known in these regions outside Apulia, but the performances of the dance were not for reasons of efficacy, but rather for social enjoyment at festivals and weddings, and increasingly, as performances for travelers and tourists as part of the Grand Tour.

Henry Swinburne, in his Travels in Two Sicilies, recounts his experience of witnessing a performance of the tarantella in Naples in the late 1770s:

They do not even dance to music, but perform the Tarantella to the beating of a kind of tambourine, which was in use among their ancestors, as appears by the pictures of Herculaneum. The Tarantella is a low dance, consisting of turns on the heel, much footing, and snapping of the fingers. It seems the delight of their soul, and a constant holiday-diversion of the young women, who are, in general, far from handsome, although they have fine eyes and striking features. (Swinburne, 1790: 94-5)

He later describes seeing an example of the ritual of tarantism in Lecce, quoted in Chapter Two, which gives a very different description of the movements and music, even if what he observed appears highly staged. He does not use the word ‘tarantella’ to describe the dance in this ritualistic context, but instead states that the woman danced the ‘tarantata’ (ibid.: 304), thus naming the dance after the word given to the person who has been bitten, indicating a difference between the two forms which he saw. Swinburne’s reference to Herculaneum was very much part of the sensibility of those undertaking the Grand Tour. This became a feature of the education of the aristocracy from the North, mainly Britain, but also France and Germany, touring to and around the South, particularly Italy.

32 Introduction

Travel for leisure was still a very expensive activity during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and bearing in mind the retinue which often accompanied them, was essentially the domain of the wealthy. Chloe Chard indicates that the most common features of the Tours were that they were undertaken by a member of the British aristocracy, following an itinerary that could last for several years, always included Rome, and moved in the direction of travelling from North to South. This was part of the Enlightenment idea of the need to know and understand through seeing and observation. In this case, the knowledge to be seen and witnessed was the remains of the Classical world which could be found in Italy and Greece. It was a land that was ‘other’ to the educated and modern North; it was instead a place of rural civilisation, where the character of the people matched the landscape and climate (Chard, 1999: 14-38). The Northerners came to see the past in the present, or as Horden and Purcell explain: ‘At the climax of their Grand Tour, travelers from the North came upon a world hardly industrialised in comparison with their own, and therefore perhaps inevitably more redolent of an earlier age’ (Horden and Purcell, 2000: 29). Thus the Grand Tour was both a geographical and historical journey, travelling back in time by visiting places which held the remains of the past.

It was as part of this travel experience that writers such as Swinburne and Goethe observed performances of the tarantella in Naples and Sorrento, and the beating of tambourines and free expression of the women within the dance seemed to bear a resemblance to not only a Classical world, but also one dominated by the excesses of the erotic and wine, connecting it to the followers of Dionysus. Women in particular became the representation of the South, as creatures of sensibility and emotion rather than the intellectual and objective ‘male’ world of the North.

It was one woman in particular who gave performances of the tarantella in Naples that entranced her audience, and became the emblem of the act of bringing the past to life. She was not an Italian, but rather an English woman who had reinvented herself throughout her life, and when in Naples at the end of the eighteenth century, was married to the British Ambassador, and had the title of Lady Emma Hamilton. The Hamiltons were living in Naples in the period following the excavations of Pompeii and Herculaneum which had revived interest in the Classical past, as remains of its prior civilisations were revealed. Travellers came to see not only the ruins of buildings, but also the images found in mosaics, paintings, sculptures and vases. After seeing these, some would then travel to the home of the Hamiltons, and observe Emma dressed up in imitation of the images, performing what became known as the ‘Attitudes, where she would animate the statues and vase-paintings in her presence and movements. One of those visitors who became part of her captive audience was Goethe, who traveled to Naples in 1787 and found the acme of these delights in the person of an English girl of twenty with a beautiful face and a perfect figure. [Sir William Hamilton] has had a Greek costume made for her, which becomes her extremely. Dressed in this, she lets down her hair and, with a few shawls, gives so much variety to her poses, gestures, expression, etc., that the spectator can hardly believe his eyes. He sees what thousands of artists would have liked to express realized before him in movements and surprising transformations—standing, kneeling, sitting, reclining, serious, sad, playful, ecstatic, contrite, alluring, threatening, anxious, one pose follows another without a break. She knows how to arrange the folds of her veil to match each mood and has a hundred ways of turning it into a head-dress. The old knight idolizes her and is enthusiastic about everything she does. In her, he has found all the antiquities, all the profiles of Sicilian coins, even the Apollo Belvedere. This much is certain: as a performance, it's like nothing you ever saw in your life. We have already enjoyed it on two evenings. (Goethe, 1962: 199-200)

He uses the word "attrattiva" to describe the magnetic force that a person such as Emma can exert in drawing someone towards them, a notion of magnetism that will also be found in Kircher's philosophy in relation to tarantism in Chapter Two. However, when not performing, her brightness soon tarnished, and later Goethe candidly said: "I must confess that our fair entertainer seems to me, frankly, a dull creature. Perhaps her figure makes up for it, but her voice is inexpressive and her speech without charm. Even her singing is neither full-throated nor agreeable. Perhaps, after all, this is the case with all soulless beauties. People with beautiful figures can be found everywhere, but sensitive ones with agreeable vocal organs are much rarer, and a combination of both is very rare indeed." (ibid.: 312)

Whatever Goethe might have ultimately thought of her, Emma still held sway over her own court in Naples. The Attitudes were her fanciful 34 Introduction reconstructions of the poses seen in the images amongst the remains, thus seeming to bring to life what had long been buried. As well as the Attitudes, she was renowned for her rendition of the tarantella. According to Kate Williams, Emma went on a trip to Apulia in 1789, and when in Brindisi, she watched the women in the town perform the tarantella, a dance inspired by the energetic movements of a tarantula. The performer shook a tambourine as she twirled and danced in a circle. She became more and more frenzied and sometimes collapsed at the end. When Emma returned to the Palazzo in May, she incorporated the tarantella into her Attitudes, much to the delight of her audience. The Comte d Espinchal decided that the beauty and voluptuousness of her performance could inflame the 'most insensible man'. (Williams, 2007: 145)

These performances of the tarantella became famous, and she was painted as a Bacchante doing the dance by the artist Elisabeth Vigée le Brun, and sketched in various poses of the tarantella by George Romney. After she returned to London, Emma continued to perform for the aristocracy, though she eventually died in poverty and loneliness. However, she left her own traces on the performance of the tarantella, and even if not a direct influence, over one hundred years later, the dancer Isadora Duncan also dressed in imitation Greek tunics embodying poses from the Classical past, which became the beginnings of modern dance. The tarantella, originally a rural dance, was adapted for social and court dances, becoming a stylized and choreographed version of the traditional folk dance. This transformation occurred during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, when dance was considered an essential accomplishment for the upper classes. Madame Michau, a dance teacher, created a choreographed version of the tarantella, including steps such as gallop steps, jetés, and chassés. Michau herself was the Maitresse de ceremonies at the court of George IV and William IV, based in the Royal Pavilion in Brighton.

Later in her life, Michau was still teaching the tarantella to daughters of wealthy families at schools in Brighton. Debra Teachman, in her book Understanding Jane Eyre, quotes from the diary of Frances Power Cobbe, describing her experience of taking dancing classes in an expensive school in Brighton. The quote illustrates the transferring of these traditional dances to social and court dances, stylized and choreographed, removed from their local performance and transformed into set forms.

An example of the stylized version of the tarantella in literature is found in Madame de Staél's 1807 novel Corinne, ou [Italie | Corinne, or Italy]. The book's protagonist, Corinne, is a 'genius, a free spirit, imaginative and proactive, one of the first female characters to embody this duality of both male and female qualities. Corinne represented the sensibility of the Italian South, although she actually has part-British ancestry and, like Emma, has reinvented herself. In the novel, she dances the tarantella in a ballroom in Naples, entrancing the British Northerner, Lord Nelvil, with her passionate and exotic dancing. They are, as it were, poets in their dancing, expressing so many different feelings by their ritual steps and the charming tableaux they presented to the eye. Corinne knew so well all the poses depicted by the ancient painters and sculptors that, with a slight movement of the arms, placing her tambourine now above her head, now in front of her with one hand while the other ran along the bells with incredible skill, she brought to mind the dancing girls of Herculaneum and aroused, one after another, a host of new ideas for drawing and painting. (De Staél, 1998: 90-1)

Just as Emma had been painted by Elisabeth Vigée le Brun, so the artist also did a portrait of De Staél in the guise of her character, Corinne. The process of the feminisation of the dance, which is seen also in the ritual of tarantism discussed in Chapter Two, includes the freedom of expression by a woman dancing the tarantella, which was also found in one of the most important plays of the late nineteenth century, often seen as the first feminist and modernist play, Henrik Ibsen’s A Doll's House. Ibsen spent some time travelling to and writing in Naples, Sorrento and Pompeii, and it is possible that whilst there, he witnessed performances of the tarantella, and Nora herself says that she dressed up as a Neapolitan fisher-girl to dance the tarantella which she had learnt in Capri (Act II).

It was whilst he was in Rome in 1878, that Ibsen wrote ‘Notes for a Modern Tragedy’ which became the beginning points for A Doll's House:

There are two kinds of moral laws, two kinds of conscience, one for men and one, quite different, for women. They don’t understand each other; but in practical life, woman is judged by masculine law, as though she weren’t a woman but a man. [...] A woman cannot be herself in modern society. It is an exclusively male society, with laws made by men and with prosecutors and judges who assess feminine conduct from a masculine viewpoint. (in Meyer, 2004: 321)

It was this aspect of a woman not being able to be herself that makes the dancing of the tarantella by Nora so significant. When practicing with Torvald, she drapes herself in a shawl and uses a tambourine. Her fast and frenetic dancing alarms Torvald, and after her hair falls free and she dances even faster, he stops the performance, saying that she has forgotten everything that he has taught her. However, after Nora has performed the dance publicly, and she and Torvald arrive home, it becomes clear that through the embodiment of the dance, he has a transformed view of her from little girl to woman: ‘And as I watched you darting and swaying in the tarantella, my blood was on fire ... I couldn’t bear it any longer ... and that’s why I brought you down here with me so early’ (Ibsen, 1981: 70 (Act III).

It was through the dance that Nora expressed who she is as a woman, leading to the moment of her being able to finally leave her husband. Issues of shifting power structures in relation to the position of women in society will be prevalent throughout this study, as the embodied presence of women both within the dance, and within their community, creates a space where their voices are heard and their faces are seen, leading to a temporary sense of agency. Whether or not this can create a more permanent change is questioned in Chapters Three and Four. As well as in literature and theatre, the stylised version of the tarantella was used by classical composers, including Chopin, Rachmaninov, Tchaikovsky, Mendelssohn, Verdi, Rossini and Debussy. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

It also became incorporated into classical ballet and popular dance. The ballets range from the performance of a tarantella within the ballet Napoli, created by the Danish choreographer August Bournonville in 1842, through to George Balanchine's famous Tarantella first performed by the New York City Ballet in 1964. In addition, there were some classical ballet versions which influenced stage-dance performances, one of the most renowned being that by Fanny Elssler (1810-84) in her dance La Tarantule, which inspired the notorious Spider Dance created by Lola Montez (1821-61), where plastic spiders would fall out of her skirt as she performed what was in effect a striptease. These exotic and provocative dances were seen as the embodiment of the Italian South. Smith cites from La France Musicale which, on 30 June 1839, noted that ‘Elssler’s way of dancing a tarantella in La Tarantule was said to portray “with wonderful intelligence that ardent character only found on the volcanic soil of Italy”’ (Smith, 1997: 301).

Introduction

The performances of the ‘profane’ tarantella still take place for tourists in Southern Italy. With the advent of mass tourism, which has enabled a greater number of travellers to the region to enjoy the weather and culture, these dances can be found taking place in hotels, clubs and restaurants, most particularly in Sorrento. Tourists will go to see performances of the tarantella in the South of Italy just as they would expect to see the flamenco in the South of Spain: it is still on tourist itinerary for those heading to the deep South to see that which is ‘exotic’ and ‘other.’ However, the differences in the form of what is now known as the tarantella have arisen, this has to an extent clouded the understanding of the therapeutic use of pizzica music and dance in the ‘sacred’ form within Salento, which is the focus for this book. The elements of the erotic, of sexual and licentious expression by women, and the use of tambourines, ribbons and castanets, have become the dominant understanding of the notion of the tarantella, with the mysterious story of the battle with the spider which has bitten the dancer. Although it is important to acknowledge these versions of the tarantella, it is the long history of the culturally conditioned use of music and dance as a form of efficacy within the ritual of tarantism that is the subject of this study. This emphasis will hopefully enlarge the understanding of ways in which the dance of the little zaranta has developed and been embodied by those from Salento.

CHAPTER ONE
Embodying Pasts and Presence

In discussing such a complex cultural phenomenon as tarantism, both from a perspective of the historical writings concerning the ritual, and an ethnographic study of the revival of pizzica music and dance through the development of neo-tarantism in contemporary Salento, it is both useful and necessary to draw on a selection of writers and methods within the fields of anthropology, sociology, history and cultural studies. However, I feel that there are some limitations within these disciplines which I can address through incorporating aspects of my own field of performance studies to establish a focus on the centrality of the body, and the body in/as performance, in terms of the lived experience of the body or bodymind,* and both body and performance as being process and event, rather than object. This perspective encompasses notions of ‘self’ and identity at a personal level, as well as an embodiment of socio-cultural values, and in relation to the surrounding geographic and cultural landscapes. In this chapter, we will explore the interrelationship between the body and performance, examodstrates how both the body and performance can be seen as the embodiment of past and present, and how the process of the engagement with the act of performance creates a sense of presence in the specific spatial-temporal location. In this way, it concerns the interrelationship between the experience of the bodymind and the social function of the music and dance, and the mutual dependency and inseparability of the two, in and through the action of the performance. The efficacious potential lies in the way in which the embodiment of the dance and music operate together in the specific socio-cultural space. It is the experience of the performance which acts as the agent in the process of transformation or efficacy within the bodymind.

This chapter will also discuss the use of the term 'bodymind' to indicate a psychophysical unity of body and mind. The study of historical records and field research in the contemporary revival within Salento will be used to investigate the music and dance. This investigation is necessarily situated within the fields of both history and ethnography. The bringing together of these two disciplines in the study of dance has recently been explored in the groundbreaking and timely collection Dancing From Past to Present: nation, culture, identities, edited by Theresa Buckland.

Buckland points out that in the twenty-first century, the neat division into mutually exclusive territories [history and ethnography] no longer holds. She states that such an approach demonstrates the interrelated nature of the study of a performance form, and an interdisciplinary approach in that ethnography and history's 'theoretical and methodological frameworks are located in anthropology, ethnology, cultural studies, social and cultural history, performance studies, sociology, ethnomusicology, and folklore studies' (Buckland, 2006: 4).

In examining a form of performance which has a focus on its efficacious potential, and where the extensive historical writings themselves are based in a range of disciplines including philosophy, medicine, science, religion, and travel writing, the relationship between past and present is of immense importance in understanding 'embodied cultural knowledge as temporally and spatially dynamic, situated in its meaning, and creative in the interstices of personal and communal histories that reach across the experiences of the researcher and the researched. Such departures of inquiry are often inextricably, though not exclusively, linked with issues of identity' (ibid.: 14). Both historical documents (whether textual, visual, dance and music notation, etc.), and the means for conducting field research (interviews, recordings, participant-observation, etc.), need careful consideration in terms of the situated position of each author and researcher. History itself needs re-framing, as Adrienne Kaeppler suggests in Buckland's volume, to be seen as abstracted 'moments' rather than a linear and absolute approach to knowledge: The term 'history' evokes the idea of a linear knowledge of what happened in the past that has been recorded in writing. But even in the best of times, written history records only select ‘moments’ when someone happened to write down what she or he saw or was told. Instead of confining myself to the paradigm of linear written history, I want to enlarge our historical purview to suggest that dance history does not depend on accounts that were written down—usually by outsiders—but on a wider variety of historical sources that includes written history, oral history, and cultural memory, ethnohistory, and ethnographic research. Even with this variety of sources, sometimes we can know only about specific ‘moments.’ Moments, however, can be extended to represent a particular stage in something’s development, or a stage in a course of events. As a construction here, a ‘moment’ is essentially a historiographic abstraction, which can vary from a single written description of a specific performance, to a period of years with intensive observations and numerous written sources. (Kaeppler, 2006: 26, 29)

Despite using different research methods, these questions and concerns are equally vital for both history and ethnography, and demonstrate the interconnection between them. The historical writings on tarantism offer ‘moments’ which are situated within their specific disciplines; philosophical, religious, and moral contexts; the socio-cultural positionings of writer and subject; and the individual viewpoint of the author. Likewise, ethnographic research can only offer ‘moments,’ specific events in time and place. My field research consisted of ‘moments’ of visiting certain festivals; speaking with a range of chosen subjects; observing and filming excerpts of music and dance performances in different contexts; and participating in dancing at festivals and concerts. These individual ‘moments’ make up a picture which will be presented in this study, but this is offered from my particular perspective and experience.

As Lynn Maners questions: [W]hen we write ethnography, are we writing facts as they appear on the ground, or are we writing fictions, essentially pleasant and entertaining memoirs from our time in the field? Are we recording an ethnographic reality, or is the field a palimpsest upon which we place our own constructions? The answer, of course, is that we are doing something of both. We see the culture under study through the lens of our experience, our memory, and our theoretical orientations. Emic and etic (insider’s view and outsider’s view), both past and present, exist in constant interpretation. (Maners, 2006: 92-3)

History and ethnography both offer ‘moments’ of a viewpoint in a specific spatial-temporal framework, which become part of the ‘past’ or ‘history’ in their manifestation due to the ephemerality of the event. In this way, it is questionable to suggest a binary of past and present, of history and ethnography, but instead, as Kaeppler proposes, a glimpse of ‘moments’ through the appropriate method can offer a way into seeing and understanding how a cultural form develops in a particular place and time, and the length and breadth of the ‘moment’ is as flexible as it needs to be. Thus, ethnography becomes part of the study of history, and history is made present in the ethnographic moment of the researcher’s observation and experience. For Dils and Cooper Albright, in their Introduction to Moving history/dancing cultures: The study of the past, whether that means studying a dance form from a thousand years ago, a choreographer working a hundred years ago, or a dance concert seen last week, is simultaneously of and about past and present. The ultimate reward of dance history is that it is useful. This does not mean that we ‘use’ the past, unfairly plundering or misinterpreting past lives and events and misrepresenting history in order to validate our own agendas. Dance historians study the past to illuminate people’s lives, explicate past dance practices, and understand the complex interconnections between bodies, movement, and other social practices that are a result of specific cultural beliefs and epistemological frameworks. Dancing is a way of knowing the world. History helps us to understand that. (Dils and Cooper Albright, 2001: xiv)

The connection between past and present, with a present that reflects, embodies and reframes a past through its own manifested ‘moment in time and place,’ is seen in the historical writings on tarantism. Though they will be presented in this study in a linear manner in terms of time, what can be seen through them is an almost continual reflecting back to a historical past, or pasts, in terms of claiming that the present cultural form is rooted in past practices and ideas, though often re-working these ideas through present philosophies and forms of knowledge and performance.

Thus, whether it is the Neoplatonist Marsilio Ficino in the fifteenth century taking ideas of the nature of music and dance from classical Greece and combining this with his own views on astrology to create an iatromusical approach to tarantism, which was developed further by the Jesuit priest Athanasius Kircher in the seventeenth century; or historian Ernesto De Martino in his seminal study La terra del rimorso, published in 1961, positing that the origins of tarantism lie in the Corybantic rites of ancient Greece; or some Salentines today who speak nostalgically of pizzica and tarantism as being part of a peasant-culture now lost; in all these cases it is the appropriation and often romanticising of an idea of history-in-the-present that creates a non-linear view of compound ‘moments’ which both act and re-enact a sense of identity and positioning in the present.

In this way, rather than a linear history, there are instead many ‘histories’ of the complex phenomenon of tarantism, and the past and present are combined in both the writings about it, and the embodiment of its performance in each of these ‘moments in time and place.’

Ritual and performance in anthropology, sociology and performance studies

Ritual performances have often been an object of study within the fields of anthropology, history, sociology, and cultural studies. The vast variety of methodological and theoretical frameworks found within these writings can offer much useful information and understanding of the function and process of these types of performances within a culture. However, over the past forty years scholars and practitioners working within the field of performance itself have also been examining these phenomena within the developing area of performance studies, sometimes in various forms of collaboration with the other disciplines. What this has highlighted is a difficulty within the social sciences of finding ways of approaching rituals as acts of performance: live events which operate in a specific time and place through the presence and embodiment of those taking part. This notion of embodiment — of body as process rather than object — is one that has, until relatively recently, been largely overlooked within the fields of anthropology and sociology, and indeed even performance studies. It is my intention to examine the process of embodiment and a sense of presence in tarantism and neo-tarantism, which connects the past and present, history and ethnography. This will explore how ideas relating to the body and performance have been utilized as a means to expound on the particular views of each writer in their own context through history, leading to a shifting discourse of appropriation, distortion, and often a silencing of the voices of the subjects being discussed. Naturally, I have to declare my own positioning within this as being yet another in the line to re-frame tarantism and pizzica through a different lens, but it is my hope that this focus may complement and further the writings on the subject within the fields of history, biomedicine and anthropology.

Since the influence of anthropology and sociology has been so significant in the development of performance studies as a discipline, this section will examine a selection of these writings in relation to ritual, performance and the body, to address some of the advantages of and limitations to the confluence of dialogues that have operated between the disciplines, leading to mutual borrowings of ideas, terminology and metaphor within both a blurring and defining of the boundaries between the fields. The vast array of writings on ritual performances within the field of anthropology and more recently ethnology and ethnography reflect shifts in methodologies and thinking about cultures, behaviors, identities and practices, defining and redefining what people do, and why they do it.

There has been a tendency through much of this writing to focus on analysis through a representational approach to performance which does not necessarily include an understanding of its nature as performance, and that it is through the experience of the action of the performer that the effects of the ritual, in whatever form, may be actualized. However, as anthropologist Edward Schieffelin indicates, there has been a change in the anthropological study of ritual, by which he refers to the broader concept of 'cultural performance' offered by Milton Singer (Schieffelin, 1996: 84, n. 1), from 'seeing these kinds of enactments in terms of structures of representation to seeing them as processes of practice and performance' (ibid.: 59). Bruce Kapferer, writing on Sinhalese exorcism rites, states that anthropologists 'have given insufficient attention to the significance of aesthetic form in ritual' (Kapferer, 1991: 245-6). However, moving beyond aesthetic form, there has been less attention to the nature of performance as embodied action and presence. Schieffelin highlights a potential reason for this lack:

The performative perspective is also fundamentally concerned with something anthropologists have always found elusive and hard to deal with: the creation of presence. Performances — whether ritual or dramatic — create and make present realities vivid enough to beguile, amuse or terrify. They alter moods, attitudes, social states and states of mind. Unlike texts, however, they are ephemeral; they create their effects and then are gone, leaving their reverberations (fresh insights, reconstituted selves, new statuses, altered realities) behind them. It is the process of 'performativity creating reality' found in many events of interest to anthropologists, that has become increasingly a focus of attention. (Schieffelin, 1996: 59-60) Although Schieffelin opens up this significant question, he does not fully address it in his highly interesting investigation of ‘failure’ within ritual performance. He attributes the failure of the medium Aiba during a séance among the Kaluli people of Papua New Guinea in 1976 to a lack of performance skills. Schieffelin's description of Aiba's shortcomings is based on his observation of external factors, such as Aiba's inability to engage with the audience through his lack of range in singing and movement. Schieffelin compares Aiba to the shaman Walia, who was able to 'attract and hold the audience's interest, [which] enabled him to create and dominate the performative space much more skilfully and less heavy-handedly than Aiba' (ibid.: 78).

Schieffelin's approach in attempting to base his analysis on performance experience is flawed, as it focuses more on the reading of texts rather than understanding the process of embodiment and transformation. Reading skills as text does not necessarily offer a full understanding of the performance event or the real ability of the subject to create the intended effect.

A highly skilled performer does not necessarily equate to an effective performance. Some of the Salentines who were critical of the 'concert' performances of pizzica, preferred the 'amateurs' playing and dancing in the ronde on the streets, saying that this is the 'real' pizzica because they were feeling the music and dance inside. They believed that 'professional' performers did not have the same connection, even if they appeared more technically accomplished.

The efficacy of a tarantata undergoing the ritual of tarantism lies in her embodied experience of and engagement with the process of the dancing in the specific socio-cultural context. Certainly, the musicians need to have a level of skill and sensitivity in finding the appropriate song for her and performing it in a way that enables her to dance for as long as needed. However, this is not about 'technique' but rather again an internal connection with the music which is communicated through their playing to the tarantata. There is more to "Embodying Pasts and Presence" than an ability in skills as such, but Schieffelin was not able to fully address this. It may well be the case that Aiba was less effective in creating a performance that engaged the audience, thus leading to a culture-specific sense of "failure" in terms of the séance, but there are perhaps other ways, or a broader framework, to approach asking why this happened than in the reading of a set of skills.

Thomas Csordas acknowledges that a synthetic approach to performance [...] offers analytic purchase on experiential specificity by allowing us to ask in what manner participants in religious healing become existentially engaged in the healing process. Performance thus invites us — though we do not yet always accept the invitation — to go beyond the sequence of action and the organization of text to the phenomenology of healing and being healed. (Csordas, 1996: 94)

Despite these issues, anthropology has clearly played an important part in the research and examination of cultural performances, and the two-way flow between anthropology and other social sciences, and performance studies, has offered a significant contribution to the development of these fields. Marvin Carlson, writing on performance studies, notes that the "field of anthropology has been a particularly rich source for the discussion of performance in recent years" (Carlson, 2004: 12). Even if, as Csordas suggests, the "invitation" from performance has proved a challenge for anthropologists, a desire to understand the efficacy of a ritual performance through its nature as performance is seen increasingly as having greater importance, particularly in the field of medical anthropology.

Two of the key influences on the emergence of performance studies as a discipline in the United States came from the social sciences of anthropology (most particularly Victor Turner), and sociology (Erving Goffman on the presentation of the self, and role-play, Gregory Bateson on play and games, and later Judith Butler on performativity, amongst others). Turner's notions on the liminal and "social drama" as well as his collaborations with theatre practitioner Richard Schechner, who is usually attributed as one of the main influences of the founding of performance studies as a theoretical discipline (ibid.: 17), have been well documented (Turner, 1982). Turner's symbolic approach to the organizational structure of ritual performance, and his interest in play, became a fundamental model for Schechner during the 1960s and 1970s. Schechner was also greatly influenced by the work of Erving Goffman, particularly during the 1970s. Goffman's significant contribution within the field of sociology has been through his discussion of the performative nature of social behavior, and the notion of "role-play, presentation of the self, and the interaction between "performer" and "audience". Thus the notion of "performance" is removed from its place in relation to a specific cultural event, and is instead situated in any and all activities of social life, examining how the "self" is presented and played as a "role" in any given moment (see Goffman, 1955 and 1956 for an elaboration of these ideas). Goffman's use of metaphors taken from performance, such as "actor; "role", "setting", "stage props, etc. "The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:"

The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

, has now become established as a practice amongst many sociologists and also anthropologists, who use this kind of language from performance to discuss their social subjects and their practices. Goffman’s sociological approach also had a strong influence on performance studies which was ‘at least equal to, and perhaps even greater than Turner’s in the anthropological study of performance’ (Carlson, 2004: 32). It is interesting to see that today the metaphors from performance are often used very freely within the social sciences, to the extent that looking at this from the perspective of performance studies can lead to a sense of frustration. Is everybody really an ‘actor’? Is it appropriate to use this terminology in the context of ‘everyday life’, with all its socio-cultural complexities? Carlson questions this in relation to Goffman’s definition of performance, as “all the activity of an individual which occurs during a period marked by his continuous presence before a particular set of observers and which has been some influence on the observers” (ibid.: 35, citing Goffman, 1959: 22). He states that it ‘is important, however, to note that even this seemingly very general and calculatedly neutral definition reflects certain assumptions and biases’ (ibid.: 35). From the perspective of a field which is attempting to address complicated questions of performance and presence, the way that these metaphors are used can at times seem to offer a somewhat superficial understanding of the nature of performance, still not fully encompassing the embodied experience of the process.

Within ritual performance, it can certainly be the case that these metaphors may be used in a blurring of boundaries between performance and social behavior, protagonist and actor. During the 1960s in America and Europe, there was a great increase in the interest of these phenomena by both those working on cultural performances within academia, and also by theatre, dance and performance practitioners, who sought to bridge a gap between ritual and theatrical performance. This complicated history involved a dialogue with anthropology and ethnology, as well as sociology, cultural and folk studies, and psychology, all of which left an imprint on the theoretical development of performance studies, which still utilizes these other disciplines as a means of articulating performance practices.

Performance practitioners who began to explore and use ritual within their work included Jerzy Grotowski, Eugenio Barba, and Peter Brook in Europe, all of whom were influenced by the writings of Antonin Artaud, while in America, as part of the dynamic avant-garde performance movement, there were practitioners such as Schechner and Joseph Chaikin in theatre, and Anna Halprin in dance. In part, this was fueled by an increasing interest in, and awareness of, performance forms from Asia such as Kathakali from India, Noh and Kabuki theatre from Japan, and Peking Opera from China, which encompass ritual elements in various ways. This play between ritual and theatre meant that at times the ‘actor’s experience was described as analogous to possession rituals and shamanistic journey which evoke imagined truths in the experienced immediacy of performance, thereby making them “real”. Actors were encouraged to see themselves as shamans’ (Kendall, 1996: 19). This process was not without its own issues, not the least of which was a tendency towards a ‘mystification’ of the actor’s experience; the accusation of appropriation of performance forms, aesthetics and training practices from other cultures; and an interest, sometimes at a superficial level, in spiritual traditions, particularly from Asia, which were drawn into an attempt at the blurring between______ This was also bound up with the connection between past and present, with the identification of the roots of theatre originating within ritual. David George points out that it is because textbooks tell us so, that '[e]veryone knows the theatre originated out of ritual' (George, 1998: 1), citing from Phyllis Hartnoll's Concise History of Theatre: "The origins of thea- tre go back far into the past, to the religious rites of the earliest communities" (Hartnoll, 1967: 7, in ibid.: 1). This, George goes on to discuss, highlights some of the problems linked to the notion of 'origins, which can lead to an over-simplification and evolutionist view of the development of the range of types of performance practices around the world and, harking back to the earlier problematising by Kaeppler, a linear approach to history:

The relationship between ritual and theatre has traditionally been approached historically — the former identified as preceding and (it is argued, 'therefore') being the source/origin of the latter. Much in this approach may be objected to on methodological grounds - its 'fallacy of emergence', its cultural universalism, porous causalities, and — not least — the evidence that the sequence depends in the end on ideological assumptions. (ibid.: 12)

The desire to connect to a sense of 'roots' and 'origin' in theatre can lead to a romanticising of both actor-as-shaman, and theatre-as-ritual, which blurs the distinction of motivation between these types of practices. However, it has also led to constructive and innovative developments in the fields of performance which can offer great possibilities towards understanding the efficacious potential of the experience of the performative nature of ritual. Some practitioners have used ritual as a means of creating different performance forms, particularly through the idea of 'participatory' performance (Grotowski, Halprin, Nicholas Nufiez), where the relationship of performer-spectator is altered, leading to a greater sense of 'communitas, to use Turner's expression. In addition, the line between what may be considered to be 'art', and 'life' also became less distinct, seen, for example, in the Life/Art Process developed by Halprin at the Talmapa Institute in California which sought to 'investigate the complex and potentially transformative relationship between artistic expression and life experience' (Worth and Poynor, 2004: 35).

It is also certainly important to acknowledge the difference in intention between an actor or dancer on stage, and a participant in a ritual performance with a focus on efficacy through culturally determined practices. However, even though this intention — the motivation, choice of process, and desired outcome — may be different, there are experiential qualities inherent within theatrical or dance performance that may be useful as a way of approaching the experience within ritual performance, bearing in mind its nature as an act of performance, of engaging in an embodied action to create a process of transformation within the bodymind and socio-cultural space. This may be helpful, particularly as a means to address Schieffelin's concern stated earlier about anthropologists' problems with approaching the 'creation of presence' (Schieffelin, 1996: 59). Theatre practitioner Michael Chekhov, speaking on the motivation for acting, suggests that the desire for characterisation is actually the desire for transformation (Chekhov, 1996: Tape 1). The process of the actor playing an 'other' is one of the transformation of the bodymind in the space of the stage during the time-frame of the performance. The actor's desire to experience this transformation of 'self' leads them to engage in the activity of creating and playing a character. For actor Yoshi Oida, "you are completely yourself and at the same time you are aware of watching yourself" (Oida and Marshall, 1997: 18).

For Konstantin Stanislavsky, an inspiration for many practitioners such as Chekhoy, Grotowski, and Barba, there is a unity of actor and character, developed through what he calls the 'creative state'. He describes this state using the Russian term 'ja esm,' or 'I am Being.' According to Jean Benedetti, "[t]his is a case of Stanislavski inventing or rather revising a lost word. The verb 'to be' now only exists in Russian in the infinitive, 'est.' Stanislavski uses the first person singular, 'ja esm,' which no one would normally use. 'I am being' is a way of conveying this unusual message" (Benedetti, 1998: 6, fn.).

This state of 'I am Being' is the 'actor's sense of being fully present in the dramatic moment. A term that functions in the System as a synonym for "experiencing" (Carnicke, 1998: 174). Through development of both outer action and inner life, the actor can, as Benedetti suggests, enter into a heightened, creative state of being:

"By following this process methodically I become involved in the action. The situations take on a reality for me, I believe in them, my mind begins to accept them as true. There comes a point when the borderline between me and the 'character' is blurred. I am in the state Stanislavski called 'I am Being' At that point a kind of creative spontaneity occurs. The subconscious takes over. I behave with the same immediacy as I do in life but with the difference that my behaviour is selective, shaped, aesthetic and transparent." (Benedetti, 1998: 9)

The state of 'I am Being' of experiencing and 'being fully present in the dramatic moment' may begin to offer a way into questioning the notions of liveness and presence that for Schieffelin can be a stumbling block for anthropologists. This sense of presence is significant for ritual performances, which need to take account of how to make present, and to be present, in the specific time and place of the performative act. This is present-ing rather than representing or representation, which is the way that ritual has often been discussed by social scientists. Present-ing, being present, is not representing something, but is rather being. This sense of 'I am Being, of being fully present in the moment, can offer a useful way to approach complex concepts such as 'trance' found within cultural performances, and important within a study of the phenomenon of tarantism. The notion of ‘trance’ is a vastly complex area of study, and while acknowledging the difference in intention and process between ritual and theatrical performance, and the danger of correlating actor with shaman, there is a value in examining the trance state through performance and theatre studies to offer an embodied approach to understanding the experience of performance.

Trance is defined as an altered state of consciousness that consists of a deep absorption leading to a dissolution of subject/object duality, and a ‘forgetting’ or ‘removal from’ an everyday awareness of ‘self’. Bruce Kapferer states that trance is "the dissolution of any subject/object distinction. [...] A process is established in which there is a loss of a distance between the ‘T’ and the ‘me’" (Kapferer, 1991: 269, 275). For psychologist David Wulff, trance "should be understood to refer to a state of profound absorption or lack of mental content during which the individual is experientially cut off from the outside world" (Wulff, 2004: 399).

Within tarantism, the subject experiencing both the ‘illness’ of the condition and the ‘cure’ of the dance is often described as being in a state of trance. Performers and musicians today describe the experiential quality of performance, offering a similar description of the process:

"When you let go of your hand, the tambourine starts playing, when you let go of your voice, the song starts singing; and when you let go of your body the pizzica starts dancing. [...] Even I find myself asking myself at times how I managed to reach a certain rhythm, how I managed to hit the tambourine so strongly without my hand feeling anything." (informants’ accounts in Liidtke, 2005: 37)

It is important to acknowledge that these types of experiences, whether in the context of a healing ritual or concert performance, are culturally determined, and the specific nature of the experience will be particular to the individual depending on their bodymind condition and their socio-cultural positioning and heritage. As Liidtke points out:

"Just as the efficacy of tarantism rituals cannot be reduced to the impact of music and dance alone, without reference to the larger historical, cultural and spiritual context within which this tradition was embedded, the effect of ‘neo-tarantism’ performances cannot be reduced to the notes and steps of the pizzica." (ibid.: 52)

This is of immense importance in the dialogue between performance and anthropology. It is necessary to have an anthropological approach that examines the particular cultural circumstances that create the specific nature of the experience in the context in which it occurs. Performing pizzica music and dance will not produce the same type of experience for everyone, and the significance of the ‘larger historical, cultural and spiritual context’ is vital to avoid reducing the experience to being "the same" across all cultures and forms. This is the potential danger within performance studies when discussing these experiences without reference to the specific historical and socio-cultural determinants of the individual. However, anthropologists have tended to omit examination of the experiential nature of the performance itself, in terms of its nature as performance, which includes the embodied experience of ‘presence’ and ‘liveness’ in the action of the performance. In approach­ing "trance" as a performance and theater studies concept, one can examine the embodiment and experiential aspects. This book focuses on the ritual of tarantism and contemporary performances of pizzica in Salento, but the nature of subject-object dissolution and "forgetting of self" in performance provides a helpful examination.

In the quoted text by Liidtke's informants, the experience demonstrated was a "letting go" of the sense of "doing" within the action of performance, leading to the dance dancing and the song singing without the "I" of the performer "doing" the dance or the song. This experience has often been viewed as an "ideal" or "optimum" state by performers, and training methods have been developed to attempt reaching this state during performance.

Stanislavsky used the term "I am being" to describe the process of being fully involved in the moment of the action, leading to a state of merging actor and character, or self and other, and being fully present with complete bodymind attention and absorption in the here-and-now moment on stage. Carnicke states that Stanislavsky describes this state as "experiencing": "He compares it to the sensation of existing fully within the immediate moment — what he calls 'Iam' and what Western actors generally call 'moment-to-moment' work. [...] [It is] the term he chooses to describe what actors feel when his 'entire set of exercises' successfully releases their full creative potentials'" (Carnicke, 2000: 17, and 1998: 107).

The Russian word for "experiencing" is perezhivanie, from perezhit, meaning "living through." Carnicke explains that there have been problems with this word being translated into English by Elizabeth Hapgood as "feeling" or "to feel," instead of "to experience." It is not about feelings in terms of emotions, but instead the experience is a complete psychophysical engagement with the action, the "actor's deep concentration on stage and absorption in the events of the play during the performance" (Carnicke, 1998: 110).

To experience is to live, to be present, to be fully in the moment. This experience of presence or "living through" occurs in a psycho-physical unity, that is, a state where body and mind operate together. Carnicke points out that the "first and most pervasive of [his essential ideas] is Stanislavsky's holistic belief that mind and body represent a psy-chophysical continuum" (Carnicke, 2000: 16).

Likewise, for his student Michael Chekhov, who developed his own system of bodymind exercises for the actor: "All our physical exercises will be considered and done as psychophysical exercises. We want to fill, to permeate our bodies with psychological values. Therefore, while doing all our bodily exercises, it is good to have in mind this side of the exercise. [...] Everything like the development of our imagination or using of the psychological gesture, all such means makes physical exercises to psychophysical." (Chekhov, 1996: Tape 4)

This unity of body and mind is of importance in the ritual of tarantism, with an understanding of the ways in which the music and dance operate on and through both mind and body to effect a psychophysical transformation. It is through this type of transformation that Chekhoy believes that the performer can reach a state of "creative inspiration," which is a loss of the sense of "me doing this," but instead the performance is being performed, without the performer trying to "do" it, achieved through the complete absorption and engagement with the image through the embodied action. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi uses the term 'flow' to describe a state of consciousness where one becomes totally absorbed in what one is doing, to the exclusion of all other thoughts and emotions. This harmonious experience involves a mind and body working together effortlessly, leaving the person feeling that something special has occurred. (Csikszentmihalyi and Jackson, 1990: 5)

The idea of the 'flow state' can be connected to the subject-object dissolution found within definitions of trance. This experience can be seen in the late Formula One driver Ayrton Senna's description of taking pole position at the Monaco Grand Prix in 1988: "I suddenly realized I was no longer driving the car consciously. I was kind of driving it by instinct, only I was in a different dimension. [...] It frightened me because it was well beyond my conscious understanding" (in Moran, 1996: 74).

This relaxed yet dynamic state of 'effortless effort' can be experienced during performance, where the everyday self-consciousness of the performer is 'forgotten' in the moment of absorption in the action of the performance. The experience of self-awareness and absorption with the embodied skills resulting from training can lead to a 'forgetting' of the self in the action of the performance, manifesting the dissolution of any sense of duality between 'self' and 'world.'

Roberto Raheli, a Salentine musician, explained the experience as follows: "In my experience, I can say that when we play the pizzica tarantata in concert, at times we are captured by the music. But a spider did not bite us and we are not ill due to sarantismo. Yet sometimes our minds go to strange places and we forget we are performing in a concert" (Raheli, 2005: 127).

Raheli emphasized the importance of both 'inner' and 'outer' in understanding the particular experience that is taking place. He stated that it is essential to operate from within a Salentine mentalité, as it is this Salentine world-view that precedes the music and makes it possible. Technically sophisticated musicians may play a form of this music, but without this deep understanding, they will never be capable of playing it properly. Raheli concluded that without this understanding, all one can play is the music of the pizzica tarantata, but never the Pizzica Tarantata. (ibid.: 128)

This statement is bound up with notions of personal and collective identity in relation to contemporary performances of pizzica, which will be explored in Chapter Four. However, it is important to acknowledge, as Liidtke stated previously, that the socio-cultural context is vital in understanding the particular nature of the experience. This also needs to be seen within the realm of the experiential potential of performance to lead to a 'forgetting of the self' and psychophysical transformation through an embodied engagement with the action. The themes of embodiment, with both body and 'self' as process rather than object, and a unification of 'inner' and 'outer', of the lived experience and socio-cultural environment, have been examined through performance and theatre studies to reveal how the notions of presence and embodied action may be understood in relation to tarantism and pizzica in this study.

The interconnection between performance studies and the social sciences noted earlier can offer a fuller way of approaching these themes, and the next section will investigate a selection of theories from anthropology and sociology which have similarly addressed issues of embodiment and experience, which will be woven together to present an analysis of an ethnographic 'moment' that demonstrates the complex interaction that results in the embodied experience of a cultural performance in a specific spatial-temporal location.

Body, 'self' and process in/as performance
The notions of 'presence' and 'liveness' within performance inherently involve examining the processes of the body, and embodiment of action which leads to a transformation of 'self' and environment in the 'moment' of the performance. However, questions of the body and embodiment have been largely overlooked in the social sciences, and indeed performance studies, until the last few decades. This is due in part to problems concerning language, particularly finding ways to verbally articulate an experience which happens and is understood through the body.

According to Farnell:

Scholars suggest that the curiously disembodied view of human beings that until recently has permeated the social sciences is due to a longstanding bias against the body in that tradition of thought we call Western (i.e. European and European derived). This precluded social theorists from attending to physical being and bodily actions in their definitions of social action. (Farnell, 1999: 345)

In part this has been due to Cartesian dualities of mind and body, and more recently, as Farnell points out, a Darwinian understanding of the verbal and written as being 'real' knowledge, and the nonverbal as part of our evolutionary past, which 'has produced a radical disjunction between verbal and so-called nonverbal aspects of communication in our meta-linguistic discourse' (ibid.: 346).

This problematic issue of language has been discussed by Penelope Gouk in relation to the work of Stephen Friedson examining music and trance in Tumbuka healing, and Cheryce Kramer's study of the use of music in nineteenth-century German psychiatry, where she suggests that [for the communities which Friedson and Kramer are describing, the only viable way of grasping the connection between music and healing is through embodied knowledge; that is a way of knowing expressed through bodily actions rather than discursive speech. Long accepted in anthropological discourse, this performative dimension of human understanding has recently come to the attention of sociologists and historians interested in the 'tacit' skills which are constitutive of scientific and medical knowledge. In trying to analyse such skills, they are confronting exactly the same problem encountered with musical healing: that is, the struggle to translate non-verbal and embodied practices into suitably academic language. As scientists probe deeper into space and explore the human body, they too are accepting the limits of rational analysis and seeking alternative modes of understanding. (Gouk, 2000a: 22) This challenge of finding language to discuss the process of ‘knowing’ through the body has been part of the development of performance studies. Zarrilli points out the need to examine language and assumptions behind it in discourses about acting:

Too often, when we think and talk about acting, we do not examine our language or the assumptions that lie behind it. [...] Languages of acting, like other propositional modes of linguistic construction, mark not only their positionality and ideology but also their referential, signifying nature. (Zarrilli, 1995: 8, 9)

As well as language, there are concerns with finding appropriate theoretical frameworks. Chris Shilling states that there have been two main theoretical threads in approaching the body within sociology since the 1980s. One focuses on the external environment, or the place of social action (e.g., Bryan Turner drawing on the work of Hobbes, Talcott and Foucault). The other focuses on the internal environment, where the body is central (e.g., Arthur Frank and Thomas Csordas, drawing on phenomenology and existentialism). Shilling suggests that it has proved difficult to bring these two environments together in an interconnected theoretical approach.

Shilling himself has attempted to incorporate the two in his fascinating and unusual use of pragmatism, which he develops from the work of the Chicago School of Sociology in the early twentieth century, as a theoretical framework to examine identity and transformation through the body. He utilises pragmatism due to its recognition and explorations of the distinctive properties of, and the dynamic relationship that exists between, the external and internal environments of human action. This tradition of inquiry can also inform substantive studies of embodied subjects in their social and material contexts, as evident in the work of the Chicago School, thus helping to address the relative lack of empirically informed work in the field of body studies. (Shilling, 2008: 3)

As stated previously, the interconnection between embodied experience and socio-cultural environment is of major significance in the study of tarantism and pizzica. Shilling's work has proved useful in offering a framework within sociology. However, I disagree that Csordas was working only within the realm of the internal environment as Shilling suggests. Instead, in accordance with Deirdre Sklar, I would contend that Csordas 'weaves together Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenological analysis of perceptual processes and Pierre Bourdieu’s socio-political analysis of collective practice. Csordas recognises that the phenomenologist’s “lived experience” is never merely individual and subjective, but develops as relational and cultural constructions in social space. He understands that the sociologist’s “practice” is not only a collective sedimentation passed on through generations but an opportunity for individuality, agency, and somatic awareness' (Sklar, 2006: 100). In this way, Csordas has developed an approach that combines the lived experience of the body with an interconnected relationship to the socio-cultural environment. In his influential essay from 1990, ‘Embodiment as a Paradigm for Anthropology,’ Csordas' approach to embodiment "begins from the methodological postulate that the body is not an object to be studied in relation to culture, but is to be considered as the subject of culture [and so] the body is a productive starting point for analyzing culture and self" (Csordas, 1990: 5).

Drawing on Merleau-Ponty's ideas of perception, and Bordieu's discourse of practice, Csordas states that there needs to be a "collapsing of dualities," including those between subject and object, and of the body-mind itself. He proposes that the body is "non-dualistic, that is, not distinct from or in interaction with an opposed principle of mind" (ibid.: 8). He develops this further in his 1993 essay ‘Somatic Modes of Attention,’ which begins with the statement: "Embodiment as a paradigm or methodological orientation requires that the body be understood as the existential ground of culture — not as an object that is 'good to think,' but as a subject that is 'necessary to be'" (Csordas, 1993: 135).

He draws a distinction between body and embodiment, which he likens to Barthes' distinction of word and text: the body is a biological, material entity, while embodiment can be understood as an indeterminate methodological field defined by perceptual experience and mode of presence and engagement in the world. As applied to anthropology, the model of the text means that cultures can be understood, for purposes of internal and comparative analysis, to have properties similar to texts (Ricoeur 1979). In contrast, the paradigm of embodiment means not that cultures have the same structure as bodily experience, but that embodied experience is the starting point for analyzing human participation in a cultural world. (ibid.: 135)

Csordas stresses the importance of attention, in Merleau-Ponty's terms, to the experiences of embodiment, and that the processes of attention themselves also require investigation. He describes these processes using the term 'somatic modes of attention, which he defines as being 'culturally elaborated ways of attending to and with one's body in surroundings that include the embodied presence of others' (ibid.: 138).

As with Shilling, there are aspects of Csordas' work that are useful to draw on for the purposes of this study, including the unification of body and mind, the combination of lived experience and socio-political environment and analysis, the use of modes of attention, and embodiment as process, rather than body as object, which reflect those discussed previously through performance studies. To connect these theories, I suggest that a way of approaching embodiment and presence within performance is to see the body in terms of being process rather than object. It is this process that leads to the sense of embodiment, which contains within it the lived experience of the body, as well as identity of the 'self,' and socio-cultural positionings. However, not only is the body seen to be a process rather than object, leading to the paradigm of embodiment, but the nature of performance itself can likewise be understood as process rather than object. Body, performance, and indeed the sense of 'self' are, by nature, in continual emergence, rather than being fixed objects. It is this process of emergence that gives rise to the potential for transformation and efficacy, as well as presence, within performance. The understanding of performance as process is connected to the notions of the ‘presence’ and ‘liveness’ of the performer. The term ‘presence’ has been a much contested area within the field of performance, with continuing debates over what this might actually mean. As a succinct approach to understanding presence as a quality, Allain and Harvie in The Routledge Companion to Theatre and Performance state simply that this is ‘where the performer appears to be notably focused or “in the moment” (Allain and Harvie, 2006: 193). As well as the performer being present, the performance itself can also be understood to be ‘present’ in that it is made present ‘in the moment’ through the manifestation and embodiment of the performer. For David George, ‘A performer exists only and ever in time. It is therefore always about “presence, presentness and presenting”’ (George, 1999: 14, citing R. Corrigan, The World of the Theatre, Glenview IL, 1979: 24). Peggy Phelan points to the ‘eternal presence’ of performance, in that it is ‘[p]oised forever at the threshold of the present’ (Phelan, 1993: 27). It can only exist in its moment of performance, due to its nature of ‘liveness’; therefore, performance ‘continually marks the perceptual disappearance of its own enactment. [...] Performance’s only life is in the present’ (ibid.: 115, 146). In its ever-present and non-fixable nature, performance can be seen as event and process, rather than object, as Nathalie Crohn-Schmitt states, ‘performance makes clear its nature as event rather than object’ (Crohn Schmitt, 1990: 231-4). Furthermore, as in the discussion of history and ethnography, the past and present are interconnectedly manifested through the bodymind of the performer in the event of the performance, thus performance itself also becomes a manifestation of past and present in the process of the moment. The performer embodies their own cultural past and present, and thus as Csordas suggests, becomes the subject rather than object of culture. As stated previously, the body is both inscribed with a culture through conditioned habitual patterns, but also itself inscribes the culture through the liveness of the performance process. Thus it is not just about the embodiment of culture, but embodiment as culture. This embodiment of the past is itself a complicated issue. Buckland suggests that "It can be argued that dance has a particular propensity to foreground cultural memory as embodied practice by virtue of its predominantly somatic modes of transmission. Indeed in traditional forms of danced display, it could be argued that longevity of human memory is publicly enacted, demonstrating the ethereality of human existence and the continuity of human experience, as successive generations re-present the dancing." (Buckland, 2001: 1) She also points out that ‘[n]ot all traditional forms of dance ceremony can be interpreted in this way’ (ibid.: 1), and in the discussion of neo-tarantism in Chapter Four, what will be seen are ways in which this embodied culture is not necessarily a direct linear transmission of a form, but rather ‘more often than not a speculation often accompanied by inter-connected assertions of ancientness, purity, legitimacy and evolutionist notions of pagan origins’ (ibid.: 1). Once again, the compound ‘moment of the present’ encompasses the pasts in complex ways. The live presence of the performer connects the inner and outer, past and present, the lived experience of the body with the socio-cultural-political positionings in which the performer is situated, revealing how these mutually generate each other. Csordas’ view on this phenomenological ‘attention’ and engagement leads to an awareness of the interconnection of both the internal processes of the body, and the external surrounding situations:

"Because attention implies both sensory engagement and an object, we must emphasize that our working definition [of somatic modes of attention] refers both to attending ‘with’ and attending ‘to’ the body. To attend to a bodily sensation is not to attend to the body as an isolated object, but to attend to the body’s situation in the world. The sensation engages something in the world because the body is ‘always already in the world’ Attention Zo a bodily sensation can thus become a mode of attending to the intersubjective milieu that give rise to that sensation. [...] A notion of somatic mode of attention broadens the field in which we can look for phenomena of perception and attention, and suggests that attending to one’s body can tell us something about the world and others who surround us. (Csordas, 1993: 138-9)"

Shilling’s use of pragmatism likewise acknowledges that the central focus of the body also encompasses the external world:

"[Pragmatism recognises] action was undertaken by individuals always already within a social and natural context yet possessed of emergent capacities and needs that distinguish them from, and also enabled them to shape actively, their wider milieu. In this context, action, experience, and identity arise from the ongoing interaction and transactions that occur between the internal environment of the embodied organism and its external social and physical environment. [...] Thus pragmatism’s insistence on the human potential to ‘make a difference’ turns what sociologists have sometimes treated as exclusively socially determined organisms into phenomenologically aware, active body-subjects whose corporeal properties enable them to intervene creatively in the world. At the same time, pragmatism’s recognition that embodied actions are shaped in part by the distinctive properties of the social and natural world also avoids the dangers of viewing actions as emanating from monadic subjects who are hermetically sealed from other people and from the material contexts in which they live. (Shilling, 2008: 4)"

What can be observed through these theoretical frameworks is the potential of the bodymind in the action of performance, when engaged with the use of awareness of both the internal processes of the bodymind and in relation to the surrounding socio-cultural positionings and relations to the world, to effect a transformation of bodymind and ‘self’ through the lived presence of the performer in the specific time and space of the performance. This interconnected relationship between ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ can be seen to operate both ways. Not only is the bodymind transformed in relation to the outer environment, but also the surrounding environment can be transformed by the presence of the action within it. Thus the space of the performance is as much in a state of process, rather than object, as is the performer and performance, and indeed these are mutually generative of each other and the overall experience. A particular site or place can contain within it multiple readings and meanings relating to personal, social, and political identity, depending on the presence — or presences — of the nature of the embodied actions being performed within it. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

These theories have examined the interconnection between ‘inner’ and ‘outer’; how shifts in bodymind actions create shifts in the nature of the space and vice versa; and also that there can be multiple performances, sometimes in apparent conflict, operating together in multiple spaces with different experiences of embodiment. In order to examine these in relation to tarantism and pizzica, I here discuss an ethnographic ‘moment’ of the celebrations for the festival of St Peter and St Paul in the town of Galatina as I experienced them on 28 and 29 June 2008. This ‘moment’ lasted for a period of twelve hours, during which the particular site of the Piazza San Pietro contained shifting patterns and identities of sacred and secular per- formances which both informed and were formed by the psychophysical actions and transformations of those taking part in a range of activities. This ‘moment’ demonstrates the way in which history was made present in the lived experience of the embodied actions and reactions within the space. These performance activities generated spaces or sites of contesta- tion of ideology and practice which shifted and transformed throughout the ‘moment; within both the space of the bodies within the Piazza, and the range of geographical spaces and configurations created and re-created through the embodied actions.

Embodying Pasts and Presence 65

Galatina lies approximately 21 km south of the Salentine capital of Lecce, and was formerly part of the area known as the Grecia Salentina, or the Greek region of Salento which was referred to in the Introduction. It has a strong connection to tarantism due to the small chapel of St Paul in the corner of the Piazza San Pietro, which also contains the large church dedicated to St Peter and St Paul, known as the ‘Mother Church’ The affiliation of St Paul with tarantism will be discussed more fully in Chapter Two. But for present purposes, and as was mentioned in the Introduction, St Paul is historically the patron saint of the tarantati, who are both pos- sessed and cured by him, and after being healed may make a pilgrimage to the chapel in Galatina to give thanks and leave an offering. From the eighteenth century, the annual recurrence of the symptoms of the condi- tion would often happen around the time of his feast day, and the tarantati would travel to the chapel to re-enact the ritual, and then celebrate mass in the church. Due to this association, the festival is often attended by those interested in the phenomenon of tarantism, as well as those coming for the religious events or the market which is set up throughout the main streets of the town. The fame of the festival was greatly increased through De Martino’s book La terra del rimorso and the documentary film La Taranta (1961) which captured dramatic scenes of the tarantate (the film focused mainly on women) dancing within the chapel and square outside. The instances of tarantate returning to the chapel in this way have declined in recent years,” due partly to the now very small number still left alive, and also because of the feeling amongst some locals that the event has lost much of its spiritual significance. Yet the history and mythology of tarantism still acts as a draw for a range of visitors to the place and time of the festival and, as some of the people I spoke with stated, whether they were locals 7 Local legend states that both St Peter and St Paul stopped off in Galatina on their various travels. St Peter supposedly arrived on his way from Antioch to Rome, evan- gelising the local community in the process. One of the earliest recorded names for the city was 'San Pietro in Galatina'. For an account of some of the events that occurred during the festival in Galatina over the last few decades of the twentieth century, see Di Lecce (1994) and Chiriatti (1995).

During the festival, people from other parts of Italy, journalists, or researchers came to record events, hoping that a 'favantata' might appear. Others, mainly Salentines, said their reasons for attending the festival were for the performances of pizzica music and dance, or to enjoy the market and socialize with friends. Over a 12-hour period, from 7 PM on June 28th to 7 AM on June 29th, the author observed and experienced various performances of pizzica music and dance, as well as other forms of music and cultural performances connected to the church.

Through the evening, the nature of the activities within the space continuously shifted, creating different sites and boundaries that moved and transformed throughout the 'moment.' These sites sometimes conflicted with each other in terms of sacred and secular, private and public, creating a contested space of performance practices embodying different socio-political and cultural ideologies and presences.

The religious aspect of the festival began at approximately 8 PM when the statues of St. Paul and St. Peter were carried out of the main doors of the church, followed by ecclesiastical figures in robes. Crowds surrounded the linear route of the procession on both sides to watch. Once the statues emerged from the church, carried on the shoulders of men, they paused. At this point, the local brass band began playing well-known popular opera tunes, and the bells of the church started ringing at the same time, creating a cacophony of secular and sacred music. When the band finished, the priest chanted the verses of the liturgy for the saints with sung responses, following which the brass band, now part of the procession, struck up again, and they all continued in a straight line with the statues at the head through the Piazza and out into the rest of the town. The processional route went through the main streets, stopping in front of other churches, where prayers were sung, the bells sounded, and the brass band played. The procession of the statues around the town took approximately two hours. Meanwhile, the many thousands of people visiting the festival, including children of all ages, were strolling through the stalls of the market, which extended throughout the center of Galatina. These stalls were selling a wide range of goods, including a large variety of foodstuffs; clothes; toys; household goods; CDs of music; and carvings and knick-knacks from parts of Africa, which were being sold by migrant stall-holders. There were also some items and stalls related to pizzica and tarantism within the space of the Piazza San Pietro. Several elder women were selling the colored ribbons (zacareddhe) which are worn by pizzica musicians and dancers, and often adorn the ¢amburelli, as well as being used to wrap around the pictures of saints such as St. Paul or the Apulian saint Padre Pio, which were mounted on sticks and also sold at these stalls (see Illustration 7 for an example of this type of stall at the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli).

'The significance of the use of both colors and ribbons within tarantism will be discussed in Chapter Two. The chapel of St. Paul was open, and many of the crowd walked into the small space, taking photographs, talking, looking around for glimpses of parts of the building they may have seen in books and films. In front of the chapel was the stall held by musician and dancer Ada Metafune and her husband, the renowned tamburelli maker Biagio Panico, who live in Torrepaduli in the south of Salento, and are both significant figures in the development, study, and practice of traditions of pizzica music and dance within contemporary Salento (see Chapter Four for further reference). The stall sold a selection of Panico's hand-made tamburelli and other instruments, as well as CDs and DVDs by artists within the neo-tarantism movement, such as Officina Zoé, Alla Bua, and Metafune's and Panico's own organization, Novaracne." There were also tambourines and CDs of pizzica music being sold on some of the other stalls in the Piazza, and throughout the town. Many people had come to the festival solely in order to attend the market and buy goods, rather than having a particular interest in the religious rites.

At approximately 10 pm, the procession of the statues returned to the Piazza San Pietro. As it entered the Piazza, there was a firework display, as well as the sound of church bells and the playing of the band, again all taking place at the same time. After some more prayers, the procession re-entered the church, along with the ecclesiastical figures and local dignitaries, to the sound of the band playing the Triumphal March from Verdi's Aida. Soon after this, the concert performance of pizzica music groups commenced on the stage which had been erected to the left of the cathedral (see Illustration 3). The concert consisted of four groups from Salento playing pizzica piz- zica music, finishing with the Tamburellisti di Torrepaduli, one of the most renowned and well-established pizzica groups who were formed in part to conduct ethnomusicological research and performance of local musical traditions. The concert was particularly poignant, as it was also dedicated to the memory of the legendary samburello player Pino Zimba, who had died earlier that year. The concert took place on a fixed stage, erected for the purpose of the festival, with the crowd of spectators watching in an end-on configuration. There was a fluidity of spectators, as people watched for an amount of time and would then leave to wander around the market or go home, and others would arrive to fill their places. As well as playing the music and songs, some of the groups also had dancers who performed pizzica pizzica dance on the stage in front of the musicians. These were most commonly male-female couples, but also some solo female dancers, and for one band, four young girls who danced as a group. These performances appeared mainly choreographed, demonstrating a range of pizzica pizzica steps and movements often with a good degree of technical skill.

For further information, see <http://www.iltamburello.com/>.

70 CHAPTER ONE

The concert finished at 4am. At this point, there were still large crowds of people in the city, but gradually the numbers began to diminish as the market stalls closed. Throughout the night from about 10pm, in addition to the concert, there had been a number of ronde forming in various parts of the Piazza, with musicians playing pizzica pizzica songs, and people stepping into the centre of the circle to dance. After the concert finished, the ronde were concentrated in the area immediately outside the chapel of St Paul. The mainly young people in this area were drinking wine, laughing, talking, and watching or joining in the dancing until 5.30am, when the remaining ronda was stopped by machines arriving to wash the streets. The hundred or so people left were sitting down, or going into the nearby bar for a drink, as gradually others started to arrive to go into the main church for the Mass at 6am.

At 5.40am, a black car drew up in the Piazza and stopped just outside the chapel. The cry went up: a farantata had arrived. There was a sudden swarm of people surrounding the car, many with cameras, trying to see into the windows. A man got out of the car and went to the chapel, but the door had been locked earlier in the night, and was still locked. There was a moment of confusion, until a policeman explained that the door would not be opened until 6am. The man quickly got back into the car, and drove it a little way out of the Piazza, still in view of the crowd. There was outrage amongst many of the people waiting that the woman was not able to go into the chapel. Several shouted out: ‘Open the door! Open the door!’ An atmosphere of tense anticipation came over those waiting, looking towards the car parked nearby. Finally at just before 6am, a man arrived with the keys, accompanied by two policemen. The car reversed back to the chapel, and was again surrounded by people pushing to get a view. The policemen forced a space in the crowd, and together with the woman’s family, quickly got her into the chapel, and closed the door behind. She stayed in there for about ten minutes, and on coming out, was accompanied by some of her family in the walk across the Piazza and into the church for the Mass. There was almost complete silence as she came out, a very small figure swathed in black, looking the size of a child compared to her family (see Illustration 4). After she had disappeared into the church, people began to go into the chapel. There was a great difference in the embodied behaviour in the The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Top right: former farantata entering the church. Bottom left: example of a presentational performance of pizzica dance. Bottom right: example of a participatory performance of pizzica dance in a ronda outside the chapel of St Paul. (Photographs: Jerri Daboo)

The chapel at this point compared to earlier in the evening. Moving into the space of the chapel which the woman had just left, people walked around the small site in silence, gazing about them as if trying to see the effects of what had happened in there, and others were praying in front of the altar. The transformation of the quality of embodied actions in the space, and the shift in the nature of the space itself formed by the presence of the woman who embodied the past, was highly palpable.

The woman had been a farantata in the past when she was younger, and had come to give 72 CHAPTER ONE thanks in the chapel. Some of the people I spoke with afterwards said that they had been moved by seeing a visible reminder of both the suffering which she had endured, and that she was amongst the last remaining Salentine from that era, which had now almost passed, and was soon to be lost for good.

Despite being not as 'dramatic' as some of the appearances by the ¢arantate in previous years, her physical presence, even though in visual terms this was just a glimpse of a black-clad figure, made real for a moment all the histories of tarantism, bound up with the identity of the people and the land.

The complex 'moment' of the twelve hours of the festival in the Piazza San Pietro contained within it contested spaces of embodiment and performance, which were in a state of process, leading to shifts in the experience of space, body, and identity through the many presences that were created by the embodied actions. The seeming conflict between the sacred and the profane was evident throughout the event.

The history of the festival and the connection of St Paul with tarantism, with the enculturation of the Catholic Church with the ritual, was reflected in the multiplicities of actions, sense impressions, and embodiments. The space of the Piazza contained the building of the 'mother church', with its Baroque architecture; the small chapel of St Paul with its associations of the 'pagan' ritual of tarantism; the bandstand; the concert platform, and some market stalls. Each of these sites were embedded with particular associations of religious, cultural or social life, which were reflected in the actions of those within them. But this was not fixed, and shifted in relation to the changing activities which occurred over the time period.

When the procession passed through the centre of the Piazza, many of the people lined on either side crossed themselves as the statues passed them, whilst also taking photographs. Once the procession had passed, the same space became filled with actions of socialising, drinking and buying goods from the market. There was a continual shift in the configurations of the activities, with the movement of people who were watching the concert performance, and a shift of the formation, size and dynamics of the ronde which were formed, then dissolved when the musicians were tired, and then re-formed when the next musicians began to play.

Embodying Pasts and Presence 73 The aural sphere was often a site of contestation, with the church bells and brass band sounding together in a sensory multiplicity of sacred and secular. It was possible to stand either in front of the concert platform, or the ronde at the opposite corner of the Piazza, and hear the spill of music from the other infiltrating the space of each performance mode. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Outside the chapel of St. Paul in the early hours of the morning, the smell of spilled wine overwhelmed that of the food from the market stalls and the incense from the church. Inside the chapel of St. Paul after the tarantata had left, and people were praying and responding to the space with a much greater sense of the sacred, the sound of the samburelli still playing outside became part of the sensory experience. The movements of the pizzica pizzica dance occurring on the concert platform and the ronde in front of the chapel, contrasted with the embodied actions of the religious practices of those entering and moving around the church, paying respects at the statues of St. Peter and St. Paul, and also again taking photographs. This blending of the sacred and secular through the enculturation of tarantism with the Catholic Church, will be seen in the history of tarantism in Chapter Two. This blend is also very much part of Salento, and the ambiguity creates its own meanings and identities for the Salentines. Although leading to contestation of the sites within the space of the Piazza, the contradictions resulted in an overall unity of experience. None was given a sense of greater importance or meaning than the other, but the embodied actions and responses to the event of the festival became a nondualistic process of moving through and between the sites without an epistemological dislocation of incongruity. As well as contested spaces, there were different forms of performance and experience of embodied practices according to the type of engagement with the action and spatial configuration. In particular, this was seen in the two approaches to pizzica pizzica dance that took place in the Piazza, with both the concert performance, and the dancing within the ronde. These two types of performance can be understood through the categorisations proposed by Andriy Nahachewsky as being participatory and presentational dance, in that the first happens within social contexts, and the second in a more formal presentation on some form of stage: 74

In participatory dances, the focus tends to be on the dancers themselves. The process of dancing is important. A good dance differs from a less successful performance based on how it features. Presentational dances tend to be perceived more as a product than a process. The success of a particular performance is judged by how it looks. Participatory dances take place at social events where a particular community comes together to celebrate. This may be on the village green, at the house of a key participant, in a ballroom or in a dance bar. Presentational dances are often performed on formal stages and in other locations where the physical and cultural distance between performers and audience is greater. (Nahachewsky, 1995: 1) Nahachewsky points out that these categories are 'idealizations, and that they can be usefully seen as 'opposite poles' on an axis, and traditional dance can operate at any point along this axis (ibid.: 1). This definition of the difference between participatory and presentational dance is very useful in examining the different performance forms of the pizzica pizzica during the festival. Within the space of the Piazza, both forms occurred at the same time at points during the evening, at diagonally opposite ends of the square. The presentational dance took place on the specially erected stage next to the church, with invited performers, and an audience who were separated from the elevated stage watching the musicians and dancers in an end-on configuration. The participatory dance took place in the ronde outside the chapel of St Paul, with anyone who wanted to participate as a musician or dancer. The ronda was formed with musicians on the edge of the circle, the crowd of spectators close behind them, and a couple dancing in the middle. Dancers would change after being in the centre for varying lengths of time, and the ronda would break up when the musicians were tired or no one entered the circle, then reformed by new musicians in the same or slightly different place. There were times when two or three different ronde happened at the same time in close proximity to each other.

The configuration and focus of the spectators are significant, as the presentational dance performance creates a separation of performer and audience, with the focus on the audience being in a linear direction towards the stage. In the ronda, the spectators were closer to the dancers and musicians, and could switch roles between being performer and audience. The direction of focus was inward towards the centre of the circle.

In the concert performances, the music groups were the primary attraction, with dancers considered 'extra.' The movements of the dance were choreographed to respond to the music, and the dancers wore similar costumes. The intention was to 'show' the dance in a presentational context, rather than for personal transformation through the experience of taking part.

The participatory dance within the ronde fits Nahachewsky's definition, involving a community-based experience where the dance was not choreographed but improvised and spontaneous. The focus was on the dancers themselves, with the audience's attention directed towards the centre of the circle. As referred to in the Introduction, the ronda is seen by Salentines as being a 76 CHAPTER ONE created space of ‘magic, partly because of this concentration of focus on the center, which contributes to the efficacious experience of those dancing and watching. In this way, it is also the case as Nahachewsky suggests, that what constitutes as being a ‘good’ dance is based in how it feels, rather than how it looks. The dancers entering the space of a ronda were mainly less skilful than those performing in the presentational dances on the stage, but their process of engagement in the action was more important to them in terms of the experience of dancing, rather than a focus on how well they ‘looked’ to be dancing from the outside. This again reinforces the point made earlier in relation to Schieffelin that being technically skilful alone does not necessarily account for a successful performance, depending on the context.

One young Salentine woman who danced in a ronda with her boyfriend, explained to me afterwards that she chose to enter the ronda and dance with him because this was the way in which she wanted to express her love for him. This created a very special experience for her through the action of the dance, which was based both in her embodiment, and the surrounding socio-cultural environment. The event was made special for her because it happened on the night of the festival, in front of the chapel of St Paul, with all the related history of tarantism and pizzica bound up with this. The music of the pizzica pizzica itself is connected to the identity of the people and the land, and therefore all these aspects made the space of the ronda, for the short time it existed, into a very specific culturally determined site. Yet it was through her embodied experience of the dance with her boyfriend in this site that led to her process of transformation: it could only occur through the action and process of the dance itself, in the socially constructed space. The space alone would not have had the effect without the lived presence of her body in the process of the dance, and the dance in another socio-temporal framework would also not have created the specific sense of transformation that she expressed feeling in that particular time and space.

In addition, the experience of being seen in the ronda was also important: it is a public, shared, and community space. Not many people knew them, but the fact that their presence in the dance was being witnessed by the community was also important, even though it was not presentational in the same sense as the performances on the stage. It was the participatory understanding of communitas that enhanced the Embodying Pasts and Presence 77 experience of ‘being’ rather than ‘showing’ through the action of the dance in response to the music. The potential of pizzica music and dance to enable this transformation is in part connected to the identity of being Salentine. This identification with pizzica will be discussed further in Chapter Four, but demonstrates the inherent connection between the socio-cultural constructs of identity, and the embodied experience of transformation and presence in the action of the dance. Nahachewsky’s comment about the categories being ‘idealizations’ is also relevant, but rather than a linear axis, I would suggest instead seeing this as interconnecting helixes, in that there was an element of presentational and participatory performance in each of the opposite spaces. Towards the back of the audience for the stage performances, rather than conforming to the focus of looking in a linear direction towards the stage, some people instead formed ronde, and danced in the configuration of the circle, thus creating a contested space with both linear and circular formations, leading to a conflict with direction of focus for participants and audience. Likewise, within the ronda outside the chapel, there were some dancers entering the circle who gave the appearance of being more skilful, and performing choreographed sequences, rather than spontaneous and improvised responses to the music. I have observed some of these same dancers appearing at other festivals over previous years, and they will tend to dance with the same partners, demonstrating an accomplishment and knowledge of steps and sequences which offers a level of presentational dance within the space of the participatory, thus again leading to a complex interweaving of contested sites and embodiments within the overall space.

The final point to make about the ‘moment’ of the festival, was the emergence of the female body in performance, and the manifestation of past and present hegemonies of female embodiment within spatial-temporal sites. The position of women has changed greatly in Salento over the past thirty years, and this was demonstrated in the contrast between the embodiment of the young women dancing in the festival, and the appearance of the former tarantata at the end of the event. The history of tarantism shows how women have often been repressed within the society, coping with difficult socio-economic circumstances, and an attitude towards them which has resulted in their voices being rendered silent, and their embodied presence hidden. This is a complex subject, and will be explored throughout this study, but previously women were not seen dancing in public in the way they are today. They may have danced at weddings or social festivals within their village or town, or out in the countryside, but this was limited in terms of a visible presence.

So within the ritual of tarantism, the act of presence within the dance was part of the nature of its efficacy, as the women who had been at the margins of society became present and visible for the space of the ritual. As Karanika states: the ¢arantate [...] are women whose social role is marginalized, and whose psychological problems find a bodily expression in the symptoms they experience and wish to heal through their ecstatic dance. It is through this dance that they become protagonists in a public ritual, and therefore turn their position of marginality to center stage in their local societies. (Karanika, 2005: 35)

However, the public display of dance within the ritual, even if acceptable within Salentine society as a culture-specific form of efficacy, has in part led to many of the writings throughout its history removing the act of the dance from a sacred context, and placing it instead in the realm of the erotic, labelling the women as wanton or mentally unstable, leading to both a ‘feminisation’ and ‘hystericisation’ of the women, and the nature of the ritual, as will be seen in the history of the medical writings discussed in Chapter Two.

Even if they were not to be seen dancing in public, women were still sometimes able to experience the efficacy of pizzica music and dance in a private space of transformation. One Salentine man spoke to me of remembering when he was a young boy, living in a house very close to the sea on the Ionian coast in the south of Salento, he would sometimes go down to the beach on the night of a full moon with his father and an older couple, who were their neighbours. There, under a tree, his father would play the guitar, and the husband of the couple would sing for his wife, who would dance on her own in this private space out of the need to express herself in this way through the process and experience of the dance, which became the site of transformation and efficacy within her embodiment and presence in the specific place and time. Another Salentine woman told me that she felt that the experience of the dance had been better in the past, when it was more closely connected to a private expression, whereas today in the festivals it is about noise, drink, and the bustle of a lot of people in a very public space. She feels that the quality of pizzica being about a special, healing, private and releasing experience has been lost, along with the connection to the land, with instead now there being a focus on urban life. There is a tendency for some Salentines today to speak of pizzica in relation to the ‘peasant’ culture of the past, of the worker on the land who understands the real nature of pizzica through contact with the earth. One Salentine said that pizzica is about ‘lavore la terra’ [‘working the earth’], and that it was born in the countryside. He felt that ‘pizzica è sudore, sole, terra e verde’ [‘pizzica is sweat, sun, earth and green’], and that only those who live in the countryside and work the earth can understand what it really means. For Ada Metafune, ‘la pizzica è legata all’animo del contadino’ (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [‘pizzica is bound up with the soul of the peasant’]. She feels that the peasants have a stronger connection to the earth because they work the land, therefore having a similar stronger connection in the stamping movements of the pizzica: ‘questo battere era talmente forte perché c’era un forte legame con la terra’ (ibid.) [‘this stamping (or beating the ground) was so strong because there was a strong connection with the earth’]. Mariella Pandolfi’s exploration of the embodiment of suffering amongst southern Italian peasant women offers an insight into a culture-specific relationship to the body, and an inscription of cultural values through the body, that relates to the particular circumstances of a woman in a ‘peasant’ environment: Maria [Pandolfi’s subject in the field] tells us about a world of subjective identity — a ‘minimal’ identity that finds in the body, in the experience of the body, the locus of existing and expressing herself; describing herself by way of the body establishes a phenomenological identity. Second, a phenomenological identity, in the sense of being present in the world via the body, is also set forth and defined by the way of social structures that for centuries have defined cultural roles and forms that, in the last analysis, served to control and ‘normalize’ the female world of emotions. [...] {Maria has an] exclusively subjective experience of her own suffering, which she understands as a body speaking of its own suffering. And this product of her story becomes in itself the story of a corporeal self. (Pandolfi, 1990: 257, 258)

The speaking of the subjective story through the presence of the body is manifested in the embodied dancing of the ¢arantate within the history of the ritual. This made the moment of the appearance of the prior tarantata at the festival at Galatina in 2008 so strong, particularly in comparison to the very public display of dancing by women which had occurred during the previous night. The clothing of some of the presentational dancers on the stage, including a bare midriff and a lightweight skirt that exposed the legs, made a stark contrast with the tavantata shrouded in black, her head covered, ushered in and out of the chapel hidden from the crowd, wanting a private space for her personal time of devotion, rather than the public space of the crowds at the festival. And yet it was her embodied presence, with the story and history inscribed in her body, which drew the crowd to her, and created the transformation of quality of presence within and outside the chapel. She was a reminder of a past way of being for women, which made clear the great change there has been in a relatively short time for the whole culture of Salento, and for women in particular. As the embodiment of a past now almost lost, of a connection to the land, and a private, sacred space of healing, her presence and actions in the site of the Piazza that morning had a profound effect on all watching.

In this sense, she manifested a residue of an older hegemonic order, discussed by De Martino in his view on the women as being 'subaltern' referred to in Chapter Three, in the same spatial-temporal site as the new socio-cultural positioning of women in society, marked by their differences in embodied actions. The contrasts, contradictions and contestations within the 'moment' of the festival of St Peter and St Paul in Galatina highlight many of the aspects which will feature in the rest of this study: the mixture of sacred and profane; culturally specific forms of healing and ritual performance; the past embodied in the present; shifting views and discourses on the body, and attitudes towards the women who became farantate in the many centuries of writings about the ritual.

The next chapter will focus on these historical writings, examining the appropriation and different viewpoints of the ritual and those who undertook it, demonstrating changing attitudes towards the body, healing and the natural world which took place during the centuries of recorded histories and stories concerning those who have been bitten by the taranta.

CHAPTER TWO
Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism

The challenges to the discipline of history over the past four decades, particularly from feminism, postmodernism, and post-structuralism, have led to a questioning of the hegemonic voice which decides and defines what history is, and whose history it is. Such questions and challenges are at the forefront in writing this chapter on the history of tarantism, based in a selection of the historical records of the ritual that are available. Firstly, of course, it is not 'the history' but 'histories, and it is also my own narrative based on both the choice of which documents are included, and how they are interpreted. As discussed in Chapter One, whether writing history or ethnography, it is the particular situation of researcher and author that creates the picture that is presented. An investigation of how 'past' informs and relates to 'present' is, as previously stated, not a linear or evolutionist path, but instead a series of compound 'moments, each of which need to be understood in their particular context. Although the dangers of a linear approach are acknowledged, this chapter will take an essentially direct route through the 'moments' of the histories concerning tarantism. The main reason for this approach rather than a thematic one, is in order to clarify the specific theoretical and socio-cultural positioning of each writer in their particular period and context. The potential problem with a thematic structure is that specific details can be lost, and in the case of my choice in writing about tarantism, it is these particular contexts that are of great importance in exploring how notions of the body as object have been appropriated and defined by various sources through shifts of thinking and practice over six centuries of records. Even De Martino's writing of La terra del rimorso, despite taking a thematic approach to his chapters, which incorporates extracts of historical writings, still at points offers a linear perspective to contextualize the ideologies of the authors. In choosing to approach the historical 'moments' in this way, there are still clear themes that emerge and are identified in the process, most notably the gradual medicalization, Christianization, and feminization of the ritual, as well as the ways in which music and dance are valorized or dismissed as means of therapeutic efficacy.

The development of these themes within the historical records is bound up with the theories, practices, and culture-specific views of the particular writer, and needs to be contextualized in this way. Hopefully, the thread of these themes can be traced through the narrative, leading to a picture that offers both a linear and thematic approach to the development of such a complex and contradictory subject over a long period of time.

The objectification of the bodies of the tarantati, as well as the practice and processes of the ritual, has effectively silenced the voices and embodied presences of the savantati themselves. The doctors, scientists, and philosophers whose writings are discussed are all men, some of whom are writing based on personal observation of examples of the ritual, and others based on second-hand accounts or reading works of other writers. All of them are writing from the perspective of their own ideas, ideologies, and socio-cultural positionings, thus structuring the history and story of tarantism through their own interpretations and opinions, defining ways in which both the bodies of the tarantati and the existence of the ritual have been understood and presented.

As Alexandra Carter writes in relation to the study of dance history: "Historians make meaning; we need to be aware of who is making the meaning and from what perspective that meaning is made" (Carter, 2004: 14). This certainly leads to the question: "Whose history is it?", for clearly it is that of the histories and stories of the writers themselves, as well as the subjects they are writing about. The significance of the volume of writings and debates about tarantism through the centuries provides valuable insights into shifting views on the body, dance, music, healing, and medical practices, which offer a perspective on the defining of the performing body in relation to changes in ideologies and socio-cultural constructs.

In Chapter One, I proposed that the body, or rather the shifting process of embodiment within the dance, both inscribes and is inscribed by the socio-cultural surroundings, and that the space in which the ritual takes place is as much in a state of process as is the body of the tarantata and the performance itself, and that these are mutually generated by each other. The historical records likewise demonstrate a state of process, a shift in thoughts and practices, which both inscribe and are inscribed by the particular spatial-temporal location from which they emerge. The doctors, scientists, and philosophers are themselves engaged in the experiential process of writing based on their own bodymind state and their socio-cultural positionings, creating the emerging picture of tarantism as it was defined through the centuries. Additionally, historical records are part of the revivalist phenomenon of neo-tarantism in contemporary Salento, in a complex interplay of embodiment and identity based on the interpretation of the histories of a cultural performance form within the region, inscribing and being inscribed on the bodies and performance forms that have emerged more recently.

The problem with attempting to identify historical origins, whether of a ritual or performance form, was also discussed in Chapter One. The desire to find and identify the precise origin, and the linear evolution from this point of origin onwards, is a great temptation to academics. It can offer a sense of legitimacy to a historical study to state that "this is where it started, and this is how it developed." This is demonstrated in the histories of tarantism, with many writers throughout the centuries, as well as in contemporary Italy, suggesting that the origin of tarantism is found in the antiquity of Greek rituals and pagan practices. This is a speculation, though based on a reasonable assumption of the reality of the Greek influence in Apulia and on certain features of the ritual. However, this also denies the specific nature of tarantism as a particular and unique practice in its context, and the differences and individual characteristics that are a part of its own form.

The evolutionary question in relation to a performance form comes back to the unanswerable question: which came first, the chicken or the egg? The answer is: neither of them. It is not possible to say exactly where or when tarantism originated, nor precisely how it started and became established. What is available are the earliest records of its existence, which does not mean that it did not exist before or had emerged from a different type of ritual or performance. Although this chapter contains the "earliest recorded writings," this does not indicate that this is "where it all began." The questions of "how did tarantism begin," "when and why were pizzica music and dance first used as a means of cure rather than entertainment," or "how did the figure of the saranta become entwined with the ritual" will have to remain unanswered.

To refer back to Chapter One, it is perhaps more useful to see this as a process rather than a fixed object which has a clear beginning and end. When did a chicken evolve into something that we now call a chicken? It is simply not possible to say. These questions tend to demonstrate the "fallacy of emergence" based on "ideological assumptions"; to repeat David George (George, 1998: 12). Each "moment of history" was a present moment at the time it occurred and in its point of being written about, so in this chapter, what is offered is a series of these "moments" to create a picture of the changing approaches to the body and the performance of music and dance within tarantism. In order to provide a wider context which may be of help in understanding the shifting positions of music and dance in relation to the body, health, and society, there are two "moments" which are briefly discussed before the writings on tarantism: that of mousiké and ritual in ancient Greece, and the developments in music and dance in the early Christian Church. Music, words, and dance operate in a unified paradigm in ancient Greece, where music is a "delightful manifestation of the rhythms of words or physical movement" (Ley, 2007: 134). In this context, music and dance were used to achieve balance and harmony in the body and mind, often through rituals that invoked transformation and healing. The passage from Homer's Iliad demonstrates the importance of music in soothing the psyche and spirit of the Greek hero Achilles. This discussion highlights the relevance of music and dance in ancient Greece, which will be crucial in understanding the development of tarantism and its connections to Greek rituals and practices. This unification is seen through the term ‘mousiké, defined by Murray and Wilson to equate with the notion of ‘culture’: [Mousiké is the] union of song, dance, and word to which the Muses gave their name. Mousiké, the realm of the Muses, lies at the very heart of Greek culture, and is indeed a contender for the closest term in Greek to our (polymorphous) ‘culture’ {...} [It represented] a seamless complex of instrumental music, poetic word, and co-ordinated physical movement. [...] Mousiké was an endlessly variegated, rich set of cultural practices, with strongly marked regional traditions that made them a valuable item of local self-definition as well as a means for exchange and interaction. (Murray and Wilson, 2004: 1)

The Muses were the daughters of Zeus and Memory (Mnémosyné), and lived in the ‘shining dancing-places’ (Ley, 2007: 122) on Mount Olympus, with the Graces and Desire. The importance of memory is seen in the centrality of myths during the archaic period, where the need to unite a varied range of peoples into a single identity resulted in the use of myths to create the idea of a shared past, a collective memory, which defined not only who they were, but how they were: Mousiké shaped the way individuals and communities lived and sought to reproduce themselves. It was a medium through which ideals of behaviour were developed and enforced — the morality of individuals and collectives, notions of proper or ideal corporeal types, political principles and pragmatics. [...] Mousiké was also a vital medium through which societies created and related to their past. (Murray and Wilson, 2004: 2)

For Griffith, this resulted in a self-conscious panhellenic identity through shared myths and stories, which were ‘regarded by all Greeks as being about “their” collective past’ (Griffith, 2007: 15). Here is another example of a ‘moment’ where past and present were brought together to create a sense of shared identity through forms of cultural performances. Inherent within mousiké is the inseparability of music, dance and words. In this unity, these forms of performance had the ability to affect both the bodymind of the individual, and the socio-political structure of the state.

The potential for music to create a psychophysical transformation is manifested most clearly in the development of modes, or harmoniai, and the notion of harmony and sympathy. This leads to a correspondence between the balance of humours within the body, musical tones, and astrological and astronomical influences, connecting human and divine through a harmonious balance achieved by finding the appropriate musical scale to promote a particular state of being. Pythagoras (c. 570-490 BCE) made a correlation between music and numbers which resulted in the creation of a tonal system based in geometry and the harmony of the cosmos. This was bound up with the notion of ethos and character, which could be affected and determined by association with a mode that related to a planetary or divine influence. In this sense, the ‘Greek doctrine of ethos [...] was founded on the conviction that music affects character and that different kinds of music affect it in different ways’ (Grout, 1981: 9). For Pythagoras, ethos encompassed the moral qualities and effects ruled by mathematical ratios ‘that operate in the whole of the visible and invisible creation. Music, in this view, was not only a passive image of the orderly system of the universe; it was also a force that could affect the universe — hence the attribution of miracles to the legendary musicians of mythology’ (ibid.). 7). Therefore, there was a need to find the correct mode to establish the appropriate state of being within a person, and this also led to Pythagoras exploring the use of music in healing. There are several stories where he used music to calm or soothe 2 A musical ‘mode’ is a particular scale or pattern of notes, which can imply a specific key or tonal center for the music. 88 CHAPTER TWO someone who had been roused into a state of anger or agitation, such as when he supposedly calmed a young man who was drunk by changing the musical mode he was listening to, which was reported in the preface to Boethius’ De Musica, which will be mentioned in the section on music in the early Christian Church. Pythagoras’ ideas were developed by successive philosophers and doctors with a furthering of the notion of the way in which musical modes affect the bodymind, including the relation to the four bodily humours: blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile, with the associated characteristics of being sanguine, phlegmatic, melancholic and choleric, and their relationship to the four elements, and other associations such as the seasons of the year and times of the day. The first writings concerning the humours are usually attributed to Hippocrates (c. 460-377 BCE), with a fuller development of correspondences to other aspects by subsequent medical practitioners and philosophers, reaching a full exposition in the work of Galen (c. 129-216 CE) in the Roman period, whose treatises became the foundation of medical thought and practice for many centuries. One of the most significant philosophers relevant for this study is Plato (c. 429-347 BCE). In his Dialogue Timaeus, which was his most well-known text in medieval Europe, he stressed the importance of the balance, or harmony, of elements in the body to create a sense of well-being, and that it is the imbalance of the elements that leads to illness: The origin of diseases should be obvious. The body is composed of four elements — earth, fire, air and water; and disorders and diseases are caused by an unnatural excess or deficiency of any of them, by their shifting from their proper place to another, by any part of the body taking in an unsuitable variety either of fire or another element (for there are several varieties of them), and by similar disturbances. (Plato, 1977: 112) In relation to the idea of the connection between man and the divine, Plato believed that the qualities of the musical modes also had a correspondence with a particular deity or aspect of the divine, and through listening to and being involved with the music, a person can become filled and harmoniously ‘in tune’ with this divine energy. If the body is ‘in tune’ or in harmony with the mode relating to the deity, then this deity will be attracted into that body, leading to the Greek notion of ‘sympathy’, that Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 89 things which are similar will attract each other, just as those which are dissimilar will repel. This is seen in some of the religious rites which involve music and dance. The relationship between these is profoundly important in classical Greece, as Greek religion was ‘deeply musical and performative’ (Murray and Wilson, 2004: 4). These rites included being filled or possessed by a deity, leading to the state of entheos, of being engodded. An example of this type of possession ritual was the Pythia or Pythoness at Delphi, dedicated to Apollo. She became "entheos, plena deo": the god entered into her and used her vocal organs as if they were her own (Dodds, 1951: 70). Dodds points out that this is not a state of the soul leaving the body, but rather "that the body has a god within it" (ibid.: 87, n. 41). This state can lead to the feeling of being "outside of oneself" or "exd."

In Plato's Socratic Dialogue Jon, there is an examination of the nature of performance, with Socrates questioning Ion as to whether his performance of reciting Homer is based in acquired skill or if he has been inspired by divine possession. The dialogue continues with Socrates asking Ion about his experiences during his performances, and Ion responding that he is moved by the emotions of the stories he tells.

Plato connects the ideas of possession through "entheos" and "exd," the origin of the word "enthusiasm" and "ecstasy," respectively, in the experience of performance. The process of being filled by or being absorbed with a deity results in the moving away from the sense of "self." This two-way state is significant in understanding the connection between possession and performance.

Griffith (2007: 19, 23) emphasizes that both the performer of epic scenes and his audience are felt to be "beside, outside" themselves and "possessed by god" as a result of the vividness and emotionality of the narrative. The pleasurably "mind-bending" (psuchagégia) of allowing the god to enter "inside" oneself (enthousiasmos) and thus moving "outside" one's normal state of consciousness was recognized by audiences and critics alike as being brought about more powerfully by tragedy and comedy than by any other art-form.

Although Jon ends somewhat playfully, with Ion denying being in a state of divine frenzy and Socrates describing him as being a "proper Proteus," the combined state of entheos and exd is also found within the performance of religious rites involving music and dance, particularly those associated with Dionysus. It is sometimes described today as being where the soul leaves the body to journey somewhere else, leading to the idea of "soul loss." Gary Tomlinson makes such a distinction, describing tarantism as a ritual of possession rather than ekstatsis, which is a term he uses instead to describe the Benandanti, a cult whose practices consist of soul-journeying (see Tomlinson, 1993: 155 and Ginzburg, 1992). However, the experience of both possession and ekstasis in their use in Greek philosophy and practices did not have the same meaning. Dodds claims that "entheos" never meant that the soul had left the body, as Rohde seems to imply in some instances, but rather that the body had a god within it. In describing the experience of the Pythia, he states that she becomes "entheos" only in the sense of being in a state of grace resulting from the accomplishment of rites (Dodds, 1951: 87, n. 41). He makes a clear distinction between this type of experience and shamanism, which is "not the entry of an alien spirit into the shaman; it is the liberation of the shaman's spirit, which leaves his body and sets off on a mantic journey or 'psychic excursion' (ibid.: 88, n. 4.4). The experience of forgetfulness of self resulting from the belief in being possessed by or absorbed with a god is not the same as the 'self' or soul going somewhere else in the form of a shamanic journeying. See Tomlinson, 1993: 150-3, for a further discussion of some of the problems with categorizations and taxonomies of terms such as possession, ecstasy, and shamanism.

The rites of Dionysus were especially intertwined with theater performance. Those belonging to the guild of actors and musicians were known as the Artists of Dionysus. For the Athenian festival, the City Dionysia, a statue of the god was brought from his sanctuary on the south slope of the Acropolis to the festival, and they 'also built a theater near the temple, where the community could watch performances dedicated to Dionysus, who encouraged the complementary moods of ekstasis (standing outside oneself) and exthousiasmos (the god within) associated with wine' (Rehm, 2007: 185). He gave rise to the cult of Maenadism, women who were initiated into his rites, and were renowned for their wild, frenzied, ecstatic dancing, usually to music in the Phrygian mode, which was associated with Dionysus.

Dodds suggests that part of the social function of these rituals was cathartic, in the meaning of the word within classical Greek thought, in that: it purged the individual of those infectious irrational impulses which, when damned up, had given rise, as they have done in other cultures, to outbreaks of dancing mania and similar manifestations of collective hysteria; it relieved them by providing them with a ritual outlet. (Dodds, 1951: 76) Understood in this way, it is clear why direct connections have been made by later writers between the Dionysic rites of the Maenads and tarantism. The rituals of Dionysus can be seen as the use of dance and music to create a socially acceptable means to reach a state of release from the self, or ekstasis, in the action of the collective dance.

Similarly, the Corybantic rites, which Dodds suggests 'appealed to similar psychological types and produced similar psychological reactions' (ibid.: 78) were a ritualistic means to treat a state of 'madness; or as Plato defined it, 'phobies or anxiety-feel-ings [...] arising from some morbid mental condition' (ibid.: 78). It seems that the efficacy of the ritual would depend on the particular condition and proclivities of the participant, as 'the real test seems to have been the patient’s response to a particular ritual: if the rites of a god X stimulated him and produced a catharsis, that showed that his trouble was due to X; if he failed to react, the cause must lie elsewhere' (ibid. Just as the particular ritual relating to a specific god needed to be identified, the same was the case, as previously noted, for finding the appropriate musical mode to effect a process of healing. In Jon, Plato says that those in a state of illness ‘have a sharp ear for one tune only, the one which belongs to the god by whom they are possessed, and to that tune they respond freely and with gesture and speech, while they ignore all others’ (ibid.: 79). This reinforces the notion of the ability of music to create a transformation in the state of being, just as it did for the battle-worn Achilles, withdrawing for a moment from the actions of the war, and soothing his heart and spirit by playing the phorminx, and singing songs which recalled the famous deeds of men.

In this overview of aspects of the placing of music and dance within ancient and classical Greek thought, what can be seen is the interconnection of music and dance, and their part in the notion of ‘mousiké, defining a cultural and ethical identity for the panhellenic state. The development of the idea of modes, and how specific modes affect the state of being of a person in particular ways, when combined with medical practitioners as well as philosophers, led to a paradigm of musical healing consisting of the need to find the particular mode in order to achieve harmony within the being. The playing of a mode that was associated with a particular deity could also cause a sympathetic attraction to something that is similar, leading to a state of possession, or being filled by that deity and their quality, resulting in a loss of sense of self through being in exd, outside or beside oneself.

The particular feature of the need to find a correspondence of musical modes to promote a process of healing, will be discussed later in the records concerning tarantism. This brief exploration of music and dance in Greek medicine and ritual performance is in strong contrast with the following contextual ‘moment’ beginning several centuries later, examining how the early Christian Church appropriated and transformed the practice of music and dance.

Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism

93 Music and dance in the early Christian Church

During the period in which the Christian Church was trying to establish itself within Western Europe, music and dance came under close scrutiny and debate, with differing results that would affect the development of both in their practice and theory for many centuries to come. Some of these developments are significant for understanding the context of the early modern writings on tarantism, most particularly the division between sacred and secular performances; the separation of music and dance as disciplines; the continuing connection with music as a form of treatment for medical conditions; and the association of dance with ideas of immorality and erotic excess, especially in relation to women.

The connection of the use of forms of music and dance in pagan rites was one of the foremost reasons that the Church attempted to control their practice within its own liturgical framework in order to establish a firmer hold of Christianity throughout the west, so it was ‘therefore, a commonplace to regard the battle against dancing as a part of the war against paganism’ (Arcangeli, 1994: 127). From the time of the early Church Fathers, a clear division was being made between dancing within the building of the church itself as part of a service which reflected a divine union with the angels, and the lascivious excesses and sinful practices of popular dances outside the church, which were instead seen as reflections of demonic vices. In this sense, dance itself was not condemned outright as a practice, but rather it was the context in which it was performed that created the moral and religious divide in the minds of the Fathers. According to Backman, the ring dances or circle dances which were performed in the church, often around the altar, were an imitation and embodiment of angels dancing in a circle in paradise, with the altar as a representation of the divine at the centre (Backman, 1952: 21). However, the ring dances performed in a secular context outside the church were said to have the devil at the centre of the circle, and in the words of a French preacher, ‘omnes vergunt ad sinistrum’, they all turned to the left, or ‘perversely’ (Stevens, 1986: 161), in a diabolical mirroring of the sacred form enacted within the church.

St John Chrysostom (c. 345-407 CE), the Bishop of Constantinople, known as ‘Golden-Mouth’ wrote in no uncertain terms about this division in a lecture about how Christians within and outside the church building celebrated the festival of Whitsun:

"Yesterday was the festival of the Devil (a pagan festival), but you, on the contrary, celebrated the festival of the Holy Ghost as far as, with the utmost zeal of spirit, you have received all that we have proclaimed. You have passed the greater part of the day together in transports of moderation, in the performance of ring-dances in the spirit of St Paul. By this your merits have increased doubly, in the first place because you refrained from the indecent dances of the drunken, and in the second place because you danced those spiritual dances which are most pleasing and most modest ..., and while others performed dances for the Devil, you circled instead in this place and used musical instruments of the spirit, revealing your souls as do the musical instruments on which the Holy Ghost plays when he instils his grace into your hearts." (in Backman, 1952: 32)

This is interesting as another example of contested spaces of embodiment and performance, such as was discussed in the moment of the festival of St Paul in Galatina in Chapter One. In this instance, the event takes place on Whitsun, itself a holiday (holy-day) which Christianity appropriated from the Jewish festival of Shavuot, and also most probably, as St John Chrysostum suggests, a pagan festival (‘festival of the Devil’ in his terms) celebrating the summer. Within this conflicting spatial-temporal frame, two forms of dance occur: one, inside the church, described as ‘spiritual’ and ‘modest’ dedicated to St Paul, and the other outside the space of the church, both geographically and spiritually, labelled as ‘drunken’ and ‘indecent. Those dancers within the church are praised further for choosing a form of embodiment which is approved of within a Christian context, as opposed to the secular, even demonic, embodiment of the dancers outside the boundaries of the church building, which are instead considered to be shameful. St John Chrysostum offers one of the most renowned and often cited statements on secular dance leading to a state of shame, in his commentary on Salome's dance in St Matthew's Gospel:

"For where there is a dance, there also is the Devil. For God has not given us our feet to use in such a shameful way but in order that we may walk in decency, not that we should dance like camels (for even dancing camels make an unpleasant spectacle, much more than women), but in order to dance ring-dances with the angels." For if it is shameful for the body to behave thus, the more so is it for the spirit to do so. (in ibid.: 32) In this way, dance itself is not a forbidden activity, but it is the location and intention of the dancer that creates a defining of embodiment within the performance as to whether it is a sanctified or shameful act in the eyes of the Church. This connection of shame of both body and soul became intrinsically connected to those dance and music performances which were not within the strict ecclesiastical framework, and the control of performances relating to religious rites, whether festivals or particular occasions such as funerals where songs and dances were performed within the church building or churchyard, became tighter over the centuries. In 826 CE, the Council of Rome ‘complained that women, especially on holidays and anniversaries of saints, only came to the church in order to sing shameless songs and to perform choir dances, whereby they followed pagan example' (Backman, 1952: 155), and by the middle of the ninth century, Pope Leo IV banned women from dancing and singing in churches and their porches. This banning of performances in churches and churchyards continued through the thirteenth century and beyond, as dance became further associated with a moral debate that was articulated from the pulpit. According to Arcangeli, in the manuals for confessors and penitents that originated in the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215, a 'special entry for dance (chorea, in the predominant Latin form of these texts) was very common (while you would not find “music”, and rarely “theatre”)' (Arcangeli, 1994: 129). In this way, dance was separated from music, and singled out for special scrutiny.

Even in my current home city of Exeter, there was a Synod in 1287 which 'ordered that there shall be no wrestling, ring-dances or other forbidden games in churchyards, especially at night watches and the festivals of the saints, because by the performance of such play-acting and indecent games the dignity of the Church is dragged through the mire' (in Backman, 1952: 157).

96 CHAPTER TWO

In terms of the seven deadly sins, dance was seen as a manifestation of Lust, due to the social occasions where secular dance took place, when men and women would dance together, a particular feature of social dance of which the Church disapproved. Additionally, dance was related to the sin of Gluttony, being seen as a state of excess of both drunkenness and also enjoyment. This hearkens back to Gregory the Great, for whom dance 'was seen as a manifestation of inepta Laetitia [‘inane rejoicing’ ]' (ibid.: 129). Arcangeli points to the connection between dance and excessive joy, seen particularly in the types of embodied movements such as jumping and leaping (we still jump for joy'). He states that 'Plato [in the Laws] wrote that the word chords (dance) comes from chara (joy)' (ibid.: 139), even though this may be seen as a play on words rather than actual derivation. However, the equation between dance and excessive joy that came from secular pleasure, including eroticism and wine, may also have been seen by the Church as another link to pagan rites, especially those associated with Dionysus, so again needed to be controlled within a form of an ecclesiastical embodiment and expression. Dance as a pleasurable activity, an expression of the joy of moving to music, was perceived as a shameful act, when compared to the dance of angels around the altar in church, which was an initiation into the mystery rites of Christianity. This created a determination not only of the location and intention of the dance, but also of the type of embodied response to the act of dancing, leading to a distinction between sacred and secular manifestations. While the practice of dance was being divided into sacred and secular forms, the discipline of music experienced developments of its own, resulting in a separation in the study of the two performance forms.

One of the main features of medieval church music was the establishment of the modes, which were "clearly a compound of the Byzantine echoi and the Greek tono?" (Grout, 1981: 15), integrating western and eastern influences to form the basis of musical melodic structure. By the eleventh century, the system of modes had been formed. Although given the names of the ancient Greek modes (Phrygian, Dorian, Lydian, and Mixolydian), they were musically different from the Greek versions due to a difference in their transposition. There were eight modes altogether, grouped in four pairs, with each mode having two forms: authentic and plagal (which started a fourth lower than the authentic, and are prefixed with "Hypo-"). Each mode was structured in a specific way, reflecting different qualities.

As an example, the medieval Phrygian mode (though the Greek Phrygian mode became the medieval Dorian) was structured as follows: Semitone -- Tone -- Tone -- Tone -- Semitone -- Tone -- Tone. Starting on the note E, the ascending scale on a modern piano keyboard would consist of playing only the white notes to the E an octave above. The Phrygian is the closest mode to the minor scale as it is understood today, though with a flattened second. It is also, with the modification of a major third making it into the Phrygian Dominant, the mode that is often heard in forms of flamenco music, as well as in a range of Jewish and Arabic music, thus being considered the most "exotic" and "Eastern" sounding of the modes. Several of the songs used in the ritual of tarantism are recorded as being in the Phrygian mode, particularly with the inherent ambiguity between major and minor found in many of the pizzica songs, referred to in the Introduction.

As well as scales, there was a system of rhythmic modes established during the Middle Ages, originating in part from Greek rhythms based on patterns of speech. The most significant for this study is the first mode, the trochaic, consisting of an accented followed by an unaccented beat: -~. This rhythmic pattern, in duple and triple metre, is the one found most frequently in the pizzica music used in tarantism, and in the movements of the feet in the dance.

In addition to the developments in the practice of music, the philosophy and theory of musical knowledge were of extreme importance during the Middle Ages. One of the foremost writers in this respect was Boethius (c. 480-524), who in his Principles of Music made a connection to its Greek roots based in arithmetic exemplified by Pythagoras, and described music as a reflection of the order and harmony of the universe, and its related influence on character and ethos. The term "musica" was used to encompass the notion of knowledge and became one of the seven liberal arts (part of the quadrivium, alongside geometry, astronomy, and arithmetic, and the trivium of grammar, rhetoric, and dialectic). This separation of playing music from a theoretical and philosophical understanding of it made knowledge of "musica" a part of education. This was demonstrated by Isidore of Seville (c. 559-636) in his "Etymologies" HI ch. xvi: "Sine musica nulla disciplina potest esse perfecta" ("Without music no branch of learning can be complete") (in Stevens, 1986: 13).

Music was drawn into a paradigm of knowledge and learning, rather than for the aesthetic enjoyment and pleasure of the player and listener. St. Augustine articulated this in his "Confessions":

"Thus vacillate I between dangerous pleasure and tried soundness; being inclined rather (though I pronounce no irrevocable opinion upon the subject) to approve of the use of singing in church, that so by the delights of the ear the weaker minds may be stimulated to a devotional frame. Yet when it happens to me to be more moved by the singing than by what is sung, I confess myself to have sinned criminally, and then I would rather not have heard the singing." (Confessions, X, Ch. 33, trans. J. G. Pilkington in Whitney J. Oates, ed. Basic Writings of Saint Augustine, New York, 1948, in Grout, 1982: 27)

As with dance, the pleasurable enjoyment of music became associated with sin. The ideas from Pythagoras and Boethius as the authorities from the past became the established views on music and knowledge within education and the Church, which were connected as education occurred in monasteries and in the schools attached to cathedrals during the Middle Ages (ibid.: 56).

The distinction between music as pleasure and music as knowledge grew ever wider, developing from Boethius's differentiating between the cantor (singer) and "musica" (musician), in other words between someone who plays music, and someone who actually understands it but is not necessarily a performer, thereby separating practice from theory and knowledge. The singer or practitioner was debased to being likened to "a drunken man reeling home (he hopes) along a road he does not know" (Stevens, 1986: 376).

The development of music as a theoretical discipline within the world of knowledge that is also based in arithmetic and geometry, has influenced the way in which it has been understood and taught within western education. The separation of practice from theory, and of music from other performance disciplines such as dance and theatre, has been an important factor in how the arts have been placed and discussed within academia.

The separation of music from dance in the Middle Ages is also significant as a moving away from the united notion of "mousiké" in classical Greek thought. However, this understanding of the inherent interconnection between music and dance, particularly in relation to healing, was to be revived and renewed in the writings of the fifteenth-century Neoplatonists, particularly Marsilio Ficino, whose iatromusical approach in his writings on tarantism will be discussed shortly.

The "moments" on music and dance in ancient Greece and the early Christian Church contain aspects that will be of importance in the historical writings on the ritual of tarantism. These writings, in their appropriation of issues concerning the body, performance, and healing within the specific paradigms of philosophy, medicine, and history of each writer and period, demonstrate the reduction of the complex subject of tarantism into a site of debate by medical and ecclesiastical figures, many of whom had no direct contact with or knowledge of the people involved. The following investigation of the historical writings examines the shifting attitudes and paradigms of embodiment and performance from the fourteenth century onwards, noting how the body was defined and determined according to the socio-cultural contexts of the writers, and how this in turn leads to the embodiment of these ideas through the performance.

100 CHAPTER TWO Writings on tarantism from the fourteenth to the mid-twentieth centuries

Earliest recorded writings

Although there are extensive records concerning tarantism from the seventeenth century onwards, there are earlier writings, particularly within the de venenis literature, or the writings on poisons, of the use of music in treating the bite of a tarantula. The most probable source for the earliest documentation is that of the Sertum Papale de Venenis, written by the Paduan doctor Gulielmus de Marra in 1362. The section on the use of music to cure the bite of the tarantula is part of a collection of writings on the treatment of poisons, and is placed between a section on the hiss or sight of a basilisk,® and that concerning the treatment of hydrophobia, or the poison resulting from the bite of a mad dog. The section on tarantulas is summarised in Volume 3 of Lynn Thorndike’s extensive collection A History of Magic and Experimental Science:

Tarantula bite is relieved by music, because the poison produces melancholy whose best antidote is rejoicing. The vulgar and ignorant say that the insect sings when it bites and that when the patient hears similar cadences, it is a great relief to him. William is unwilling to admit this explanation but he thinks that the joy derived from the music may attract the spirits from within the body to the periphery and so prevent the poison from penetrating to the vitals. (Man. Barb. 306: 146-7, in Thorndike, 1966, Volume 3: 534.)

De Martino continues the citation from de Marra’s work which questions why it may be that hearing a specific melody will affect the patient in a particular way if, as he suggests, there is not a real connection between the spider and the music:

The basilisk was, at this time, considered to be a real creature, influenced by the description by Pliny the Elder of it being a snake that can kill both through its venom and glance. References to basilisks and Pliny in relation to tarantism continued through to the seventeenth century, e.g., in Ferdinando (1621) and Gritber (1679).

Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism

In fact, each individual of the human species, for a generic disposition, gains sensible pleasure from things which are agreeable to his own individuality. [...] [F]or hearing, some enjoy horns, others bagpipes, and still others songs. [...] In relation to this, those who are bitten by the tarantula receive the greatest pleasure from one music or another, for example the zither or especially the melody called pelandra; others enjoy the sound of the /epore and especially the aria called Dama di Provenza, and so on for other musical instruments, melodies and songs which are pleasing to them, their souls are joyous, and since cheerfulness is an excellent medicine for that disease, they recover and return to life, although the cause of the enjoyment they feel is another. (Ms. Lat. Barberini, p. 306, in De Martino, 2005: 214)

De Martino points out that this record does not contain a reference to the use of dance as part of the cure, discusses how the music is used, nor mentions Apulia specifically as the region where the events take place, but there are significant features in this document in relation to the understanding of tarantism as being caused by the poison resulting in the condition of melancholy, and the use of a specific type of music to cure the condition. Hecker, however, claims that the first reference to tarantism can be found in the work of the scholar Nicholas Perotti in his Cornucopiae Latinae Linguae in the following century. Perotti places the condition firmly within Apulia, and the description of the illness resembles later writings, in terms of falling into a state of melancholy which is cured by music that incites laughter and joy, as well as movements of leaping. Hecker actually suggests that a form of the condition existed much earlier, and makes reference to the physician Gariopontus, a contemporary of Constantine of Africa, both of whom were based in the famous medical school at Salerno in the eleventh century: The patients in their sudden attacks behaved like maniacs, sprang up, throwing their arms about with wild movements, and, if perchance a sword was at hand, they wounded themselves and others, so that it became necessary carefully to secure them. They imagined that they heard voices, and various kinds of sounds, and if, during this state of illusion, the tones of a favourite instrument happened to catch their ear, they commenced a spasmodic dance, or ran with the utmost energy which they could muster, until they were totally exhausted. These dangerous maniacs, who, it would seem, appeared in considerable numbers, were looked upon as a legion of devils, but on the causes of their malady this obscure writer adds nothing further than that he believes (oddly enough) that it may sometimes be excited by the bite of a mad dog.

102 CHAPTER TWO

He calls the disease Anteneasmus, by which is meant no doubt the Enthusiasmus of the Greek physicians. We cite this phenomenon as an important forerunner of tarantism, under the conviction that we have thus added to the evidence that the development of this latter must have been founded on circumstances which existed from the twelfth to the end of the fourteenth century. (Hecker, 1833: 69-70)

Hecker thus implies that tarantism grew out of illnesses connected to forms of mania, in part as a response of melancholy to sociological conditions such as the Black Death and other devastating plagues and illnesses of the Middle Ages, which were also the possible causes for the cult ‘dance manias such as St Vitus’ dance, which will be discussed shortly.

A further record from this period is provided by Alessandro di Alessandro (1461-1523), a lawyer from Naples, who offers an eye-witness account of a case of tarantism in Apulia in his Genialium dierum libri VI. He describes how those bitten by a ¢aranta are cured by music,’ through being ‘entranced and enticed’ (in De Martino, 2005: 92) by the musician playing a particular melody, to which they react to physically ‘in jumps and gestures which are not unseemly and disorderly, but rather in keeping with what the zither is playing’ (ibid.: 92).

Alessandro recounts going to Apulia and seeing a young man in a village who was a ¢arantato, and ‘danced with a certain elegance, with the movements of his body and mime in keeping with the rhythm of the tambourine’ (ibid.: 92). When the music stopped, the young man collapsed on the ground, but rose and danced again when the music restarted (Genialium dierum libri VI, Paris, Book IL, ch. 17, 1549, pp. 212-15, in De Martino, 2005: 92-3). This account offers a much more detailed description of the ritual, including explaining that it takes place 9 However, from the many descriptions and illustrations, it seems clear that a drum or tambourine were common, as well as a string instrument such as a violin (although earlier versions of this), a flute, and possibly a regional form of the bagpipe, which was the ‘the universal folk instrument’ (Grout, 1981: 74), and certainly an outdoor instrument, and therefore likely to have been played by travelling groups of musicians. Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 103 specifically in Apulia; the symptoms of the condition resulting from the bite are that of ‘stupor’ and ‘dulled senses’; the use of a particular form of music to instigate the cure, with the sufferer being ‘entranced’ and ‘fascinated’ by the music; the rhythms of the music causing a change in the movements of the ¢arantato; these movements are specifically that of a dance, rather than random spasmodic responses, and that the dancing demonstrated a ‘certain elegance’ in time with the rhythm, as opposed to Perotti’s account of the movements being an unstructured ‘leaping’ rather than dancing; and that once the tambourine stopped, he would fall to the ground in the original state of stupor, until the music began again. In its structure and detail, this is probably the first fullest description of the ritual in terms of the particular features that were observed in the following centuries.

These three historical documents and their commentaries demonstrate some significant features which are of importance in understanding the ways in which tarantism was first placed within written discourse: the medicalisation of the phenomenon within the context of writings on poisons; the diagnosis of the condition as being one of melancholy, which is cured by music; and the use of prolonged dancing in response to music, which was likened to some of the dance manias which were taking place in medieval Europe, particularly the St Vitus’ dance, which defined how tarantism was categorised by medical practitioners in successive writings.

In the three examples of the earliest documentations, what is not discussed is the personal responses of the tarantati to their condition; it is rather the observed opinions of each of the writers, framing the symptoms and cure within their own views. The body, as well as the performance of the music and dance forms, are appropriated within a discourse of a medical condition or disease which requires a cure that can be articulated within an understanding of biomedicine at that time.

What is also apparent from Alessandro’s account, is his seeing the phenomenon as a ‘curiosity, something to be observed and studied, a strange and even exotic practice, which motivated him to travel to a village in Apulia in order to witness the event for himself. The Sertum Papale, containing de Marra’s reference to the treatment of the poison from a tarantula, is part of the extensive de venenis literature dealing with poisons. This was a significant field of medical writings in 104 CHAPTER TWO the medieval and early modern periods, as poisoning was one of the most feared conditions. This covered the poisons from animal and insect bites; the effects of plague; and also poison as a murder weapon, which could be implemented at a distance both geographically and temporally. There was additionally an important connection between poisons and magic: ‘Poison was one of the great fears of the age. Its threat lay in the fact that bewitchment and poisoning were both methods by which one person might inflict harm on another’ (Gentilcore, 1998: 103), and it was often left up to doctors to make the distinction between a case of poisoning, and one of sorcery: Poisoning was for a long time closely associated with sorcery and magic. The fear of poison began with animal venom, particularly snake and insect stings. The fear of vipers' bites goes back to remote antiquity, becoming synonymous not only with poison but with disease itself. The Emperor Nero is reputed to have used viper's flesh as an antidote for snake-bites and other poisons, and it was also an ingredient of the original recipe for theriac. Gentilcore also mentions the phenomenon of snake charmers, found in Southern Italy in late medieval and early modern times, who were known generically as serpari or ciaralli (also cirauli). These snake-handling families were believed to have special powers, connecting them to the Marsians, who were reputed to be able to entrance snakes with incantations and cure the poison from their bites through their saliva.

The notion of "charm" implies a connection to magic, and the Marsians were reputed to be able to entrance snakes with incantations, and cure the poison from their bites through their saliva. The fear of poison began with animal venom, particularly snake and insect stings. The fear of vipers' bites goes back to remote antiquity, becoming synonymous not only with poison but with disease itself. The Emperor Nero is reputed to have used viper's flesh as an antidote for snake-bites and other poisons, and it was also an ingredient of the original recipe for theriac. Gentilcore also mentions the phenomenon of snake charmers, found in Southern Italy in late medieval and early modern times, who were known generically as serpari or ciaralli (also cirauli). These snake-handling families were believed to have special powers, connecting them to the Marsians, who were reputed to be able to entrance snakes with incantations and cure the poison from their bites through their saliva. As mentioned previously, the word "¢avanta" could mean snake or viper, as well as spider or scorpion, and the symbolic history of snakes, magic, and medicine is significant in the development of tarantism. It is not surprising that St. Paul, with his association of handling venomous snakes in Malta, became the patron saint of the tarantati. Gentilcore points out that the ciaralli, or snake-charmers, were similarly affiliated with St. Paul. He notes that when they came under the regulation of the Sicilian proto-medicato Giovanni Filippo Ingrassia in 1564, they were listed as "the psydli, who are called chirauli in the vernacular (because they operate without medicaments by the powers of St. Paul the Apostle, to whom they are given since birth)" (ibid.: 107).

So it is apparent that: 106

CHAPTER TWO

The involvement of St. Paul was part of the Christianization of their ancient ritual. The Acts of the Apostles (28: 3-5) recount how St. Paul, on the island of Malta, shook off a viper that had fastened on his hand without coming to any harm. Snake-handlers capitalized on this association, referring to themselves as members of the "house of St. Paul." They thus became known as pauliani or sanpaolari. (ibid.: 107)

Here is another instance of the Christianization of a pre-Christian healing tradition, through the enculturation of its practices within the confines of the Church through the inclusion of St. Paul as the patron saint to whom they are "given"; but also, as Gentilcore suggests, the snake-charmers themselves used the association with St. Paul as a means to give legitimacy to their tradition within the Christian world.

In the early writings on tarantism, there is one feature that continued through into the records from the early modern period, which is the diagnosis of the state resulting from the bite as being that of melancholy, which is cured by music. As was noted previously, in ancient Greece, melancholy was seen as a condition relating to the imbalance of the humor of black bile, and from antiquity, music was used as the means to help restore the equilibrium of the humors within the body through its ability to affect the psychophysical state.

Melancholy, originating in black bile, is related to the spleen and was also perceived to be connected to love and the erotic, and the symptoms could be either "robust or fragile, manic or withdrawn, frenzied or deluded, depending on time and place of observation. It has been both feared and desired, a sign of madness and of inspired furore, and a distinct indication of class or professional talent" (Austern, 2000: 116).

This distinction in symptoms could also be classified according to gender-based characteristics: From antiquity to the present day, melancholy has been perceived either as a privileged state of inspired genius and thus implicitly masculine, or as an unstable pathological state of fragility that borders on the feminine state of hysteria. At no point has this been more true than in the era during which the renaissance gave rise to modernity, when the intelligentsia and the fashionable elite regained interest in both melancholy and the ancient powers of music to move body and soul. (ibid.: 124)

Thus, melancholy could be either a state of deep sadness leading to artistic genius, fueled by unrequited love, which was personified by the image of a love-sick man, or by a fragile, emotional woman in a state of hysteria and frenzy. In Part 1, Section 1, Subsection IV, Robert Burton discusses the states of madness and frenzy, specifically Phrenitis ([frenzy]), which the Greeks derived from the word ([Greek: phraen]). He describes it as a disease of the mind with a continual madness or dotage, often accompanied by an acute fever or inflammation of the brain. It differs from melancholy and madness, as their dotage is without an ague, and it is typically more violent, with patients exhibiting anger and clamour. Madness is defined as a vehement dotage, or raving without a fever, and is often more violent than melancholy. It can be caused by the same factors as the other, such as choler adust and blood incensed, with a full age to distinguish it from children. Fracastorius adds that it should be confirmed Impotency, to separate it from those who accidentally come and go again, as by taking Henbane, Nightshade, Wine, etc.

There are various kinds of fury, such as Ecstasy, familiar with some persons, like Cardan's ability to enter it at will. This fury can also be found in Indian priests delivering their Oracles and the witches in Lapland, as Olaus Magnus wrote. The other species of this fury include Enthusiasms, Revelations, and Visions, often mentioned by Gregory and Bede in their works. Obsession or Possession of devils, Sibylline Prophets, and Poetical Furies are also mentioned. The most known are Lycanthropia, Hydrophobia, and Chorus Sancti Viti.

In Part 1, Section 2, Member 4, Subsect 7, Burton mentions that the state of melancholy can be due to the sting from a tarantula, which is an ordinary thing in Calabria and Apulia in Italy. Their symptoms are merrily described by Jovianus Pontanus Ant. dial., as they dance together and are cured by music. Treatment of melancholy with music was recorded in ancient Greece, and Burnett observes that this influenced Arabic doctors in their treatment of the condition through their reading and translation of Greek medical texts. The first-century Arabic doctor Ibn al-Jazzar writes, "In the case of sickness caused by excessive love, to prevent men from being submerged in excessive brooding, tempered and fragrant wine should be offered, and hearing various kinds of music, speaking with dear friends, etc." (The Guide for the Traveller, 1, in Burnett, 2000: 85). His contemporary Ibn Hindi talks of the relationship established in Greek medicine between specific conditions and their treatments with particular musical modes: “We know, for example, that there is a mode of melody and rhythm which arouses sadness, one which rouses joy, one relaxing and tranquilizing, one which keeps awake, and one which induces sleep. And whenever we order those who suffer from melancholy to be treated with the respective modes, it helps them” (in Ibid.: 86). This use of music to cure melancholy continued to influence the treatment of the condition through early modern Europe and was also used in connection with the biomedical diagnosis and defining of tarantism, seen particularly in the reference to the tarantata being in a state of feverish restlessness, longing for passion and erotic desire, and frenzied movement.

Austern offers the following description of the state of melancholic unrequited love:

"Like all other experiences with both physical and social aspects in Western thought, erotic illness was a set of conditions whose specifics varied by era and location. However, there were a few generalities that consistently defined the ailment. […] Its classic and easily recognizable symptoms included listlessness, sleep deprivation, lack of interest in food or drink, and the languorous wasting away of the entire body, except for the eyes, which, according to one tradition, revealed the infection of the sufferer's system through the optic nerve and into the three ventricles of the brain by the phantasmic image of the beloved. The disorder was accompanied by emotional instability, an irregular pulse, and an ambulatory mania born of restlessness; it was often associated with abnormal erotic phenomena and enhanced capacity for sexual performance. The most natural and effective cure, and the one most fervently desired by the sufferer, was union with the beloved.” (Austern, 2000: 118-119)

This bears a striking correspondence to the medical writings on tarantism, particularly during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, where the state of listlessness, an irregular pulse, mania, and enhanced sexual desire with a longing to be in divine union with the tarantula or St Paul who had caused the condition, became common features in the observation and diagnosis of the tarantate. The references to St Vitus' dance, and other forms of 'dance mania which arose during the Middle Ages, also became a feature of the writings on tarantism.

Instances of St Vitus' dance, or the Dancing Plague, are found from the eleventh to the seventeenth centuries throughout Europe. The symptoms of the condition, involving a state of apparent mania, leading to collective and frenzied dance or movement, often in relation to a particular ecclesiastical figure or building, explains why tarantism has often been included within the categorization of St Vitus' dance. However, the problems with categorizations and taxonomies are again revealed, as the particular cultural and performative manifestations of tarantism are subsumed under a general heading of dance mania, even though the characteristics are in many aspects quite different to the historical descriptions of St Vitus' dance, and to the medical condition that bears its name. In fact, St Vitus' dance is now accepted as being synonymous with Sydenham's Chorea, which is caused by rheumatic fever, resulting in involuntary spasmodic movements, and this is significant in understanding the essential differences between the phenomena. The reasons for the rise of the dancing plagues are often attributed to the extremely stressful circumstances of medieval Europe, such as the Black Death and other plagues; medical conditions including leprosy and syphilis; failure of harvests resulting in famine; war, and poverty (Donaldson et al.; Hecker; Sigerist; Backman; Bartholomew; Brabazon). It was also linked to conditions of melancholy, hysteria, and depression (Paracelsus; Bartholomew; Hughes). The exact date of the first occurrence specifically relating to St Vitus is unclear. Backman describes the famous incident that took place in Strasbourg in 1518. According to the records of Daniel Specklin written in 1587, a large number of old and young people began to dance in the market places, and continued to dance for a night and a day, until they fell to the ground. They were sent to the chapel of St Vitus near Zabern, where they were given 'small crosses and red shoes," and a mass was held for them. On the uppers and soles of the shoes, crosses were drawn in consecrated oil and in the name of St Vitus, they were sprinkled with holy water. This helped all of them' (Backman, 1952: 235-6).

Even though there are many recorded incidents of dance plagues prior to this (see Backman), St Vitus became associated with those smitten by the condition. De Martino states that the saint's name was used as a form of curse: 'Gott geh dir Sankt Veit (God send you St Vitus) or Dass dich Sankt Veit ankdme (may St Vitus come to you)' (De Martino, 2005: 221). Paracelsus (1493-1541) first developed the term choreomania to describe dancing plagues. He opposed the Galenic paradigm of the bodymind and instead posited that the cause of choreomania, or chorea lasciva as he suggested it should also be known, resides in either the laughing veins in the body or in the imagination.

In his unusual idea of the existence of laughing veins, he explains that when they are 'opened and bled, the person begins to laugh and cannot stop while he is bleeding' (ibid.: 158). This is caused by an imbalance of the spiritus vitae within the body, leading to an over-heating and inflammation of the laughing veins. The other cause of the condition is through an overactive imagination and lack of will and reason, resulting in an unhealthy indulgence in joy and worldly pleasure: 'This obviously is one of the reasons why whores and scoundrels who take pleasure in guitar and lute playing, who satisfy all voluptuousness, bodily pleasure, imagination and fancy, never escape but become ill in such a way that they jump and dance, thus applying what has been their occupation.' This dance which we find in whores does not come from nature nor have a natural cause, but it comes from recklessness and disgraceful living in which there is neither reason nor sense. (ibid.: 160) He suggests that the ‘voluptuous urge to dance’ (ibid.: 181) occurs more often in women than men, because of their tendency to relate to the imagination, and their lack of will and reason. He states that the cure for such an urge is abstinence which induces sadness, thus subsuming the state of excessive joy. If locking the patient in a dark room and depriving them of food and comforts does not work, then it ‘is better to take a good stick and give the patients a good beating and lock them in as described above’ (ibid.: 182).

If Paracelsus’ views on St Vitus’ dance appear idiosyncratic, they also demonstrate the potential essentialising of the culture-specific nature of conditions such as tarantism. The physician Hermann Griiber, writing in 1679, acknowledges some similarities between tarantism and St Vitus’ dance: ‘The kind of madness, or as it is called the St Vitus’ Dance [...] seems to have some affinity with the sting of the tarantula. Those affected with this malady are as delirious and restless as those bitten by the tarantula, and become so engrossed in dancing and running about that they ultimately become quite exhausted and fall to the ground’ (Griiber, 1886: 68). However, he also makes clear some of the distinctions between the two phenomena, stating that in St Vitus’ dance, there is no connection with the bite of an animal, and the sufferers are ‘seized with that peculiar madness, and, without any sounds of music, do tire themselves out by their movements’ (ibid.: 69).

De Martino also points to the differences in manifestation of the forms:

[T]he choreutic forms of Northern Europe are completely lacking in the musical symbolism of the ¢aranta that bites and poisons, inducing corresponding melodic aversions or inclinations in the poisoned victim. As we read here and there in the chronicles, even when the chromatic repulsions appeared in the crisis, especially to red, they remained mere impulses and did not have anything to do with the chro- matic symbolism of the taranta. (De Martino, 2005: 221)

The other significant difference is that in tarantism, the movements used are that of a specific form of dance in response to the particular music being played, whereas in St Vitus’ dance, the movements are usually described as paroxysms, without a direct response to the rhythm or melody of music, if there is some, or any organised form of dance. Even Backman, who includes a brief mention of tarantism, describes the movements of dance manias as being twitches, spasms and leaps which could be labelled as ‘dance’, as ‘people of those times did not mean by dancing what we mean today. For them any twitching of the muscles or the bending of the limbs was a dance’ (Backman, 1952: 327). Whether Backman is accurate in this assumption, it is clear that there is a distinction between this type of condition causing spasmodic muscular movements, and the use of the organised movements of pizzica dance in response to the appropriate music in tarantism. As well as the types of movements, there is the fact that tarantism was not always a mass public event, but rather was often performed in a private space, in a house or in the fields, with just the musicians and perhaps a few other people present. It was not necessarily a public or shared expression, but rather a personal experience of efficacy through the embodiment of the dance in response to the music in a particular time and space. Although the reoccurrence of the symptoms every year and the pilgrimage to the chapel of St Paul in Galatina became a public event in subsequent centuries, the tarantati did not necessarily perform the dance together, and the experience was still a personal one, even within a shared space. The tension between public and private was indicated in Chapter One, and this aspect of the individual experience of healing is often overlooked in writers who define tarantism as being analogous with St Vitus' dance.

Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 113, Backman concludes that in his opinion all forms of dance mania are caused by ergot poisoning," thus reducing the individual cultural contexts and forms of embodiment and experience of the particular place and time of each individual and event into one taxonomical category. Although perhaps a convenient means to diagnose tarantism as a medical condition, the categorisation and association with it as a form of St Vitus' dance, which continued in medical writings through to the twentieth century, often results in a distorted view of the particular magico-religious and performative characteristics of the ritual that are essential in understanding the nature of its efficacious potential.

The medicalisation of tarantism that is apparent from these earliest writings, dictates the way in which it continued to be written about and perceived, as will be demonstrated in this chapter. However, to add to the developing picture, Gentilcore cites a non-medical example of a pre-seventeenth-century writing on tarantism which offers another dimension. Giovanni Pontano (1426-1503) was a Neapolitan humanist and writer, working during the time of Aragonese court in Naples, eventually becoming leader of the famous academy there. In his satirical dialogue Antonius (1491), one of his characters explains why Apulians are considered to be exceedingly happy:

"Whereas only the Apulians have a good and ready excuse to justify their insanity, attributing its cause to the spider they call the tarantula, the bite of which causes men to go mad. And this constitutes their greatest happiness, since, if someone wanted to, he could obtain — quite licitly — the desired fruit of his madness. [...] Women are wont very often to be bitten by this spider; and then, since the poison cannot be extinguished in any other way, it is licit for them to unite with men, freely and with impunity. In this way what for others would be a shameful act [flagitium), for Apulian women is a remedy." (Pontano, Antonius, in I Dialoghi, ed. C. Previtera (Florence, 1943), p. 51, in Gentilcore, 2000: 260)

This extract demonstrates the beginnings of the feminisation of the ritual, in other words, the emphasis on women being bitten by the tarantula and needing the cure which Pontano states is through sexual liaison, becoming the defining feature of the phenomenon. ‘This satirical interpretation anticipates later views on tarantism as being a state of folly, and an excuse for immoral behaviour, most particularly by women. In fact, the earliest medical examples as shown do not suggest that women suffered from tarantism more than men, and certainly Alessandro's case study was of a young man. However, Paracelsus was not alone in suggesting a connection between a weakness in the rational mind, and women's fragility in this respect, with their tendency towards the imagination and fancy. The notion of lust and excessive joy in relation to dance has already been discussed, so a narrative began to develop, associating tarantism with sexual licence and women, particularly those from the lower class. This narrative was expanded during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, especially with the debate over whether the condition was caused by an actual spider bite or by hysterical fancy, or the desire to dance freely and behave in the manner of a tarantata, whilst not in fact being in a state of illness from poison.

The 'feminisation' of forms of cultural practices has been observed in many traditions. Christine Worobec describes such a process in her fascinating study of the k/ikushi in Russia, who were female 'shriekers, peasant women who were believed to be possessed by the devil. There are chronicled incidents of klikushi from the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries, with extensive study of the phenomenon by Russian medical and psychiatric practitioners at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth centuries. Worobec notes that the feminisation of the possession ritual led to the majority of sufferers being women by the mid-eighteenth century, and by the mid-nineteenth century, all of them were women. This was accompanied by a shift in the perception of the ritual as being an acceptable cultural expression, to instead seen as fraudulent, and the definition of the women as suffering from hysteria emphasised the 'feminine' nature of the condition.

The 'notion that the loss of control over the body constituted a feminine rather than a masculine trait' (Worobec, 2001: 52) reinforces the view of a lack of rational will in women and, as in tarantism several centuries earlier, the 'medicalization of possession and the hystericization of women's bodies by medical professionals was beginning to take effect' (ibid.: 53). Certainly by the end of the seventeenth century, doctors such as Baglivi were emphasising the role of women in tarantism, as will be seen later in this chapter, with his labelling the condition as being 'I' Carnevaletto delle Donne' (Baglivi, 1704: 368) ('the little carnival of women'), and stating that some women pretend to be bitten in order to enjoy dancing.

This can also be seen as being in part due to the medicalisation of tarantism, and Baglivi's need to justify the causes within a biomedical framework. If no 'real' biological foundation could be established by not finding evidence of an actual spider bite, then the only medical explanation could be that the ¢arantata was 'faking'. This creates an hegemony of medical taxonomy over culturally determined practices which may be acceptable within their specific context, yet not definable within certain biomedical explanations which attempted to harness such phenomena within their own rational, scientific world. The body becomes an object of medical definition, rather than a cultural expression of the experience of embodiment as a process during a ritualised dance response to a specific music, which is a psycho-physical means of alleviating symptoms resulting from a particular set of socio-cultural conditions.

Latromusical interpretations: De Ficino and Kircher

Despite the biomedical bias of writings on tarantism, there are also examples from the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries that offer a different understanding of the nature of the ritual, which are those based in an iatromusi-cal approach, or the innate healing power of music, within the framework of natural magic and philosophy. Two examples of this are discussed in this section: the brief mention of tarantism by the Neoplatonist Marsilio Ficino, and the extensive writings by the Jesuit priest and Renaissance polymath Athanasius Kircher, whose treatise Magnes, sive de arte magnetica was much quoted and often derided by the medical practitioners who followed him. As Gentilcore states in relation to the understanding in the early writings that the condition of tarantism was caused by the bite of an actual spider:

116

CHAPTER TWO

It was this symbiotic relationship between tarantism and the actual spider bites that formed the focus of debate, in the context of de venenis literature: writing on poisons, including the bites of venomous animals, and their antidotes. From this point on, cultural interest in tarantism moves in two essentially different directions, one after the other: musicological and medical. (Gentilcore, 2000: 260)

This section focuses on the first of these, the musicological, and the ability of music to effect a process of healing in the body through notions of sympathy and correspondence which hark back to those from ancient Greece previously discussed. Ficino and Kircher, both humanists, offer a different paradigm of interpretation of the body and embodiment within tarantism which is related to the natural world and natural magic, with an understanding of the efficacy of the ritual through the healing power of music and the relationship of the body to the cosmos, rather than a biomedical view offered by the subsequent medical practitioners. Though writing 150 years apart, and within different philosophical and cultural frameworks, it is their aligning of music and medicine within notions of natural magic, as well as the use of some of the same source material from antiquity, which places them together in this context.

Marsilio Ficino

Marsilio Ficino (1433-99) was one of the most significant figures in the development of Neoplatonism during the Renaissance, and responsible for the translation of Plato's work into Latin, as well as reviving interest in the importance of Plato, as opposed to Aristotle, whose writings and philosophy were more in favor at the time. Cosimo de Medici, powerful, rich and influential as well as greatly devoted to the furthering of learning and philosophy, invited Ficino to become the head of the Platonic Academy in Florence, later patronized by Cosimo’s son Piero and his grandson Lorenzo. The meetings of the Academy were attended by not only the Medici and invited philosophers, but also by some of the artists who were supported by the court, which included Michelangelo Buonarroti, Leonardo da Vinci, and Sandro Botticelli. Ficino, in the merging of past and present, drew on ideas from antiquity of not just Plato, but also the Neoplatonists from the third and fourth centuries CE, such as Iamblichus and Plotinus, as well as the ancient Egyptian Hermes Trismegistus, reinterpreting and developing these earlier ideas with his own interest in astrology and natural magic. In particular, he discussed the ability of music to create a psychophysical transformation through establishing a harmony in body and soul by means of correspondence and sympathy. Astrological influences, as they had developed by Ficino’s time, were also incorporated into the correspondences in relation to the musical modes, thus connecting ‘music theory and practical magic’ (Tomlinson, 1993: 97). Ficino created a synthesis of music, medicine, and astrology. He was the first Westerner to establish a therapeutic system based on music. In a letter to Antonio Canigiani, Ficino explained the connection between medicine and music: "You ask, Canigiani, why I so often combine the study of medicine with that of music. What, you say, has the trade of pharmacy to do with the lyre?" (Ficino, 1996: 61). He referred to Plato and Aristotle, who taught that music maintains and restores harmony in the soul, while medicine does the same for the body. Since the body and soul correspond with each other, Ficino argued that it is easy to care for the harmony of both body and soul in the same man. Chiron and the prophet David are mentioned as examples of practicing both arts. Democritus and Theophrastus maintained that this can be done in the case of other diseases, of both the body and the soul. Pythagoras, Empedocles, and the physician Asclepiades proved this in practice. (ibid.: 62)

Da Vinci, possibly influenced by Ficino, mentioned tarantism in one of his manuscripts: "Il morso della taranta mantiene 'uomo nel suo proponimento, cioé quel che pensava quando fu morso" (Cod. H 18 y, in Di Lecce, 1994: 9). Ficino stressed the importance of music because it is based in the medium of air, which has a stronger effect than anything transmitted through the other senses. This sympathetic correspondence allows particular music to gain the influence of a planet, connecting the mundane physical world with the cosmos. Music imitates emotions and moral attitudes, influencing the singer and listener. The planets have the moral character of the gods whose names they bear, which can be imitated in music. Performing such music can make oneself more Jovial, Solarian, Venereal, etc. This mimetic theory of music connects with the world-harmony one, as mimetic music is a living spirit, and the heavens also have musical spirit. (Walker, 1985: 16)

In Chapter 21 of the third book from Ficino's renowned collection De Vita (Book of Life), he explains further the connection between music, words, and the element of air in relation to magic. Some words, pronounced with a somewhat sharp effect, have great power over images, directing them to do their own thing more effectively. Origen asserts that there is a great power in certain words, and Alchindus and Synesius, discussing magic, agree. Zoroaster, who forbids the chanting of strange words, and Iamblichus also agree. The Pythagoreans used to do certain wonderful things in the manner of Phoebus and Orpheus with words, songs, and sounds. The ancient doctors of the Hebrews considered this most important, and all poets sing and make wonderful things with their songs. What is all this about? Well, it is so that you might know that certain things that are made of herbs and vapors are made first through the art of medicine, then through the art of astrology, resulting in a common form, just as a certain harmony is given by the gifts of the stars. Thus, tones are first selected for a kind of norm of the stars, then they are composed among themselves for the same kind of congruity, and become almost a common or shared form, in which a certain heavenly power arises.

Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 119
Now, of course, this material of harmony is purer, and more like heaven itself, than the material of medicine.

Harmony, therefore, is full of spirit and sense when it answers to a star according to its own signification, according to its limbs, and the form resulting from these limbs, and according to the affect of its imagination. It has no less a power than anything else that goes into one who is singing. From him this power goes into the nearest listener.

[M]any Orientals and Southern people, especially from India, people for the most part who use Solar things, are said to have an astonishing power with words.

Their singing is conceived with this power.

It is not, then, altogether amazing that certain diseases of the soul and body can sometimes be carried away by it, or even brought on by it, because this Musical spirit touches and works the spirit as a medium between body and soul, affecting either one with its outpouring of affection. You will agree that this force is marvelous, exciting and spirit-brightening, if you agree with the Pythagoreans and Platonists that this is a heavenly spirit, arranging everything with its movements and tones. (Ficino, 1996a: 158, 159-Go, 161, 162)

Ficino here explicates his connection between music and magic, and the power of words and music to affect the psychophysical state of being through harmonious congruence in relation to particular astrological influences, thus leading to an efficacy through the use of music and words. Music historian Gary Tomlinson notes that the Renaissance had a preoccupation ‘with efficacious utterance, musical miracles, and human manipulation of the world’ (Tomlinson, 1993: 97), and points to some of the linguistic origins which connect music and magic:

The lexicon of magic has loaned one of its specifically musical terms to our vocabulary of emotional delight: from incantare or incantatio, the musical technique taken by my dictionary to be exemplary of all magical operations, we borrow enchanting, enchanted, and related words. And from the most common Latin term for a song or tune, carmen, we derive a ubiquitous English word that still retains magical implications in some of its meanings, charm. (ibid.: 1)

The ability of music to charm or enchant a listener and be used as a form of medicine when understood through the harmonious correspondences which connect the mundane human world to the celestial one, leads to Ficino’s iatromusical framework in his brief mention of tarantism at the end of Chapter 21 of De Vita:

Just as people in Apulia, when they are touched by the poison spider there, become numb and lie down half-dead, that is what happens to people who hear Phoebus’ song. For they dance to its sound, they play, and get well. If, after ten years, they should hear a similar sound, they are suddenly stirred to dance again. (Ficino, 1996a: 164)

The reference to ‘Phoebus’ song’ is explained by Ficino in relation to healing: ‘the power of Phoebus as Lord of Music flourishes in all harmony. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

[...] Again, since your spirit has been affected inside, you will likewise affect the soul and body. [...] There is a Phoebean medicine in song, and a power in it’ (ibid.: 163, 164). The aforementioned use of a specific melody to instigate the cure of the poison in tarantism, certainly indicates why Ficino may have used tarantism as an example of musical and magical healing. The use of specific colours within the ritual, which will be discussed further in this chapter, is also a feature of the correspondences relating to celestial bodies, elements and humours, so the unique features of tarantism were appropriated within this paradigm as a way of explaining why these particular correspondences of melody and colour may be found. Ficino himself was much criticised by the Church, as his ideas were seen as based within pagan beliefs, and also by subsequent philosophers, scientists and doctors from the period of the Age of Enlightenment, for whom natural magic was a false and ignorant understanding of the world.

A similar fate was to await a man of the Jesuit order, Father Athanasius Kircher, as he developed his own iatromusical approach to defining tarantism towards the end of the Renaissance, finding himself at odds with those for whom the study of the rational world had overtaken that of the magical one.

Athanasius Kircher

On reading Kircher’s treatise Magnes, sive de arte magnetica (1641) which contains a chapter on tarantism in Part VIII, ‘De Magnetismo Musicae, René Descartes wrote to his friend Constanin Huygens saying of Kircher: “The Jesuit has a lot of tricks; he is more charlatan than scholar” (Findlen, 2004: 22). Even if, as Findlen suggests, this remark by Descartes may have been prompted by professional jealousy as he was also writing on magnets (ibid.: 22), it highlights the schism between Kircher’s late Renaissance framework of thought with that of the emerging Age of Enlightenment, which viewed Kircher’s branch of natural magic as not in keeping with the new world of science and reason.

Kircher (1602-80) was a German Jesuit, based in the Jesuit College in Rome from 1633, who studied, taught, and wrote on an extraordinary range of subjects, including Egyptology, the Classical world, comparative religion, music, mathematics, geology, and magnetism. The study on magnetism is not about ferro-magnetism, but rather connected to the notion of attraction in a broader sense, including that between people, and thus related back to notions of attraction from classical thought. This was central to his work, in that he ‘regarded magnetic attraction and repulsion as the lingua franca of all creation’ (Mayer-Deutsch, 2004: 111). As an example, in Magnes, sive de arte magnetica, he included illustrations of his invention of a Sunflower Clock, which operated on the principle that the sunflower would turn in response to the movements of the sun due to the attraction of the flower to the sun. It was also in this treatise that he wrote on tarantism within this understanding of the force of magnetism or attraction, and the natural world:

The attraction and repulsion of magnets is only the plainest evidence for the same forces that account for the surprising cures achieved by application of snakestone or the playing of tarantella music; the arrangement of the planets and the sun around the earth; and the lives and loves of plants, animals, and men. [...] The sole key to nature, says Kircher, is the unity among dispersed things, the ‘rerum omnium natu- ralium Magnesticus in hoc Universo nexus’ (the magnetic tie among all the natural things in this universe). (Saussy, 2004: 266) In addition to Magnes, sive, he also wrote on music in the Musurgia universalis (1650) which included diagrams of his inventions of music-making machines, and in the Phonurgia nova (1673). In his synthesis of the many disciplines which he studied, he spoke of the ability of music to affect and heal body and soul, and it is this iatromusical aspect in particular that made his writings on music and tarantism so important for De Martino in La terra del rimorso, attempting to move away from the medically reductionist definitions of tarantism.

Kircher’s interest in Apulian tarantism must be seen in the perspective of this attempt to gather in a single synthesis everything which had to do with universal magic, the occult magnetism of the universe, and in particular the prodigious healing effects of music. [...] Kircher embraced all of the ideological elements of tarantism in Apulian popular tradition [...] For him, these features were part of the same immediate reality as that lived by the Apulians who believed in tarantism, except that he wanted in a certain sense to be the philosopher of such connections, their vindicator in the framework of magnetism, iatromusic and humoral pathology. (De Martino, 2005: 225, 226)

In this way, De Martino felt that Kircher, unlike the later medical practitioners, was maintaining the culture-specific ‘nexus of crisis, cure and recovery — its integrity as a cultural phenomenon (ibid.: 226), rather than reducing it to a disease caused by poison or hysteria. Despite writing so fully on tarantism, Kircher himself did not actually observe any cases personally. Instead, he heard of accounts second-hand from two missionary Jesuits in Apulia, Father Nicolellus and Father Gallibertus, based at the colleges in Taranto and Lecce, who would send him details of cases they encountered. They also provided him with some musical notation and lyrics to a selection of the songs used in the rite, which were published by Kircher in a chapter in Magnes, sive, ‘On Tarantism or the Apulian Spider Tarantula, its magnetism and strange sympathy with Music, thus offering a unique example of actual music from this historical moment.

An example of one of Kircher’s tarantellas can be found in the top part of Illustration 5. What is notable from this example, and others included in Kircher’s collections, is the use of a 4/4 duple metre, as opposed to the 6/8 or 12/8 triple metre more commonly found in tarantella melodies. However, as stated in the Introduction, there is often an ambiguity in Apulian pizzica music between duple and triple time, and ethnomusicologist Diego Carpitella, who was part of De Martino’s research team, notes that some of the examples he collected in 1959 were also in 4/4. The only other example of notation of a therapeutic tarantella from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is in 12/8. It was collected by Stefano Storace in Torre Annunziata, which he discusses in his ‘genuine Letter from an Italian Gentleman’ published in the Gentleman’s Magazine in 1753, where he 123 124

In this corrected text, I have removed the page numbers and separated the wrongly appended words. I also verified that the numbers in the text are part of the header or footer, and I didn't continue any unfinished sentences. Then, as Storace began to follow the aria that an elderly woman sang, ‘the man began to move to the rhythm of the music, lifting himself to his feet like a thunderbolt, giving the appearance of a man who had awoken from a terrible vision, his gaze fixed and wild, with every joint of his body in motion. When Storace stopped, the man fell to the floor in a convulsive fit; as soon as he resumed, the man was back on his feet and moving with vigour. (Melechi, 2006) This tarantella is also published in De Martino’s La terra del rimorso along with Kircher’s. Carpitella suggests that this shift from 4/4 to 12/8 in notation was ‘due to a process of stylization from folk to high or semi- high culture. [...] In effect, in folk music, rhythms in eighths and quarters are sometimes quite distinct, while in other cases it is difficult to decide if it is a triplet or a dotted note’ (Carpitella, 2005: 299). It is not possible to be completely sure from the notation whether the songs would have been performed in duple or triple time. It may also be that in the case of Storace, as he was attempting to pick up the song by ear from a woman who he felt was not a good singer, he may have interpreted the time as a clear 12/8, whereas in fact there was a greater ambiguity in metre, although as previously stated, the pizzica dances are different from the more familiar Neapolitan or Sicilian tarantellas that tend to be more clearly in triple time. Kircher’s interpretation of the reports of tarantism from the two Fathers in the field demonstrates his emphasis on the condition being caused by the bite of an actual spider, and the iatromusical approach to the healing of the bodymind through the use of a particular type of music relating to the spider instigating the cure of the dance. At the heart of this is a three-way process of ritualistic elements which together form the cure: music, dance and colour. The chromatic aspect is noted in many of the writings on tarantism through the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and for Kircher, this becomes associated with the notion of attraction and correspondence in relation to the humour of the spider which bit the victim, and of the type of music needed to cure them. One particular feature he notes is that the spider itself is of a specific colour, usually red or green, and will respond to one type of music rather than another. The person who was bitten by the taranta likewise assimilates this preference for both colour and music:

What provokes great amazement is the fact that for a certain resemblance of nature, [taranta poison] arouses the same reaction in man and in the ¢aranta ... As the poison stimulated by the music drives the men to dance through the continuous excitation of his muscles, it does likewise the taranta. (Kircher: 770, in De Martino, 2005: 95)

Kircher tells of an experiment which was ordered by the duchess in the palace in Andria, where a spider was placed hanging in a jar of water, and musicians were then instructed to play. According to the report from Father Nicolellus, when the musicians played a particular melody which corresponded to the humour of the spider, it began to move, leap and ‘dance’ in response to the rhythm of the music. When the musicians stopped playing, the spider also ceased to move. This same process was observed in the tarantati, in that they would need to hear a particular melody which corresponded to the spider that bit them, which would incite them to dance in response to the music, and when the musicians stopped playing, they would fall to the ground. This creates a direct correlation and correspondence between the behavior and process of embodiment connecting the taranta and tarantato. Kircher states that musicians would ask the sarantato about the specific color and location of the taranta which had bitten them, and they would then go to the place concerned to try out different songs to see which made the appropriately colored spider dance, and then would know that this was the particular mode, melody, and rhythm to play to the afflicted tarantato. However, De Martino suggests that the musicians traveling to the actual place probably did not occur, but rather, as Baglivi states, the musicians simply asked about the size and color of the taranta, and would then try different songs until the patient responded (De Martino, 2005: 96).

Whether or not this did occur, there is a direct correspondence established between the humor, color, and musical preference of the spider, and the state of being of the tarantato who was bitten, and the musicians have to try several songs to find the one which connects the two through sympathetic correspondence. Along with the colors, there were other ritual objects and events that occurred in the accounts, which became part of the symbolic landscape of tarantism.

Kircher notes that the ritual could be performed either outside or inside, and if outside, the zarantato would sometimes display a desire to be near or in water, and would create a type of swing by hanging from trees by ropes, as if imitating a spider hanging from a thread on its web. If the ritual took place indoors, then a rope could be hung from the ceiling to have the same effect. He also makes mention of the fact that sometimes the ¢arantati would use unsheathed swords or other weapons during the dance, being particularly drawn to the shining of the metal. As they danced, they would move the sword between their hands, throwing and catching it, and imitating being in a fight. Some would lie down on the sword, until inspired to jump up and start fighting and dancing again. The bottom image in Illustration 5 shows an outdoor example of the ritual, where the ¢arantato is dancing with two swords, with a musician playing for him nearby, and a spider dangling from a thread on a tree.

The element of fighting in the ritual represents both fighting the spirit of the spider and the effects of the poison. Within the pizzica pizzica, with its focus on courtship and the erotic, there is also an element of playful and flirtatious encounter between a man and woman, or sometimes a more serious battle between two men over a woman or as a matter of honour. The ritualistic relationship between fighting and healing, and sometimes additionally the erotic, is clearly embodied within the process and presence of the dance in this way. This will be explored further in the discussion of the pizzica scherma in Chapter Four.

The elements of the influence of nature and the swords or fighting aspect, were also reflected in the choice of colours and music. As mentioned, Kircher stated that the colours most often used were red and green, and that these colours needed different types of music to correspond to them. The colour green incited cheerful songs, with themes about nature, i.e. woodland and meadows, while red demanded more martial songs and rhythms (Kircher, 1641: 762). Kircher offers some insights into the types and socio-economic status of the cases of the ¢arantati that were observed. Although he states that “Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism” (127), many were peasants, shepherds, or others who worked on the land and were therefore not wealthy, there were, contrary to later discussions of tarantism, also noblemen and women who became tavantati, and even cases of Capuchin monks. In Taranto, musicians were paid a regular wage by public officials to be available to play for those afflicted, thus making the cure available to the poor who would not otherwise be able to afford the cost of hiring musicians for the time necessary to be healed (ibid.: 770).

In the case of the Capuchin monks, there was a report of one who performed the ritual daily, and when the Archbishop of Taranto went to see this for himself, the monk was irresistibly drawn to the red of the Archbishop's garments. There is also the story of the monk who was forbidden to perform the ritual, and in a frenzy ran out of the monastery and into the sea, drowning himself as a way of escaping the suffering from which he was not allowed the traditional means of cure.

In addition to providing music, Kircher offers some of the only examples at this time of lyrics for the songs used within the ritual. The range of these songs offers an interesting view on the ways in which the condition of tarantism was perceived. Some of the lyrics demonstrate a strong connection with love and the erotic, in some instances, being overtly sexual:

Deu ti mussicau la tarantella? Sotto la pudia della vanella. (ibid.: 871) [‘Where did the tarantula bite you? Under the fringe of my dress.’] (Gentilcore, 2000: 263)

This harks back to the ideas of sexual licence and the behaviour of women within the ritual, noted by Pontano, but also is related to the songs of love and courtship found more generally within the pizzica. The lyrics connect the spider directly with the bite and the condition, and after the enculturation of the figure of St Paul into the ritual, the savanta in the song is later sometimes replaced by St Paul himself biting the girls and boys in the genitals, thus transferring and transforming the metaphor of the bite and possession to that of and by St Paul instead of, or along with, the spider, which will be discussed later in this chapter.

Another lyric that Kircher includes which he says is in the Sicilian rhythm, or the Sicilian Octave, shows the nature of the correspondence with music itself, in this case by making a direct correlation between the body of a musical instrument, and that of a love-sick man in the process of playing and singing his suffering:

Stu pettu é fattu cimbalu d’amuri
Tasti li sensi mobili e accorti
Cordi li chianti, sospiri e duluri
Rosa é lu cori miu feritu
4 morti
Strali é lu ferru, chiai s6 li miei arduri
Marteddu é lu pensieri, ¢ la mia sorti
Mastra é la donna mia, ch’a tutti
Phuri Cantando canta leta la mia morti. (Kircher, 1641: 873)

[‘This breast has become a harpsichord of love
Keys, the senses, feeling and ready
Strings, the tears, sighs and pains
Sound hole is my heart, mortally wounded
Rod is a point, my ardours are wounds
Hammer is my thought and my fate
Conductor is my lady, who, singing without end
Joyfully sings my death.’] (Gentilcore, 2000: 263)

A common theme of pizzica songs is love and death, as this lyric exemplifies, along with the desire for the beloved in a melancholic longing. The song does not mention the figure of the ¢aranta, and in another example, instead of the zaranta being the cause of the condition, it was rather Apulian wine: Non ft taranta, né fu la tarantella
Ma ft lo vino della g______ Dove te mozicé dill'amata dove fu, Ohime si fusse gamma, ohime mamma, ohime. (Kircher, 1641: 758) [It wasn't the tarantula, or the tarantella, but it was wine from the flask. Where did it bite you, tell me my love, where it was? Oh, if it was your leg, oh, mother, oh.]

Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 129

In this way, the spider is metaphorically transformed into the wine, as it was previously into St Paul. A final example is reminiscent of the strong connection with the sea that was discussed in the Introduction, for here, rather than the spider, a musical instrument, or wine being associated with the beloved and the agent of healing, it is instead a love of the sea:

Allu mari mi portati, Se voleti che mi sanati. Allu mari, alla via, Cosi m'ama la donna mia. Allu mari, allu mari; Mentre campo, t'aggio amari. (ibid.: 874) [Take me to the sea If you want me to heal. To the sea, to the road. This is the way my woman loves me. To the sea, to the sea, I have to love you as long as I live.]

Kircher offers a phrase that aptly summarises the state of being found in many of these songs, that of "joyful misery" (Kircher: 768 in De Martino, 2005: 104). The merging of joy and pain is apparent in the lyrics, as it is in the major-minor shifts in the melodies, as well as in the movements and embodiment of the dance, alternating between immobility, deep sighing, and agitation, to release through the leaps, turns, and skipping, relieving the suffering of the condition through the culturally conditioned processes of embodiment within the ritual.

Even though the iatromusical framing of tarantism was soon subsumed beneath the weight of the medical debate and the age of rationality and science, De Martino reclaimed Kircher's writings in the middle of the twentieth century as he felt that they are far more culturally sensitive to the embodied processes within the ritual than those who followed him, and that Kircher 'ended up preserving for us much more on the cultural phenomenon of tarantism than doctors and naturalists have' (De Martino, 2005: 95).

The approach by Ficino and Kircher may be seen as having more affinity to contemporary attempts in Salento to understand the use of music and dance within their cultural context as a means of healing, and it is perhaps no surprise that some of the present-day practitioners refer to this type of understanding rather than a biomedical one which reduces tarantism to being a disease, or even a fabrication.

Pierpaolo De Giorgi, in his book on tarantism and healing (1999), describes the famous Salentine violinist Luigi Stifani who was born in Nard in 1914 and played for the tarantati, as being an 'iatromusico' (De Giorgi, 1999: 95). Through this, he recalls a past into the present, where an understanding of the innate healing power of music was utilised to establish a correspondence with the psychophysical state of being in order to effect a transformation that can lead to the re-establishment of health within the bodymind.

Perhaps this movement from a medical reductionist view to an iatromusical one is also seen in De Giorgi's choice of the word 'rinascita' for 'healing, which actually means 're-birth'. It is thus connected to the word 'i/ Rinascimento, the 'Renaissance', also a 're-birth, when Ficino at its height and Kircher at its end, wrote about a paradigm of the body which circled back to previous ideas, whilst incorporating their present ones, which were then often derided or ignored until the energetic re-birth of interest in tarantism itself in the twentieth century. The medical and scientific debate of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: The ‘moments’ of the history of tarantism reflect shifting views on and definitions of the nature of the bodymind, where the embodied experiences of those taking part in the ritual are appropriated and redefined within the philosophical, intellectual, and socio-cultural frameworks pursued by each writer situated within their spatial-temporal landscape, which often intersected and collided with other views and opinions of the same phenomenon.

What can be seen in the development of the writings on tarantism from the mid-seventeenth century onwards are the ways in which medical and scientific thinkers and practitioners changed how the body, self, and world were conceptualized and understood. Within the Age of Enlightenment, the acts of observation and classification became paramount, which led to the separation of the observer from the observed, thus making those whom they were observing into an object of study rather than a subject that experiences. For Descartes, the ‘sense of science was to be sight’ (Classen et al., 1994: 88), and the rationalizing of what was seen and understood led to its definition and classification, which needed certain forms of language and meaning in order to achieve a sense of legitimacy and authority, particularly during those ‘moments’ of a paradigm shift in ideas and views of the world.

David Harley points out that ‘in the building of Enlightenment natural history, the erection of complex systems of classification was central. Whenever a new style of enquiry is developed, a rhetorical campaign is required to legitimate it and differentiate it from earlier styles’ (Harley, 1999: 411). This could lead to public disputes between advocates of conflicting systems, as was noted by the eighteenth-century Neapolitan physician Francesco Serao, whose writings on tarantism will be discussed in this chapter. Serao describes the period as being one of heated arguments, sometimes very public, between philosophers, scientists, and students of various schools of thought, which led to Naples being seen as ‘the famous theatre for many battles of this sort’ (Serao: 136, in De Martino, 2005: 228).

The new paradigm of the body and world included the movement away from the humoural understanding of the bodymind, to one that is instead informed by dissection, the discovery of the nervous system, and the developing view of the relationship between anatomy and behavior, leading to a shift from a ‘holistic’ or integrated view of the bodymind found in the humoural approach, to an increasing separation of body from mind. This shift in the rhetoric of medicine and science resulted in an altering of the diagnosis and prognosis of tarantism, which moved it away from a culturally acceptable approach to relieving suffering through music and dance, to instead being a specific type of disease usually originating either in toxicology or psychosis. The main figure of the ‘taranta’ within the ritual may have played a large part in this redefinition, as it offered a way for physicians and naturalists to study and either propose or reject a biological cause based in an understanding of the natural world. For this to be the case, the spider had to be ‘real’, otherwise this kind of analysis would not be possible: Medical writers sought to reduce tarantism into some sort of simple ailment in order to fit it into the medical categories of the period. Their discussion of tarantism was based upon a clinical description of cases and a search for the actual taranta - the tarantula spider - which, for the peasant world, seemed to be more mythical than zoological. (Gentilcore, 2000: 264) In making the physical existence and study of the spider a central factor, the understanding of the efficacy of the ritual shifted from the ability of music and dance to effect the cure through the correspondences of natural magic, to instead psychophysiological disturbances caused by the poison from the spider, and the use of dance to 'sweat' the poison from the body. If no evidence of an actual spider bite could be found, then the condition would necessarily either be fabricated, or else caused by hysterical fancy or melancholy, and by the time of the late nineteenth century, a psychiatric disorder.

These views on tarantism will be seen in this discussion of a selection of medical and scientific writings from the seventeenth century onwards, each offering their own views and paradigms of the body and mind of the tarantata. This is made more complex through the additional intervention by the Catholic Church, which both absorbed tarantism, and was absorbed by it, transforming aspects of the ritual into a Christian framework. It is worth considering through the traces of these historical 'moments, that although the appropriations and categorisations by medicine, science, and the Church may have subsumed the voices of the tarantati themselves, it was possibly their enculturation that enabled the ritual to survive, if in changing forms, through times when cultural practices believed to be based in magic, superstition and paganism were being derided and often persecuted into non-existence by the medical and scientific communities, as well as the Church.

*Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 133
The Apulian physicians
The first evidence of this new type of approach came in 1621, with the publication of Centum historiae, seu observationes, et casus medici, omnes fere medicinae partes, cunctosque corporis humani morbos continents; quae non minus ob theoricam, et praxim ... nunc primum in lucem editae, written by the Apulian physician Epifanio Ferdinando. Ferdinando (1568-1638) was born in the town of Mesagne, and describes himself on the front page of the treatise as being a philosopher and doctor 'Messapiense e Salentinis' (Ferdinando, 1621: Front Page), thus stating his own regional and cultural identity, as was the convention at the time.

His discussion of cases of tarantism was based in his observations within Apulia, such as the case recorded under the date August 1612 of Petrus Simeon Maessapiensis, an adolescent of a 'calido' ['hot' or 'fiery'] temperament, who was bitten by a faranta whilst asleep in the fields (Ferdinando, 1621: 248). Ferdinando explains that the victims were mainly bitten in the summer, and that tarantulas were numerous in the region at that time. He states categorically that the condition is caused by the poison from the bite of the zaranta, and dismisses those who believe this to be otherwise. He also discusses the annual reoccurring of the condition, which could take place over a number of years (he mentions the case of a woman who continued to repeat the ritual for thirty years after the first bite), and tended to occur at the same time of year in which they had originally been bitten, usually the summer: 'Repetit quotannis multis tarantatis haec affection fere stato tempore in aestate' (ibid. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

259). 14 The renowned Irish scientist and founding member of the Royal Society, Robert Boyle, cites Ferdinando in his ‘Essay on the Great Effects of even languid and unheeded motion’ (1685), which contains a discussion of tarantism. He acknowledges that there may be some who do not believe the condition was really caused by the bite of a tarantula and cured by music, but points out that Ferdinando’s writings were based in his personal observations, and challenges those who doubt to go to see for themselves. His own belief was instilled by knowing some physicians and an acquaintance in Taranto, who ‘saw many bitten persons in their dances, some in public and some in private places, and amongst the rest a physician, on whom the tune that fitted his distemper had the same operation as on the other patients’ (Boyle, 1685: 75).

134 CHAPTER TWO

Although Ferdinando was working within a biomedical paradigm at odds with the iatromusical one discussed earlier, he nonetheless still emphasised the importance of the use of music and dance within the ritual. However in this case, he stated that the dance is used as a means of raising the temperature and pulse to sweat the poison out of the body, thus instigating the cure.

Dorothy Zinn points out in a footnote to her translation of La terra del rimorso, that in describing the manner of the dancing, the word ‘baccheggiva’ is used. She translates this as ‘exalted’, whilst stating that the original Italian term means ‘literally, to behave frenetically in the manner of the Bacchantes’ (Zinn, 2005: 97, fn. f), thus making the historical and cultural link back to the movements and processes of the Bacchic dancers in their state of ekstasis and enthousiasmos discussed earlier in this chapter. It is therefore not surprising that De Martino selected this passage to cite in his book, bearing in mind his own placing of the origins of tarantism within the Bacchic and Corybantic cults of ancient Greece, but also interesting that Ferdinando chose this particular term to describe the state of being of the dancer within the ritual.

Ferdinando makes some similar observations to Kircher about the elements of the ritual, for example that it could take place outside as well as inside; the use of a constructed swing; and the significance of the colours red and green. He extends this into naming the actual forms of music used, listing different types of the tarantella as being: Panno Verde (Green Cloth) and Panno Rosso (Red Cloth), as well as Cinque tempi, Spallata, and Moresca (a Moorish tune/dance) (Ferdinando, 1621: 259). The Panno Verde and Panno Rosso appear to correspond to Kircher’s description of the use of particular coloured cloths and ribbons relating to certain types of music, so in this case, Panno Verde (green) were gentler songs about the fields and groves of the countryside, whereas Panno Rosso (red) were more lively and excitable (Hecker, 184.4: 91, De Martino, 2005: 98).

Despite Ferdinando making a correlation between colour and music, this is not connected to the humours in the body as it was with Kircher. Although Ferdinando discusses the efficacious potential of the dance within the ritual, this is in order to effect a biomedical cure through sweating, and he proposes that perhaps the same result could be created by the means of other cures, such as theriac (Gentilcore, 2000: 264). The fullness of description of the ritual within Baglivi's 1695 essay, Dissertatio de Anatome, Morsu et Affectibus Tarantulae ('A Dissertation of the Anatomy, Bite and other Effects of the Tarantula'), as well as his own scientific and medical experiments and explanations, have led to Baglivi's work being one of the most often quoted and plagiarised writings on tarantism. Due to its influence and the rich detail of the ritual, this section contains a discussion of the treatise and his approach to tarantism, which led to his declaration of a rift between what he saw as the 'true' tarantism, which consisted of the disease relating to the poison, and if there is no evidence of a poisonous bite, he described this as the 'false' tarantism.

Baglivi was born in Ragusa in the province of Dalmatia (now Dubrovnik in Croatia), and at the age of fifteen was adopted by Petro Angelo, a physician in Lecce. He became a renowned physician himself, particularly in the areas of anatomy and pathology. He begins his treatise on the bite of the tarantula with a lengthy description of the history and landscape of Apulia, and emphasises the tendency of the climate towards excessive heat from the sun and dryness of the soil, so that 'the inhabitants breathe in an air that feels as if it came from a burning oven' (Baglivi, 1704: 350). He then likens the temperament of the climate to that of the people who live within it:

The temperament of the climate, is matched by that of the inhabitants; for, generally speaking, they are of a hot, scorched constitution, with black hair, and a brownish or paleish skin, meagre, impatient, peevish, watchful, very quick in their way of apprehension, nimble in reasoning, and extremely active. They are very subject to ardent fevers, frenzies, pleurisies, madness and other inflammatory diseases. Nay, the heat is so effective in that country, that I have seen several of the inhabitants urged by it to the last degree of impatience and madness. (ibid.: 350)

The point about excessive heat is significant in Baglivi's diagnosis of tarantism, and he suggests this is also connected to the nature and behaviour of the tarantula itself. It is 'a little animal impatient of cold, that keeps under ground in Winter' (ibid.: 351), however 'in Summer they straggle out and haunt the open fields, where they lie in wait for travellers' (ibid.: 352). This is the reason why so many of the attacks of tarantism occur in the summer, as the 'tarantula is not venomous in every country, nor in every season of the year, but only in Apulia, and that in Summer, especially about the Dog-Days. [...] ['T]heir poison is then exalted by the scorching beams of the sun, which makes them so mad and raging that they assault every one that comes near them' (ibid.: 359). He offers a description of the effects of the poison, which causes great unhappiness to the sufferer:

The poison of the tarantula affords us a deplorable influence of this unhappiness; for such is the peculiar and uncommon nature of this venom, that when once it seizes the body, it either kills the patient out of hand, if music and a reasonable use of remedies does not immediately take place; or, when these are employed, makes such a deep impression upon the fluids of the body, that it revives (as it were) every year; and particularly in the three months of the summer; and unless this anniversary return be mitigated for the time with dancing and the other antidotes, it keeps the patient all that year under an innumerable strain of grievous disorders. (ibid.: 362) In this, Baglivi confirms that music is a valid cure for the symptoms of the poison, as well as the reoccurrence of the condition on an annual basis, with the need to repeat the ritual of the cure. During the first stage of the illness, there are various psychophysical manifestations: A few hours after the bite, the patient is seized with a great difficulty of breathing, a heavy anguish of heart, and a prodigious sadness; his voice is sorrowful and querulous, and his eyes disturbed; and when he is asked by the bystanders where his pain lies, he either makes no answer at all, or points with his hand to the region of the heart, as if that were most affected. (ibid.: 363) Other symptoms include an attraction to particular colours, such as red, green or blue. Whilst stating that different tarantulas cause different types of symptoms, these are not related just to their colours, but rather to their biological categorisation, in that if they are spotted, they will cause pain, itching and headaches, whereas a bite from a black tarantula results in swelling, cramps, and vomiting. However, Baglivi does acknowledge that different types of tarantulas will correspond with particular types of music and instruments, and that these need to be found in order to instigate the cure: As the tarantulas are of different sizes, colours and virulency, so the persons stung by them are delighted and moved to dance by different kinds of sounds, according to the difference of the tarantula that infected them. Nay, every patient has not only his particular tune, but also his particular instrument: some a pastoral pipe, others a little drum, cittern, harp, timbrels, violins, and pipes of several sorts. Here it is remarkable that sometimes the musicians will tune three or four different sorts of sounds without having the least effect upon the patient. But when they fall into a tune that's accommodated to the poison they presently receive the benefit of it. However this must be taken for a truth, that how much so ever they vary in their particular tunes, yet they all agree in this. To have the notes run over the greatest quickness imaginable (which quickness of sound is commonly called Tarantella). (ibid.: 382) Baglivi also provides extensive description of the music and dance cure itself, which offers some interesting data concerning the processes of embodiment within the ritual. After the bite, the tarantato falls down, and is unable to move, and it is then that the musicians are called to play for him: Upon the first sounding of the music the fore-mentioned symptoms begin slowly to abate, the patient begins to move his fingers, hands, feet, and successively all the parts of the body; and as the music increases, their motion is accelerated, and if he was lying upon the ground, up he gets (as in a Fury) falls a dancing, sighing, and into a thousand mimick gestures. These first and violent motions continue for several hours, commonly for two or three; after a little breathing in a bed, where he is laid to carry off the sweat, and that he may pick up a little strength to work he goes again, with as much eagerness as he did before, and every day spends almost 12 hours by the clock in repeated dancing; and which, is truly wonderful, so far is he from being wearied or spent by this vehement exercise, that (as they say) it makes him more sprightly and strong, (ibid.: 378) This describes the process whereby the initial response to the music occurs in the extremities of the body, particularly the hands and feet, the impulse from which then spreads throughout the whole body. This was noted by other writers observing the ritual, in that it was often the hands and feet which began to move first by beating in time to the music, which was also a means whereby it was possible to diagnose someone as being a tarantata (as in the case observed by Cirillo, which will be discussed shortly). The increase in tempo and rhythm of the music was matched by their movements, which resulted in them rising up and dancing energetically, until falling down and resting for a period. The whole process was repeated as many times as necessary in order to complete the cure. This process of embodiment in the ritual continued to feature in the practice of tarantism, and was observed very much in this same form by De Martino in 1<!-- 1959, as is seen in his book and in the documentation within the related film, Terapia Coreutico-Musicale del Tarantismo (1959), discussed in Chapter Three. -->Baglivi notes that there are other ritualistic elements that can be introduced into the dance, some of which have been mentioned previously, including green vines; water; red, green or yellow cloths; swords and mirrors. The fact of someone asking for these things while dancing was sometimes used as a means for diagnosing the condition. Although Baglivi suggests that other treatments for poisons can be tried, such as Alexipharmacs, Bezoardics, or searing the area of the bite with a red-hot iron, he feels ultimately these remedies are not going to work unless music is also employed 'as is well known by the constant and infallible experience of those parts of the country' (ibid.: 376). During the annual reoccurrence of the condition, the musicians must also be called in again to play, otherwise the «tarantato» will not be cured.

Since Baglivi focuses his diagnosis of tarantism so firmly on the effects of the poison in the body, he encounters a problem when dealing with cases where there is no clear evidence of a bite occurring, thus removing the ritual from the realms of medical positivism and natural science. In order to accommodate this, Baglivi developed the notion of two types of tarantism, one real and one fake, with the fake form most often being attributed to women:

Here it must not be concealed, that though in our country there is really such a thing as the poison of the tarantula, and persons infected with it, yet women, that make up a great part of that number, very frequently counterfeit it under the masque of its usual symptoms; for, whether they be under the power of love, or have lost their fortunes, or meet with any of those evils that are peculiar to women, they never leave poring upon the mournful object, till they run into despair, or down-right melancholy, or at least are upon the borders of it; and they are also under a disadvantage or living a solitary sort of life, like that of nuns, denied the benefit of free converse with men, though never so fair and honest. Besides all this, the climate is sultry, their constitution is of the same nature, their food hot and very nourishing, and their life easy. Partly from the former, and partly from the latter of these causes, it is no rare thing with them to turn mopish and melancholy. No wonder then if they be mightily delighted with variety of music and dancing, whence they feign themselves to be stung by the tarantula, on purpose to enjoy the agreeable diversion of music, which is only allowed to such persons; and then the sham passes the better, for that the pretext is accompanied with a real paleness of face, sadness, difficulty of breathing, sorrow of heart, a depraved imagination, and the other symptoms of the pretended, rather than true poison of the tarantula. In fine, the musical entertainment of this country is so very agreeable to women that it is a proverb with us, ‘Il Carnevale delle Donne’ (‘the little carnival of women’). But though women counterfeit this distemper sometimes, we must not therefore imagine that all others do the same, for there are some persons otherwise both learned and religious, who, not being satisfied of this upon the credit of persons that were stung, have made the experiment upon themselves, that they have confessed, unless the music had been ready at hand, their lives would have gone for it. (ibid.: 368-9)

In this way, Baglivi establishes the discourse of some women who are suffering from melancholy, the effects of the heat, or a ‘depraved imagination’; faking the symptoms in order to be able to dance publicly in a context which is deemed acceptable due to being seen as an illness. He suggests that the experience of embodiment within the dance will be different depending on whether it is ‘real’ or not, and it is the musicians who can tell if the women are faking, ‘for if they find that they presently take any motions, and jog on indifferently, without any regard to the swiftness, slowness, or other difference of sounds, they give to understand the honest women is but in jest, and afterwards experience puts the matter out of doubt’ (ibid.: 382-3).

In other words, if the woman does not respond to the music through her movements, then she is considered to be not genuinely ill, as otherwise she would be moved by the music to dance in the recognised manner of the cure. This raises some interesting related questions that have been asked by anthropologists during their studies of ritual performances during the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, concerning how it may be possible to tell if a participant is ‘genuinely’ in a state of trance or possession, or whether they are ‘faking’ it. Not only is this dependent on the individual and cultural positioning of the person making the assessment, but it can also make essentialist assumptions about a state of being as deliberately or consciously experienced as ‘real’ or ‘fake’.

John Emigh suggests that ‘[ritual performers familiar with the process know whether or not they have been acting or in trance, just as accomplished actors have a clear sense as to whether or not they are pretending” (Emigh, 1996: 30). However, this establishes a dualistic approach to understanding a process of transformation and embodied experience which may not be possible to define within clear boundaries of being ‘genuine’ or otherwise. This question in relation to tarantism has been examined in the past few decades, when it has been re-established as a cultural phenomenon that can embrace notions such as trance, possession, or altered states, whereas clearly for Baglivi, this did not fit within his medical positivist framework, thus leading to his creation of such a gendered dichotomy in his diagnosis, and furthering the feminisation of the ritual.

By stating that ‘true’ tarantism is only what can be seen as being a disease, then the ‘false’ tarantism becomes all the other cultural manifestations. This also determines the embodied act of the women dancing. If they do not exhibit the particular medical features he describes, then they are perceived as not being genuinely ill or suffering from any type of condition which may be relieved through the presence of their action in the dance. In this way, their dancing is considered an act of immorality or weakness in temperament, as it does not conform to the medical paradigm of being caused by a disease, and therefore acceptable. The Neapolitan physicians Baglivi's work, as stated, was hugely influential in the dissemination of tarantism beyond Apulia through translations and citation. His views on the medicalization of the ritual still acknowledged the existence of the condition resulting from the bite of a spider, and the potential for music and dance to act as a cure within the particular site of Apulia. It was this view, as well as that of Kircher's iatromusical ideas, that was challenged by physicians from the Neapolitan medical school, who had a very different perspective on the cause and symptoms of the ritual.

One day in August 1693, two men entered the bookshop of the renowned printer Antoine Bulifon in Naples. What happened next was related by Bulifon in a letter that was cited by the Neapolitan physician Francesco Serao (1702-85), in one of his lectures (Lezioni) given at the Academy of Sciences and Letters. The two men in the bookshop were both doctors, and held conflicting views on the nature of tarantism. One was Don Domenico Sangenito, who had written an article claiming the existence of tarantism as being a genuine phenomenon resulting from the bite of a spider. The other was Bernardino Clarizio, a student of Cirillo at the school of medicine in the University of Naples, where the teachings of Hobbes, Bacon, Descartes, and Gassendi were prevalent. These views, along with those of the Counter-Reformation, had led to prominent medical figures such as Tommaso Cornelio ridiculing the work of Kircher and his writings on natural magic and philosophy.

A heated argument on the real nature of tarantism ensued between Clarizio and Sangenito, leading to a public challenge. Clarizio stated that he would allow himself to be bitten by a tarantula, to see if he would suffer from any of the symptoms of tarantism as a result. If he did so, then it would prove Sangenito correct in his views on the condition, and Clarizio would have to live with the consequences. However, if he had no ill effects, then Sangenito would have to buy a number of books for Clarizio to enjoy "in spite of all the tarantulas of Apulia and all the fanatics of the universe" (Serao, 1.c., in De Martino, 2005: 229). The outcome of the experiment was that Clarizio got his books.

Serao recounted this story as part of his own redefining of tarantism within the ideas of the Neapolitan medical school, which created an opposition to the views of the doctors in Apulia such as Ferdinando, Baglivi, and Nicola Caputo. At the beginning of the eighteenth century, Naples was a city renowned for its learning and culture, and particularly as a place of medical and scientific discovery and debate. The great natural feature that dominates Naples, the volcano of Vesuvius, drew scientists to its surroundings to investigate the particular features of nature in the area. Both Serao and Bulifon wrote about the eruptions of Vesuvius that they witnessed, and Serao in particular became renowned for his description of the eruption in 1737. The volcano additionally attracted naturalists and scientists from around Europe, and particularly after the excavation of Herculaneum in 1738 and Pompeii ten years later, also drew those on the Grand Tour or otherwise interested in viewing the remains of the classical past, including poets, writers, and painters, to Naples and the surrounding areas. When Serao published his Della Tarantola, 0 sia Falangio di Puglia in 1742, based on his Lezioni, he was writing within the framework of thought prevalent in the medical school which, as already mentioned, supported the philosophical and scientific views of those such as Descartes and Hobbes, and particularly opposed those held by Kircher. As such, it is perhaps not surprising that tarantism became a site of debate by those within the school attempting to place the ritual within a paradigm which was in direct contradiction to one based in natural magic. However, Serao goes further than this to suggest that the condition, which he describes as ‘bizarre’ and ‘surprising’ (‘un bizzarro e sorprendente fenomeno’ (Serao, 1742: 105)) has nothing to do with a spider at all, but is instead a means of dealing with a psychic disorder caused by melancholy which is particular to the people from Apulia. In addition to citing the story of Clarizio and Sangenito, he also quoted his teacher Niccolò Cirillo’s account of his witnessing a woman he saw in a hospital in 1721. She would not eat or speak, and appeared to be unable to move, until he noted that ‘her hands and head were shaking in a certain rhythm so that the agitation appeared to correspond to a musical tempo’ (Serao: 194 in De Martino, 2005: 94). On asking where she came from, and discovering that she was a native of Apulia, he decided this must be a case of tarantism. He called in musicians to play for her, and when the music started, she began to move her hands and head. With some assistance, she got up and, holding a red ribbon, began moving on her own to the rhythms of the music. Cirillo notes his astonishment that she could have so much strength to be able to dance in this way, considering she had not eaten for several days and had appeared so incapacitated before the music started. After dancing, she went back to bed to rest before the music restarted, but she was too weak to get up again, and died three days later. In this case, there is no mention of evidence of an actual spider’s bite, but instead it is stated that Cirillo suspected the woman was a farantata because she originated in Apulia. This feature in particular became part of Serao's assessment of the condition in Della Tarantola. He does not dispute that such a thing can happen, but questions the reality of whether its cause is actually the poison resulting from the bite of a tarantula. He goes into great detail about the biology of the different spiders and scorpions in Apulia, where they are found, and their particular characteristics. In analyzing this, alongside information provided to him by his correspondents in the region, he concludes that it is not possible to reduce the illness to being caused by the poison from a tarantula, but instead that it was due to the inherent state of melancholy found in the nature of people from Apulia, and their desire to play music and dance as a means of coping with what he states is a psychic disorder of melancholy, or ‘delirio malinconico’ (Serao, 174.2: 217). In this way, he places the condition as being a cultural phenomenon, even though still an illness, and labels it as ‘un istituto’ (an ‘institution’), a term of which De Martino approves, as it suggests a more rounded research approach to the condition than a purely medical one. However, De Martino also acknowledges that Serao is not clear about the distinction or relationship between an ‘institution’ and a ‘disease’ and it is ultimately his views on the condition as being a psychic disorder rather than anything to do with spiders which became the established view on the ritual (De Martino, 2005: 239). Perhaps De Martino’s approval of the term ‘istituto’ has more to do with his own reading of tarantism as a cultural phenomenon, than Serao’s original intention. The medical debate during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries demonstrates a continual appropriation of the ¢arantati and manifestations of the ritual into the discourse and rhetoric of each particular physician in 144 CHAPTER TWO the battle ensuing over the paradigm shift into the Age of Enlightenment. This debate was not only about the derision of natural magic and the pro- motion of science, but also concerned the means and practices of medical hypothesis. The division was between the physicians from Apulia, observ- ing cases of tarantism, and writing about their views on the validity of the condition as caused by the bite of a spider and the cure through music and dance, and those physicians in Naples, offering their opinions based on second-hand reports.

Thus, as Gentilcore suggests in his review of Di Mitri’s contemporary re-appraisal of the historical records, the ‘real debate was within medicine itself: cosmopolitan center versus empirical practice’ (Gentilcore, 2008: 450). As Apulian physician Baglivi points out at the start of his treatise on tarantism:

All the Authors that writ of the Tarantula have either gone upon Hearsay, or coined several Things at pleasure. None of them ever was in Apulia where the creature chiefly displays its venom, abating for Epiphanius Ferdinando an Apulian, that added to his practical observations from histories of persons bit with the tarantula. This province [is] therefore untouched, or only made known by some general and confused hints. (Baglivi, 1704: 345-6)

This establishes tarantism as a contested space between two sites: the local, at the periphery, which encompasses direct observation in its methods; and the centre, which is perceived as the cosmopolitan height of learning, but whose methods are based in analysis of second-hand accounts, rather than through observation in the field.

Throughout this debate, what remains unheard is the voices of the tarantati themselves, or their own understanding of the meaning of the ritual from their embodied experience. Although many of the physicians offer a brief contextualisation of the social status of some of the ¢arantati, there is nothing about how they themselves feel about undertaking the ritual. The many writings are always about the ¢arantati, interpreting their actions within a particular medical or philosophical theory, rather than from the perspective of their own belief and experience, which defines how the ritual has been seen and understood in relation to its efficacious potential.

As Csordas discusses in relation to early accounts of healing rituals: ‘there is attention to what is done to participants without much attention to what it means for them. Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 145 Their lack of experiential specificity has had important consequences for our understanding of therapeutic efficacy’ (Csordas, 1996: 94). The historical records speak more of the views and beliefs of the physicians, rather than those undergoing the ritual. However, it was these medical views which defined the way in which tarantism was discussed and disseminated, which in turn affected the future practice of the ritual. Serao’s views, as reductionist as they were, had a strong influence on how tarantism was seen by physicians and scientists in his time and afterwards, and was possibly one of the factors which led to the decline in the practice of the ritual through the late eighteenth and into the nineteenth centuries. Dominico Cirillo, a Professor of Natural History at the University of Naples, noted Serao's contribution to the process in a letter to the English doctor William Watson in 1770: "Every year this surprising disorder loses ground, and I am persuaded, that in a very little while it will entirely lose its credit. The Neapolitan physicians all look upon the tarantula in the same light, particularly after the ingenious book published on this subject, by the learned Dr. Serao, who, by various experiments, has proved, that the bite of the tarantula never produced any bad effects, and that music never had any thing to do with it." (Cirillo, 1770: 237-8)

Thus, the center of learning in the school in Naples had a voice that was ultimately stronger than that of the periphery of those working with empirical practice in the region of Apulia. Tarantism, with its complex encompassing of nature and efficacy, offered fertile ground for attempts at legitimising ideas and practices by a range of writers whose legacy has been both a blessing and a curse for the development and study of the ritual.

146 CHAPTER TWO

The influence of the Church, and the enculturation of St Paul

There was another significant influence on the history of tarantism which was in part responsible for its decline, and also had a connection to the medical debates: the Catholic Church. Clearly, the Church has been an influence throughout the historical times which have been discussed, but it was during the eighteenth century that tarantism was explicitly drawn into the Church's domain through the figure of St Paul and the chapel of Galatina, which was first discussed in the work of Apulian physician Nicola Caputo, whose views on tarantism were also in disagreement with those from the medical school in Naples as part of the medical debate in the eighteenth century.

During the period after the Counter-Reformation, the Church waged a war on what were seen as practices of magic and pagan rites, partly as a means of establishing a firmer control over the lives and beliefs of the people. In particular, this led to a close relationship between the Church and systems of healing practices, as the ecclesiastical hegemony sought to eradicate the belief in the efficacious power of magical practices and rituals by labelling them as demonic, and needing instead the divine intervention and intercession of the one Christian God in order to be healed successfully.

The Episcopal court was opened as part of an ongoing campaign against 'magic and superstition': a category of rituals believed to gain their efficacy — and their very efficacy was rarely questioned — through the intervention of the devil. If a spell caused illness, it was the devil which gave it its power and God who allowed it to happen as a way of testing the sinner. And only the Church's remedies, the ecclesiastical authorities argued, could safely combat it. (Gentilcore, 1998: 14)

Gentilcore proposes a model for what he defines as the 'medical pluralism' present in the Kingdom of Naples during the early modern period, which consists of 'three concentric and permeable rings, labelled "medical", "ecclesiastical", and "popular" (ibid.: 3). The choice of which form of treatment would be undertaken is based in factors such as availability, cost and suitability, but could well consist of a combination of the three. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Disease was equated with sin, and thus the body that was ill was also a body that was possessed by some form of evil which needed to be purged in order to be cured. This understanding of illness as a form of possession which is healed by exorcism was a common perception of the process of disease within the body: The popular healing rituals of the period made use of exorcising formulas to conjure disease out of the body. But the possession-illness link is clearly evident in the miracle narratives, too. Disease is represented as an active force, which enters and advances through the body. It ‘assails, ‘oppresses, ‘comes upon, ‘strikes, ‘crushes, ‘burdens’ the body. A war between sickness and health ensues, the body becoming the field of battle. [...] During this corporeal encounter the sick person is dispossessed. [...] The disease ‘withdraws, the body is ‘liberated’, ‘cleansed’. The sick person has been singled out, the body reunited with the self and its functionality restored. (ibid.: 182)

This description makes it clear why tarantism was classed as an illness of possession, which needed some form of exorcism as a means of cure. The previous discussion concerning poisons also made reference to this as being seen as a form of possession, which needs the purging cure of exorcism, sometimes in the form of a miraculous and divine intervention.

One of the means of performing the miracle of the cure was through the intercession of the healing power of saints, by praying to them, going on pilgrimages, and making offerings. Different saints became associated with different conditions, and it was St Paul who became the patron saint of the ¢arantati. Although this process of the christianisation of tarantism is often seen as an enculturation by the Church or, because of the subsequent decline in the ritual, the ‘deculturation’ or ‘cultural disintegration’ as Gentilcore suggests (Gentilcore, 1992: 4), it is perhaps also possible to view this as a two-way process. By incorporating elements of Catholicism 16 See Gentilcore, 1992 and 1998, for an in-depth exploration of the notion of ‘medical pluralism’ and the various forms of treatment available. 148 CHAPTER TWO into the practice of tarantism, it was able to survive through a time of the Inquisitions where many so-called ‘folk’ or ‘pagan’ practices were being wiped out as examples of witchcraft and sorcery (see Carlo Ginzburg’s The Night Battles (1992) for his well-known discussion of the persecution of the benandanti during the Inquisitions as an example).

Some of the ways in which St Paul became part of the ritualised landscape of tarantism are perhaps not ones of which the Church might have approved, but with the protection of the saint, and the resultant control the Church had over the tarantati, as well as receiving the monetary offerings made to St Paul in thanks for the cure, the transformation of St Paul into an erotic symbol became an established part of the ritual. The figure of St Paul has already been mentioned in relation to the serpari ox ciaralli, the snake charmers and healers who claimed affiliation with the saint, citing the Biblical reference of his handling venomous snakes in Malta (Acts of the Apostles, Ch. 28, vs. 3-5). It is the physician Nicola Caputo who first mentions the similar enculturation of St Paul into the ritual of tarantism, in his treatise De Tarantulae Anatome et Morsu, pub- lished in Lecce in 1741. Caputo had trained in the medical school in Naples under Cirillo, and thus was familiar with the discourses of medicine and science,______ However, as a doctor of Apulia, his treatise offers a very different conclusion, claiming that the condition is actually caused by the poison from the bite of a taranta, and is cured through music and dance: "We are sure of this: the Apulian tarantula and, with a few exceptions, all the species of spiders cause the illness named tarantism with their bite, for which there is no other more practicable remedy than musical therapy, as experience has shown." (Caputo, 2001: 171)

As well as describing the various spiders and scorpions found in the region, he also writes about twenty-two case studies of tarantism, one of which was that of his own wife, Beatrice Di Cesare (Case Number 19, ibid.: 147-8). In April 1721, she was bitten by a scorpion and began to suffer from the symptoms of tarantism, which went on for many days. Eventually, the musicians were called to play for her, and after finding the correct melody, she danced her cure. This particular case is interesting not just because of Di Cesare being Caputo's wife, but also that this meant she was considered a noblewoman, thus reinforcing that during this period, it was not only the lower-class 'peasants' who became tarantate, as was the perception that was reinforced particularly during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

As part of his extensive analysis and hypotheses of the case studies, Caputo discusses the affiliation of St Paul with the ritual in one section of De Tarantulae, which examines notions of miracles within an ecclesiastical framework, with the idea of the 'morbo sacro' (ibid.: 214) [sacred disease]. He tells of the local legend in Galatina that St Paul came to the town in disguise and stayed at the home of a supporter of his in a house that came to be known as the 'casa di S. Paolo' (ibid.: 219) [ 'the house of St Paul' ]. As a reward, St Paul granted his supporter and his descendants the power to heal the bite of venomous snakes, spiders, and scorpions, and additionally that the water from their well would assist in the cure, if the afflicted person drank it and prayed for protection to St Paul (ibid.: 210). This establishes that during the first half of the eighteenth century, tarantati were seeing Galatina as a place of pilgrimage particularly associated with St Paul, and the curing of their condition.

There was a subsequent dispute over the building of the chapel to St Paul at the house between the Vignola family who owned the casa, and the Church, particularly over which of them would collect the offerings that were made at the well by the avantati, but eventually the chapel was built and consecrated in 1793. It has acted as a focus for the practice of tarantism since, and particularly for the pilgrimage of the tarantati on the festival of St Peter and St Paul on 29 June, where they would come from all over Apulia to re-enact the ritual, and give thanks to St Paul. The water from the well was also drunk in order to receive the blessing of the saint, until the local authorities sealed the well in 1959, claiming that the water was polluted. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

150 CHAPTER TWO St Paul became a complex figure within the ritual, with multiple meanings and processes ascribed to him. As mentioned previously, he became transposed with the symbol of the ¢aranta, and was thus seen as both the agent and cure of the condition, in that he could cause the illness as a means of punishment, but also heal the victim in a miraculous act of intercession. In addition, the inherent erotic element already noted also became associated with him, and as with Dionysus in the Greek rituals discussed earlier, the farantata would become ‘engodded or possessed by St Paul himself in a mystical or divine union with him. There was sometimes a strong sexual element within the lyrics of the songs, which has been referred to earlier in relation to the figure of the taranta. In these songs, St Paul is often associated with the features of the tavanta, in that he is sometimes described as ‘my St Paul of the tarantulas;, and is said to ‘bite’ or ‘sting’ those who suffer from the condition:

Santu Paulu miu de le tarante
Pizzichi le caruse a mmienzu
all’anche
Santu Paulu miu de li scursuni
Pizzichi li caruse a li cujuni

My St. Paul of the sarantate
Who pricks the girls in their genitals
My St. Paul of the serpents
Who pricks the boys in their testicles. (Karanika, 2004: 29)

The women who performed the ritual would dress in white, as if wearing a wedding dress, and called themselves the ‘spose di San Paolo (brides of St Paul)’ (ibid.: 25). Thus the figure of St Paul became entwined with the prior elements of the ritual, in a merging of the religious and the erotic, the Christian and the pagan, as De Giorgio suggests:

‘La commistione di elementi fortemente sacri e di elementi fortemente erotici svela una sor- prendente religiosita pagana e cristiana insieme. Le donne vengono santifi- cate dal morso erotico. Vestono, come gli antichi iniziati, abiti bianchi che evocano mistiche nozze. Sussite persino una identificazione tra San Paolo ela “taranta” (De Giorgi, 1999: 90) [“The mixture of strongly sacred and erotic elements reveals a surprising coming together of pagan and Christian religiosity. The women become sanctified through the erotic bite. They wear white clothes, like those of ancient initiations, which is evocative of the mystical marriage. There exists an identifying of St Paul with the “taranta”]. This explanation of the idea of the mystical marriage (sistiche nozze) and the women being sanctified through the erotic bite (z#orso erotico) certainly instils in tarantism a coming together of a past and present in its manifestation, as well that of the pagan and Christian, and the sacred and the erotic. This is, obviously, too simple an analysis of a complex development of a form of cultural performance over many centuries, yet the point to make is that St Paul, and the Church, became as encultured into the ritual as the other way round. For St Paul to become such an object of sexual desire, and substituted for the bite of the spider, is a subversion of the hegemonic control of Christianity. This led to an altered symbolic embodiment of the image of St Paul, who the ¢arantati fought with, were healed by, and loved. However, the Church also certainly drew the ritual into its own domain through the figure of St Paul, propagating the removal of elements that were considered as ‘pagan’ or non-Christian from what might otherwise be seen as a manifestation of the cult of St Paul. Despite being able to view both these influences on the other simultaneously, the gradual Christianisation of tarantism is also a reason for its decline during the nineteenth century, as the notion of shame (vergogna) which has already been mentioned in relation to music and dance in the early Christian Church, helped to drive its practice underground, in an attempt to relegate it to a form of ‘folk practice’ based in superstition that was of the past. This will be seen in the discussion of the field work conducted by De Martino in the next chapter, however what will also be revealed is that in 1959 and beyond, the figure of St Paul was still maintaining the ambivalent position as agent, healer, and lover for the tarantate. This connection is still manifest in the festival of St Paul at his chapel in Galatina today, as discussed in Chapter One, with all of its complex and multiple forms of performance and embodiment.

152

In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the volume and range of writings on tarantism during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, with the debates and appropriations of medicine and the Church, offer much in the analysis of historical ‘moments’ of the ritual. This section on the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, up to the work of De Martino in 1959, will summarise some of the key interpretations of the ways in which tarantism was approached in the furthering of these views, as well as the influence of the earlier writings through their dissemination throughout Europe.

One point to mention first is that during the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, views on tarantism were generally a continuation of those that had been debated in the early to mid-eighteenth century, in that it was either caused by a spider bite; a form of psychosis or hysteria; or that the condition was being faked, either for pleasure or financial gain. One feature of these writings is the debate moving from being based in Italy, to having a wider field of dissemination and discussion through translations of texts such as that by Baglivi in particular, as well as visitors to the region from other parts of Europe as part of the Grand Tour or for scientific study, contributing their own writing and opinion on the ritual.

Henry Swinburne has already been mentioned in the Introduction in relation to his description of witnessing a Neapolitan tarantella, however he also went to Apulia, where he wanted to be shown an example of the mysterious ritual relating to the bite of a spider:

As I was now in the country of the tarantula, I was desirous of investigating minutely every particular relative to that insect; but the season was not far enough advanced, and no tarantati had begun to stir. I prevailed upon a woman, who had formerly been bitten, to act the part, and dance the tarantata before me. A great many musicians were summoned, and she performed the dance, as all present assured me, to perfection. (Swinburne, 1790: 304-5)

What is interesting in this extract is that Swinburne had set up a staged performance of the ritual, because no genuine manifestation was available. He did not expect her to actually enter into a state of trance, or to be in any sense healed by the process, but merely wanted to see the external elements of the dance:

At first she lolled stupidly on a chair, while the instruments were playing some dull music. They touched, at length, the chord supposed to vibrate to her heart, and up she sprang with a most hideous yell, staggered about the room like a drunken person, holding a handkerchief in both hands, raising them alternately, and moving in very true time. As the music grew brisker, her motions quickened, and she skipped about with great vigour and variety of steps, every now and then shrieking very loud. The scene was far from pleasant; and, at my desire, an end was put to it before the woman was tired. (ibid.: 305) Based on his description, this does appear to be a somewhat crude re-enactment of the stages of the ritual, performed for him in almost the way of the tourist performances of the tarantella. He does not say whether he paid the woman and musicians, but it is not surprising that what he saw did not represent a ‘real’ experience of tarantism. However, he appears to base his own judgements on the validity of the ritual on this observation.

Having mentioned some of the features of tarantism found in the writings of Baglivi and Serao, he then offers his own opinion: They are exact copies of the ancient priestesses of Bacchus. The orgies of that God, whose worship under various symbols, was more widely spread over the globe than that of any other divinity, were, no doubt, performed with energy and enthusiasm by the lively inhabitants of this warm climate. The introduction of Christianity abolished all public exhibitions of these heathenish rites, and the women durst no longer act a frantic part in the character of Bacchantes. Unwilling to give up so darling an amusement, they devised other pretences; and possession by evil spirits may have furnished them with one. Accident may also have led them to a discovery of the tarantula; and, upon the strength of its poison, the Puglian dames still enjoy their old dance, though time has effaced the memory of its ancient name and institution: and this I take to be the origin of so strange a practice. If at any time these dancers are really and involuntarily affected, I can suppose it to be nothing more than an attack upon their nerves, a species of St. Vitus’s dance. (ibid.: 306-7)

Swinburne is suggesting a direct lineage back to ancient Greece and the practices of the Bacchae, fulfilling his desire to see ‘antiquity in the flesh’ or a residue manifestation of the classical past in the present, even though this represents a pagan rite that for the Catholic Swinburne was abhorrent. Such stories about the strange cure from the bite of the tarantula began spreading throughout Europe through travel writings and the translations of medical treatises, adding to the sense of curiosity and mystique surrounding the practice from the ‘dark South. However, tarantism extended further than this as was demonstrated in the case of a young girl, Nancy Hazard, in Rhode Island in America in 1801, related by Carlson and Simpson (1971). Nancy was out in a field when a black spider ran over her hand, and she felt a slight pricking on her hand as it did so. By the third day after this, she had developed fits which Dr Joshua Perry of South Kingston described as being hysterical, and ‘suggestive of St Vitus dance’ (Carlson and Simpson, 1971: 293). He called in his partner Dr Joseph Comstock, who wrote an account of the case. He noticed that she liked the colours green and red, and would drum her chest with her fingers as if beating out a rhythm. Music was played for her, and she appeared to respond well to this, being particularly keen on the sound of a violin. Later, she began to beat the rhythm with her feet, and rose from her bed to dance: Her dance steps kept accurate time with the music, and sometimes she would dance wildly with high leaps off the floor. Her dances could last up to an hour and a half and terminate when she would suddenly drop to the floor ‘like a log’, often to begin dancing again until at last she would stop. Placed on her bed, she would fall back into a stupor. (ibid.: 295) Dr Comstock recommended that as a result, music should be ‘the principal remedy’ (ibid.: 295). In writing up the case five months later, Comstock discusses what he saw in Rhode Island, questioning whether it had been due to hysteria or tarantism. Knowledge of tarantism had spread across the Atlantic through the English translations of Baglivi’s treatise (1704 and 1723). Various references to the ritual had been made in publications in America from 1767, and ‘[b]y 1800, anyone widely read in the medical literature might have run across some reference to the condition’ (ibid.: 299). Comstock’s debate over whether Nancy’s case had been caused by tarantism or hysteria shows how closely these were associated in medical thinking at the time:

In the late eighteenth century, tarantism and hysteria were considered related conditions. Hysteria was still thought by many to be caused by a disturbance of the uterus [...]. [and] emphasized] the purely nervous character of hysteria, whether the source of the initial disturbance was the uterus or not. By 1801, the opinion that hysteria was a nervous disorder originating in the brain was accepted by most advanced and respected physicians. (ibid.: 297)

This aligning of hysteria and tarantism was a continuation of the forms of diagnosis of the condition from earlier centuries, but with the changing views on the nervous system, this came to be particularly associated with women, and indeed the writings on tarantism through the nineteenth century demonstrate this increasing feminization and hystericization of the ritual, as it became more closely defined as a condition relating to women suffering from hysteria and psychosis.

Comstock decided that Nancy’s case was one of both tarantism and hysteria, and that ‘he regards her dancing from the point of view of nervous disturbance and not from that of motivation of psychological factors’ (ibid.: 299). This view resulting from the transplantation of the ritual into another country, defining it through yet another particular medical framework, removes it even further from its spatial-temporal location of Apulia, stripping it of all the culture-specific manifestations, and instead categorizes it under a general condition that was to so define and confine the bodies and minds of women.

The medical and scientific reductions of tarantism continued through into the early twentieth century. Francesco De Raho, in an attempt to investigate the phenomenon, conducted experiments on guinea pigs which he had bitten by tarantulas, as well as observing cases of the ritual. Publishing his findings in I/carantolismo nella superstizione e nella scienza (1908), he concluded that tarantism was a ‘malattia nervosa’, or a nervous condition peculiar to the people of Apulia.

Dr Henry Sigerist, who moved from Germany to America in 1931, becoming a lecturer at Johns Hopkins, wrote an influential chapter on the subject in the collection Music and Medicine (1948), edited by Dorothy Schullian and Max Schoen. This was, as Gouk points out, the ‘first multi-author work in English devoted to the subject’ (Gouk, 2000a: 3) of music and healing, and therefore important in the field, not least because of the few such collections on the subject that were published until 2000, with the exception of Werner Friedrich Kimmel’s 156 Sigerist's chapter examines historical documentation of the ritual, concluding it was a "melancholiae seu amentiae quaedam species," a kind of melancholy or insanity. Tarantism was a nervous disorder, not caused by the tarantula's sting. Sigerist based his assumptions on the high incidence of mental diseases in Apulia's inbred population. He believed tarantism was a neurosis peculiar to that region.

Katner's 1956 study, Das Ratsel des Tarentismus, discussed the ritual's history and offered a detailed scientific analysis of the spiders found in the region. Katner was interested in the connection between music and medicine, and had previously written on tarantism during the Baroque period. De Martino stated that Katner had attempted to see cases of tarantism in Apulia but was unable to do so, conducting his work exclusively on philological bases. De Martino invited Katner to join his ethnographic field research in Galatina in 1959, which Katner did, though this was after Das Ratsel had been written.

Katner concluded that tarantism was caused by sunstroke and heatstroke, as well as other conditions such as the inability to sweat and a lack of salt, possibly an excess of drinking alcohol. He referred to Baglivi's treatise concerning the climate of Apulia and the nature of the people within the region.

Marius Schneider, the director of the Institute of Musical Ethnography in Berlin, wrote extensively about forms of musical healing from around the world, focusing on symbolic perspectives. His book La Danza Delle Spade e La Tarantella discussed sword dances and the tarantella, interweaving notions of healing, astrology, myths, and symbolism relating to music. He suggested that the "fighting" aspect of the dance in tarantism was necessary to awaken the body for the cure. The symbolism of the spider was also important to him: La tarantella ¢ una danza di ragni, cioé un tipo di quei balli di animali nei quali i partecipanti desiderano identificarsi con certi animali considerati come incarnazioni degli spiriti dei morti, che quando sono scontenti portano la morte o la malattia agli uomini. The tarantella is a dance of the spiders, a type of animal dance where participants identify with certain animals considered as an incarnation of the spirits of the dead. When these animals are disaffected, they carry death or illness to humans. Through this symbolic interpretation, Schneider also reduces aspects of the ritual in his work, falling into the same pitfalls as Jung and Eliade through a form of cultural relativism that does not acknowledge fully the particular features of the ritual in its cultural and spatial-temporal frameworks.

Despite Schneider’s non-medical view on the ritual, it was ultimately the doctors and scientists who had the strongest voices on tarantism in the twentieth century up to the publication of De Martino’s study in 1961. The development of psychiatric medicine had a profound effect on those who experienced tarantism, establishing a definition of the body and mind of the tarantata as suffering from a psychiatric illness, needing psychiatric treatment to be cured. One result of this was the increased feeling of shame (vergogna) felt by both the sufferers and their families, due to the stigma such a label carries with it, and this is also a possible reason for the decline in the number of savantati during the twentieth century.

The reducing of phenomena such as tarantism to being a psychiatric illness has been re-addressed in the past few decades, particularly with the influence of anthropology on psychiatry, acknowledging a need to understand these types of conditions as being ‘culture-bound’ rather than imposing a specific western definition of ‘sickness’ or ‘madness’ on a form of cultural performance which may not fit into such taxonomies.

Charles Hughes laid out the territory for attempting to see such processes as being ‘culture-bound’:

The puzzlement about the syndromes has its source in the bizarre characteristics of the behaviour displayed. If (as is usually the case) the frame of comparison is the Western-derived system of psychiatric diagnostic categories, these syndromes are, at least phenomenologically, unfamiliar ways of being ‘crazy’. [...] The controversy exists over whether such episodes or patterns of behaviour are simply culturally-based and different, yet ‘normal’ ways of acting, or examples of ‘authentic’ disease and disorder. (Hughes, 1985: 3)

Anthropologist Robert Bartholomew acknowledged similar problems with classification in his discussion of tarantism as a manifestation of mass psychogenic illness (MPI) (including such practices as St Vitus’ dance and collective demonic possession), particularly with the difficulties of ascribing such categorizations to traditions from another culture, or from a historical perspective:

Western psychiatrists typically categorize tarantism as a form of MPI due to its psychogenic character. [...] In basing judgment primarily on descriptions of the behaviour per se, it is unsurprising that contemporary psychiatry typifies tarantism as a form of group psychopathology. [...] By focusing on ‘bizarre’, descriptive aspects of tarantism per se, and blinded by Western culture-biased definitions of normality, researchers have overlooked its symbolic significance, and the influence of existing social and cultural norms. [...] The examination of behaviours that have been classified as strange and bizarre by contemporary Western cultural standards Whose History Is It? Examining the Historical Records of Tarantism 159 of normality, such as dancing manias, tarantism and demonopathy, offers a valuable lesson in evaluating the future actions of social groups, cultures and historical eras, particularly when the customs and beliefs differ significantly from that of the investigator. Bartholomew, 1994: 286, 287, 299) Bartholomew points out that one of the Western culturally biased factors associated with MPIs relates to women, establishing an association of women's nature and behavior as being particularly susceptible to this type of phenomenon: "The belief of innate female susceptibility has become accepted as a social fact by most contemporary researchers who continue to use it as a self-fulfilling criteria for determining the presence of psychosomatic illness." (David Miller, 1985, p. 103)

"Where all or the majority of the victims were women, this fact alone is considered part of the proof that hysteria caused the affliction." (ibid.: 294)

The history of tarantism has shown just such a defining of female susceptibility, with a process of a feminisation and related hystericisation of the ritual, as women were categorized as being weak and prone to such illnesses and behaviors. This was also seen in the case of the klikushi referred to previously, the women shriekers in Russia who believed themselves to be possessed by a demon.

Worobec notes that in 1899, the Medical Department of the Ministry of the Interior sent the psychiatrist Nikolia Vailevich Krainskii to observe several cases of klikushi in the village of Ashschepkovo. His views on the phenomenon were that "klikushi were women whose feminine characteristics of backwardness, atavism, and unbridled passions could be tamed only by masculine scientific rationalism" (Worobec, 2001: 9).

Worobec also emphasizes that Krainskii stated that the klikushi were evidence of the backwardness of the countryside, and the peasants who lived within it, in contrast to the "advances of industrialization, urbanization, and increasing literacy" (ibid.: 9) that were being seen in Russian cities at the time.

In this way, by studying demon possession in the distant and recent past, he joined the debate among a growing Russian educated public about Russia's relative backwardness in comparison to Western Europe, about the peasantry's, especially the peasant women's, role in that backwardness. The study pointed to Russian psychiatrists' desire to wrest authority away from spiritual and lay healers to whom the possessed turned for aid. In this battle, a majority of these trained specialists classified klikushestvo as deviant and therefore unacceptable female behavior. Placing it under the rubric of hysteria, they engaged in larger discussions of women's character that preoccupied the attention of Western European medical specialists. (ibid.: 9)

A similar situation occurred in Apulia in relation to tarantism, where, particularly after the Risorgimento and with the industrialization of Italy, the South was still perceived as a place of backwardness, which was inhibiting the modernization of the country. The practice of tarantism, and the women who undertook the ritual (even though men were also taking part) become representations of this backwardness by continuing to be involved with a ritual that was considered to be based in superstition or pretence, and in their being categorized as suffering from a mental illness, therefore needing psychiatric treatment in order to be cured, thereby reinforcing the sense of shame. In this new paradigm of medicine, women were again objectified and appropriated as a source of definition by a hegemonic paradigm of the female body. Their own experience and sense of embodiment was once more silenced, as the need to dance was seen as a form of backward and deviant behavior. It was into this world of a Southern Italy in change, with the decline in the overt practice of tarantism leaving just traces of a former cultural performance form, that De Martino enters in 1959, redefining and repositioning tarantism, and the tarantati, in a way which would have far-reaching effects on the ritual and the region.

Throughout the many historical 'moments' discussed in this chapter, with the appropriations and redefinitions, leading to the medicalization, christianization and feminization of tarantism, what is interesting is that the actual processes and elements of the ritual remained largely unchanged during this time. Even the incorporation of the figure of St. Paul, although placing tarantism within the confines of the Church, became an absorbing of the saint into the existing features of the taranzta.

In terms of the embodied experience and processes of performance, such as the state of being resulting from the original condition leading to lethargy and an inability to move, and being awoken from this state by the musicians finding the appropriate rhythm and melody which suited the tavantata, allowing them to create a psychophysical transformation through the embodied experience of the dance itself, these elements stayed essentially the same from the fourteenth through to the late twentieth centuries.

With all the attempts to subdue the voices and bodies of the tavantati, with debates and public fights over how to define the 'illness' and 'cure' within different theoretical and philosophical viewpoints, the actual practice of the ritual managed to continue, even if in diminishing form. However, contained within the very essence of tarantism is the sense of suffering which needs to be alleviated and transformed through the music and dance, and it is this suffering, often attributed to socio-economic factors and the difficulties of life in rural Southern Italy, that particularly interested De Martino in his own redefinition of the process of tarantism as being one of a crisis of presence, which is discussed in the next chapter.

CHAPTER THREE
Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited

The work undertaken by Ernesto De Martino on tarantism acts as a bridge between the past and present, between the history of the ritual during its dying days, and the contemporary revival of interest in tarantism and the music and dance of Salento. It is also, in its scope and writing, a combination of history and ethnography, with an interdisciplinary framing that can be seen as ahead of its time in many respects.

This chapter is divided into two sections, which are connected through the work of De Martino and his writings on tarantism published in his influential book La terra del rimorso. De Martino has been such a significant factor in the history and revival of the ritual, as well as a source of identification for many Salentines today, that it is essential to address his work as part of this study. Therefore the first part of the chapter offers a discussion of some of his key ideas, as well as his field work and writings on tarantism contained within his book. Some of the subsequent influences and criticisms of his work are also presented. The second section is an attempt to analyze the processes of the ritual as embodied experience within the dance through aspects of performance studies. There are potential problems with this undertaking, not least the danger of falling into the very traps for which I have criticized others. However, I have endeavored to offer a view on the ritual through performance studies that may expand and enhance those presented by anthropologists, sociologists, and historians, so adding a piece of the picture, rather than in any way suggesting that this is "the answer" or wanting to define or reduce the wealth and complexity of individual and collective experiences over many centuries. This can only be another voice in the crowd, but hopefully one that can speak of embodied experience in a way which is of benefit to the furthering of the field.

164 CHAPTER THREE Ernesto De Martino and La terra del rimorso

Despite the criticisms of aspects of the book that may be made, there can be no doubting the significance of La terra del rimorso in the change of approach to how tarantism was seen and understood, and the impact that its publication had on both researchers and the local people of Salento in creating and defining an identity of a cultural heritage that became represented through the practice of succeeding generations of Salentines. As Liidtke says, it "is impossible to consider tarantism today without taking note of this important study" (Liidtke, 2009: 64), and so this chapter will focus on De Martino's views on tarantism, and the influence that these had on a selection of subsequent writers on the ritual. In addition, as his book offers some of the most detailed descriptions of the ritual, along with the documentary film made by Carpitella during their field research, this chapter will also discuss some of the features and processes of the music and dance in the ritual through these observations from the perspective of aspects of performance studies, exploring the embodied experience of transformation enabled through the specific psychophysical aspects found within the ritual.

De Martino (1908-65) was born in Naples, and so was a "man of the South." Although he had such a strong influence on the development of anthropology and the study of cultural practices within Italy, he himself was not an anthropologist, but rather a historian of religions, and one of the founders of the Italian School of the History of Religions. He became a follower of Benedetto Croce, one of the most important figures in the fields of history and philosophy in Italy at the time. Over the course of his work, De Martino showed a level of ambivalence towards Croce's idealist view of the practices of "primitive" peoples, and moved both towards and away from Croce's ideas of history at various points in his writings. He became involved with politics, joining the Communist Party, and taking a strong anti-Fascist stance. A committed Marxist, one of the strongest influences on his work was that of Antonio Gramsci (1891-1937) who was imprisoned by the Fascist Party for his involvement with the Italian Communist Party. Gramsci's Prison Notebooks are a major exposition on his ideas of the cultural hegemony which leads to the suppression of the subaltern peasant class of the South by the capitalist power which determines to keep them in their powerless and passive state. De Martino took these views, and combined them with his interest in existentialism, most particularly the work of Heidegger, as well as Sartre and Hegel. In drawing together the Marxist and Gramscian notions of the need to give a voice and a historical presence to the subalterns in order to provide them with an active agency, and Heidegger's notion of Dasein, or "being-in-the-world," he developed two ideas which were central in his interpretation of tarantism: the crisis of presence, and critical ethnocentrism. De Martino investigated the ritualistic practices of Southern Italy, particularly those he saw as being based in magic, such as the evil eye (malocchio) and the mourning and funeral rites, as well as tarantism. In these practices, he describes a contradiction between the ‘misery psychology’ (‘miseria psichologica’ (De Martino, 2006: 95)) of the peasants using magical rites which prevents them from taking their place in the modern world as he sees it, but also that it is through these ritual processes that the subalterns can reclaim their sense of history, place, and ‘being’ in the world, which was threatened by a ‘crisis of presence’ resolved through the ritual into a re-integration of the self.

The ‘crisis of presence’ (‘la crisi della presenza’) was De Martino's term for the existential dilemma, the risk of ‘not-being-here’ or ‘not-being-in-oneself’ (‘il rischio de non esserci’ (G. Saunders, 1995: 331)). In this way, he politicizes the notion of ‘presence’ into one which he defines as the subject's ‘ability to be an active agent in history’ (Di Nola, 1998: 160). The crisis of presence is the experience of the loss of self within a historical moment, leading to the inability to act as an agent in the world, but instead remaining in a passive position, as someone who is acted upon. The subaltern in particular has been denied their place in history, leading to the sense of crisis of ‘not-being-here’ or ‘in-oneself’, or the lack of agency:

To be ‘without history’ or ‘out of history’ is to lack the consciousness essential to agency, and thus to be unable to make appropriate choices, to be unable to ‘act’ in the moment in order to ‘make history, and to be, instead, a passive recipient of his-tory as made by others. (G. Saunders, 1998: 186)

166 CHAPTER THREE
For De Martino, the practices of magic and ritual have the ability to restore the sense of presence, of ‘being-here’, through their cultural processes, thereby giving a voice, history, and active agency to the previously powerless. Thus, magic is both provoked by, and is a reaction to the sense of crisis, and is a culturally conditioned and acceptable means of resolving the crisis through re-establishing the experience of presence in the world (Di Nola, 1998: 161). Subalterns are particularly susceptible to the crisis of presence due to their socio-economic position and suppression by the hegemonic power, and so magic and ritual are culture-specific means by which they are able to recover their sense of presence and agency:

Magic is thus a way of coping in the face of overwhelming social and economic marginalization. [...] In the absence of effective strategies to counter the overwhelmingly negative aspects of this environment, popular religion helps people to live with their situation. (G. Saunders, 1998: 191)

This process effectively historicizes and empowers the subalterns. De Martino's idea of 'critical ethnocentrism' also has an historical dimension, and was developed after 1948 in part as a response to the Southern Question, and his study of subaltern folklore and culture in the South. Critical ethnocentrism, or 'ethnographic humanism, is a rejection of relativism, and has a 'deep awareness of this historical determination and the culturally conditioned use of values and categories of judgement' (Di Nola, 1998: 158). He wanted to challenge the cultural assumptions inherent within the categorizations used by the researcher and writer which were based in their own cultural bias. Whilst acknowledging that the researcher will be operating within their own system of understanding, as this is what they know, by opening up their awareness to the fact of the limitations and dangers of these categories, they may have a greater ability of approaching other cultures and histories which use different categories. Di Nola cites De Martino in La fine del mondo, explaining his notion of ‘critical ethnocentrism’:

In the perspective of a ‘critical ethnocentrism,’ the western (or westernized) ethnologist assumes the history of his own culture as a unit by which to measure alien cultural histories, but [...]. In the act of measuring, gains consciousness of the historic prison and of the limits of his own system, and opens himself up to the task of reforming the categories of observation he has available at the start of his research. (De Martino, La fine del mondo, Turin: Einaudi, 1977: 396-7, in ibid.: 163)

Although on one hand seeming to be somewhat ahead of his time in challenging researchers to move from an ethnocentric attitude to one which takes account of the particular contexts, histories and experiences of the cultures which are being studied, there were limits as to how far he was able to actually achieve this in practice, provoking Di Nola’s chapter title: ‘How Critical was De Martino’s “Critical Ethnocentrism” in Southern Italy?’ (ibid.: 157).

Although there is an exploration of the process of tarantism through his case studies within La terra del rimorso, the actual voices of the ¢arantati themselves are not really heard: it is about them, rather than from them, and the predominant voice is that of De Martino in his analysis and definition of the ritual. Crapanzo points out that the potential problem with critical ethnocentrism is that it can ‘become an imperial gesture in which the primitive simply serve our purpose’ (Crapanzo, 2005: ix), and in citing some of the criticisms of his work, Liidtke indicates that ‘by dismissing the psychopathological approach as inherently reductive, De Martino failed to recognise that psychiatry was increasingly broadening its parameters to include sociocultural variables’ (Liidtke, 2009: 66).

De Martino conducted his field research in Salento over a period of three weeks, from 20 June to 10 July 1959, in order to focus the work on and around the festival of St Paul in Galatina. He took the unusual step of gathering together an interdisciplinary team which consisted of Dr Gionvanni Jervis, a specialist in neuropsychiatry; a psychologist, Dr Letizia Jervis-Comba; the ethnomusicologist Dr Diego Carpitella, who had collaborated with De Martino previously; Professor Amalia Signorelli-D'Ayala, a cultural anthropologist, who was to look at the social and economic issues; and Vittoria De Palma, who acted as social assistant and liaison between the team and the ¢arantati. All of these contributed Appendices to La terra del rimorso. The team examined twenty-one case studies in Salento, sixteen women and five men, ranging in age from thirteen to seventy-six. With the exception of Michele of Nardo, they were all experiencing 'rebites, rather than undertaking the ritual for the first time. The descriptions of the events surrounding the first bite included being bitten or stung by a snake, scorpion or ant as well as a tarantula. One of the tarantati could not remember the actual bite; for another it had occurred after she had dreamed about scorzoni; another after seeing a snake being killed; and one had a spell cast on her by a snake while she was going towards the sea. For some, the bite occurred whilst they were outdoors, either awake or asleep, and for Rita of Alezio, the bite occurred ‘following an offense to St Paul’ (De Martino, 2005: 83). The most detailed description given of a arantata they observed was that of Maria of Nardo, and Carpitella also filmed her through the proc- ess of the ritual. Photographs of her are found in La terra del rimorso, and footage in Carpitella’s ethnographic film La terapia coreutico-musicale del tarantismo (1960).

Maria, aged twenty-nine when the team met her, had received the first bite when she was twenty. According to De Martino, Maria had endured a difficult childhood, and at eighteen had fallen in love with a young man. However, the union had been opposed by her family, and the man left her. She experienced much suffering as a result, and then at midday on a Sunday, she said that a ¢aranta bit her, and she was made to dance, thus becoming tavantata.

A local woman had already decided that her son should marry Maria, and asked Maria if she would be willing to become his wife. Since Maria was still in love with the original young man, she delayed responding to the mother, and then had a vision of St Paul during which he told her that she should not marry the man, but instead enter into a ‘mystical marriage’ with himself. However, the mother persisted in proposing her son, and eventually Maria agreed to the initial stages of the marriage. She then became unwell, and later said she was summoned by St Paul and left the house. On returning to her home having been wandering through the fields for three days, she explained that ‘St Paul had stung her once again, forcing her to dance’ (ibid.: 45). She agreed to marry her fiancé, but remained a tarantata, performing the ritual each year, particularly during the summer and on the feast day of St Paul in Galatina (ibid.: 44-5).

This was the background to Maria’s story, which De Martino and the research team discovered after seeing her perform the ritual. The team observed her at her home in Nardo on 24 and 25 June. De Martino describes the experience of entering the house whilst the ritual was taking place as being ‘brutally hurled onto another planet’ (ibid.: 38). In the small one-room building, the furniture had been cleared to the edge of the space and covered with cloths, and the bed was laid down on the floor. There were sacred objects placed around the room, such as brightly coloured pictures of St Peter and St Paul, and a bottle of water taken from the well in Galatina. A white cloth had been laid on the ground, and it was on this that Maria was dancing when they arrived, dressed in white, and with ‘eyes like a sleepwalker’s’ (ibid.: 39). Four musicians were playing for her on the guitar, the accordion, the violin and the tamburello.

There were three distinct phases to her dance, noted in De Martino’s description, and observable from Carpitella’s film, which can be divided into the movements which take place on the floor, those performed when upright, and the falling down after dancing. The cycle of the sequence begins and ends in a resting position on the ground. At the beginning, when Maria is lying on the cloth, the musicians were in close proximity to her head, with the violinist at points kneeling down very near towards her. When they began to play, her first movements were an energetic shaking of her head from side to side in time to the fast beat of the music. This was succeeded by a range of movements on the floor, including rolling backwards and forwards along the cloth with the body and arms outstretched; lying on her back with her knees bent and feet flat on the floor, pushing herself around the cloth with her feet stamping alternately in time to the music, and her head shaking from side to side; in the same position, with just her feet stamping in time to the music and her head shaking without travelling along the ground; lying on her front with her hands on the floor beside her head, pushing up her head and shoulders, her head shaking from side to side, with the movement continuing through her whole body; on her front, doing the same pushing movement to propel herself around the cloth as she did on her back, this time using the toes of alternate feet to create the movement, in time to the music. She then stood up, to begin the next phase.

She moved with a jogging movement in time to the beat of the music, sometimes with her head shaking from side to side, always on her toes (she was wearing stockings, with no shoes). At times she stayed in one place performing these movements with her feet whilst facing the 170 CHAPTER THREE musicians, other times she was moving around the floor. She would also run quickly in circles around the space marked by the white cloth, and sometimes spin on one spot. She held a coloured cloth with one end in each hand, with her arms sometimes lifted above her head, or with one raised and one lowered behind her back, or moving the cloth in front of her.

At a particular point as she became more unstable on her feet (in Carpitella's film, this came during the middle of a spinning movement) some women would form a circle around her to protect her, and she fell to the ground, where a pillow was placed under her head, and she rested until the musicians began to play again, and the sequence was repeated. Maria had not recovered by the end of the day, so the musicians came back the next day, and she danced again. During the day, there were signs that she was getting better, as she took some food when resting, and in the afternoon, gave a few cries like a dog barking. Her dance movements also "appeared freer and more varied in its figures" (De Martino, 2005: 43) until at 2.55pm, she stopped in the middle of running, indicated to the musicians to stop, and lay down on her bed.

The musicians began to play another song which was "of thanks to the Saint, with the subsidiary aim of making sure that the tarantata was truly indifferent to the stimulus of the music" (ibid: 43). Maria stayed where she was, watching them play. After those present had given thanks, and she had rested a little, Maria wanted to go to Galatina to thank St Paul herself, and De Martino and his team offered to take her. When inside the chapel, she went through the same cycle of dance sequence again, this time without the musicians, running round the altar. After drinking some water from the well, she left the monetary offerings which had been given during the ritual. She returned a few days later on 29 June, to re-enact the process with the other sarantate during the festival of St Peter and St Paul (ibid.: 38-44). De Martino's analysis of seeing Maria undertaking the ritual was part of his re-framing of tarantism within the notion of the "crisis of presence" taking a symbolic approach to the elements of the event, and ultimately presenting a "psychoanalytically tinged interpretation" (Liidtke, 2009: 65) of the process and experience of the tarantate. He rejected biomedical explanations of tarantism as being connected to the poison from the bite of a taranta, partly because there was minimal evidence of an actual bite, and the majority of the case studies were of repeats of the ritual, rather than of the first bite. Instead, he saw the figure of the spider, and other aspects of the ritual, as part of a symbolic or mythical-ritual ‘horizon’, which served as the culturally conditioned means to frame and establish the healing features of the ritual process.

Taranta, bite and poison thus have a symbolic meaning in tarantism: they give a horizon to the unconscious drives and reactions they provoke in an individual consciousness. [...] The symbol of the taranta lends a figure' to the formless, rhythm and melody to menacing silence, and color to the colorless in an assiduous quest of articulated and distinct passions, where a horizonless excitation alternates with a depression that isolates and closes off. (De Martino, 2005: 35, 36)

It is through this idea of the symbolic or mythical horizon of the elements of the ritual that De Martino suggests his more psychoanalytical interpretation of tarantism as being a means of dealing with personal, emotional and psychological problems:

This is, in essence, the symbol of the ¢aranta as a mythical-ritual horizon of evocation, configuration, release and resolution of the unresolved psychic conflicts which ‘re-bite’ in the obscurity of the unconscious. As a cultural model, this symbol offers a mythical-ritual order for settling these conflicts and reintegrating individuals into the group. (ibid.: 36)

In discussing the case of Maria of Nardo, he suggests that through the repeated practice of the ritual during the occasions of the rimorso or re-bite, she is finding the means to cope with and release her pent-up frustrations and difficulties through the identification with the symbols of the saranta and St Paul. These conflicts were in part related to the erotic, as the first bite occurred directly after her being left by her first love, and the re-bite during the time of her feeling pressured into marrying her husband, thus

“Maria periodically released her conflicts and converted her frustrations into symbol, lightening the period between ceremonies — that is, daily life - of 1 Dorothy Zinn inserts a footnote at this point to indicate that De Martino is doing a double-play on the word figura which means ‘form, but can also be a ‘figure’ in music and dance. 172 CHAPTER THREE the burden of unconscious stimulations which would have been extremely dangerous had she not found a socialized and traditional project of calen- drical, festive treatment in tarantism’ (ibid.: 45).

Thus for De Martino, the exorcism of the ritual becomes a culturally acceptable form of catharsis for unfulfilled passions and coping with the pressures of everyday life. It certainly may be questioned whether De Martino was himself offer- ing a reductionist view of the complexities of tarantism in this way, and indeed whether this approach offers any real sense of historical and political empowerment to the ‘subaltern’. However, the book offers a more contex- tualised and in-depth picture of the “religion of remorse” (ibid.: 129) than many of the previous writings about it, and the use of an interdisciplinary research team provides a multilayered picture, making La terra del rimorso a work of anthropology and history that was unusual at the time, and has been of great influence since. As Karanika states, De Martino's 'unique contribution was to have attempted to see tarantism through different angles of a prism' (Karanika, 2005: 27), and this makes the book a significant study in this respect. It is also ironic that De Martino was writing about the "minor" religion (De Martino, 2005: 129) of tarantism in its dying days, and yet it was his act of writing and publishing La terra del rimorso that in part led to the revival of interest in the ritual and the practice of pizzica music and dance. De Martino's work on tarantism had a far-reaching effect on the study of the ritual, and on the development of approaches to anthropology and culture by scholars within Italy.

Karen Liidtke offers an excellent overview of some of these developments (Liidtke, 2009: 67-74). She suggests that this research can be 'subdivided into three general themes, socio-economic, medical and anthropological, depending on the key focus taken' (ibid.: 67). Some of these studies aim to expand on or critique the work undertaken by De Martino, but his views on tarantism and La terra del rimorso are still central factors in academic approaches to both the ritual and questions of examining cultural practices in Southern Italy. However, there has been comparatively little written about De Martino outside Italy. Considering his influential ideas in the development of ethnology, this may be seen as somewhat surprising. It is scholars such as George Saunders, Mariella Pandolf, Vincent Crapanzo and Annalisa Di Nola who have been writing about his work in English. More recently, with a widening of interest in tarantism, he has also been discussed in publications in Britain and America in relation to his work on the ritual (e.g., Tomlinson (1993), Horden (2000), Del Giudice and van Deusen (2003), Liidtke (2000, 2005, 2009)), but this is still fairly limited. La terra del rimorso was only translated into English for the first time in 2005 due to the efforts and dedication of Dorothy Zinn, but other than a translation of I/ mondo magico under the title Primitive Magic in 1972, there has been no access to De Martino's writings in English.

There are, however, two further works by non-Italian authors that contain a discussion of De Martino and his writings on tarantism, which are both books that are commonly used in the research and debate concerning possession rituals using music and dance, and so are important in the field: Gilbert Rouget's work Music and Trance (first published in French in 1980), and Ioan Lewis's Ecstatic Religion (1971). Rouget's book on the use of music within trance and ritual has become an influential text within the study of ritual performance. Ultimately, his discussion of tarantism summarises his opinion on the ritual by stating that '[e]xamined closely, tarantism turns out to be nothing more than a particular form of possession' (Rouget, 1985: 159). He states his disagreement with De Martino's views on tarantism, feeling that they are 'deeply impregnated with psychoanalysis' (ibid.: 161), and that the fundamental problem is that De Martino does not accept the importance of the spider itself. Rouget cites examples from the historical records of the dance where the ¢arantata appears to imitate the movements of the spider, pointing out that De Martino interpreted some of these actions through psychoanalysis, for example saying that the hanging from ropes which was mentioned in Chapter Two, is a symbolic representation of the Greek myth of the hanged virgins as well as Phaedra, and the feeling of being rocked and embraced by their mother. For Rouget: The problem with such an amalgam is that it not only proves nothing (in fact, it makes one think that anything can be symbolic of anything), but it also obscures the essen- tial core of the matter, which is that here we have people in trance busy identifying themselves, through dance, with a creature thought to have made them ill; in other words, we are dealing with a characteristic case of possession. (ibid.: 161)

174 CHAPTER THREE

This certainly addresses some of the problematic issues concerning De Martino’s symbolic and psychoanalytic interpretation, but perhaps over-relies on a comparative approach between ritual performances across cultures which dominates Rouget’s book, not always taking the particu- lar culturally determined nature of the experience into account. He does point out that ultimately the bite is actually ‘extraordinarily ambigu- ous’ (ibid.: 165), explaining that there is a need to exorcise the venom of the spider, however this process is through identification and imitation. In this way, there is a coming together of the bite and the spider as being the agent of both the illness and the cure, as well as the real and the imaginary: In short, tarantism is the very model of the ideal scenario, since within it the symbol and the real, the signifier and the signified, the manifest and the latent, the anecdote and the hidden meaning, the pretext and the profound motivation or, to refer to De Martino’s thesis [...] szorso (and re-morso) and rimorso (bite, rebite, remorse), coincide perfectly. (ibid.: 165)

Lewis's views on tarantism offer a very different picture, and one in which women in particular appear in a fairly negative light, furthering the feminisation and hystericisation of the ritual seen in Chapter Two. He suggests that tarantism offers women the ability to strike out against gender constraints of behaviour, and states that the bite of the spider does not cause the condition, but rather that it is a practice by a cult of ‘mainly peasant women’ (Lewis, 1971: 90) who are ultimately, as he discusses in the case of Maria of Nardé using De Martino’s description, ‘imposing severe economic stress on the family which she did not love, and flagrantly calling public attention to her problems. If she could not radically remedy her situ- ation, at least she could continue to protest at it in a religious idiom which men could condone as a divinely sanctioned therapy’ (ibid.: 92).

Lewis's strong views on the women in this and other rituals again essentialises the particular characteristics of tarantism. In Chapter Two, I discussed the problems of making a correlation of tarantism with the general category of ‘St Vitus’ dance’ and Lewis offers a recent example of such a comparison. In relation to the dance manias which spread throughout Europe in the fifteenth century and tarantism, he states: ‘Whether it was known as St Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited 175 Vitus’s Dance, or tarantism, its symptoms and the circumstances in which it occurred, were generally the same’ (ibid.: 41). He likewise reduces the experience of women in the healing rituals he discusses: It will now be clear, I think, that we are dealing with a widespread strategy employed by women to achieve ends which they cannot readily obtain more directly. Women are, in effect, making a special virtue of adversity and affliction, and, often quite liter- ally, capitalizing on their distress. This cult of feminine frailty which, in its aetiolated form, is familiar enough to us from the swooning attacks experienced by Victorian women in similar circumstances, is admirably well adapted to the life situation of those who employ it. By being overcome involuntarily by an arbitrary affliction for which they cannot be held accountable, these possessed women gain attention and consideration, and within variously defined limits, successfully manipulate their husbands and menfolk. (ibid.: 85-6) While this seems a clear example of an imposition of a set of values and assumptions onto a cultural practice, it is important to note that Lewis's book is often used as a source of ‘authority’ on the subject of ecstatic ritual practices within academia in the UK, including his views on tarantism, partly because there has been so little else published, certainly at the time he was writing, on the subject. Historian Gary Tomlinson, for example, describes Lewis's work as a ‘no-nonsense study’ (Tomlinson, 1993: 151), and supports Lewis’s describing of tarantism as being a cult, even though it does not actually conform to the definition of this in terms of being a self-consciously collective group with an initiation rite, as Rouget points out in saying that tarantism is not ‘properly speaking’ a cult (Rouget, 1985: 27). However, this does highlight the issues that De Martino was seeking to address in his development of critical ethnocentrism, in that if a researcher is not self-questioning about their choice of categories they use based in their own cultural assumptions and positionings, then this can lead to a misinterpretation of the particular circumstances of a practice from another culture. These types of problems can occur when one book becomes an ‘authority’ on a subject, particularly when it is one of the only sources available. There are many concerns with Eliade’s much-utilised book on shamanism; yet as Rouget indicates, he uses Eliade’s writing because it was the only such study available to him despite being aware of the problems with it (ibid.: 18). This is also a similar potential concern with La terra del rimorso, in that it has now become ‘the’ authority on tarantism, even though it has been critiqued more recently, as mentioned previously. This is an issue not only for academics, but also for many Salentines in their own identifying of De Martino’s work as the main source which describes and defines not just the ritual, but is also a part of their own heritage and identity. Liidtke observes that often the first question she was asked by Salentines when she said that she was researching tarantism, was ‘Have you read De Martino?’ (Liidtke, 2009: 64). My own experience was of noting that La terra del rimorso was on prominent display for sale in many of the bookshops in Lecce and Galatina, as well as on stalls during pizzica festivals. On several occasions, a Salentine held up the book for me to see, saying that this was their history, culture and identity. When I asked if they had actually read the book, the most common answer was that they had not. In this way, the book has become a means of identification as an object in itself, rather than necessarily the argument that De Martino was making within it. This has also led to the possibility of a lack of a critical view of the narratives that are offered in the book, as well as De Martino’s own analysis which is conditioned through his particular intellectual viewpoint. When I spoke with some Salentines about the criticisms of his work made by contemporary Italian scholars, the response tended to be that these scholars had ‘misunderstood’ what De Martino was saying. There can be a tendency for a somewhat romanticised repositioning of the book-as-object, and De Martino-as-authority, particularly within the revival of tarantism as a cultural symbol and heritage in Salento. It is perhaps ironic that De Martino has become a part of the symbolic horizon of the past and present of tarantism, which he was attempting to articulate through his book. Remorse, Transformation, and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited

It is important to acknowledge some of the potential problems with La terra del rimorso noted above. Although I have used the book throughout this study, it is always with this caution in mind. The following section, which attempts to offer a re-framing of the experience of the embodiment within tarantism through aspects of performance studies, can only be a speculation and suggestion, as I have not seen or spoken directly with any of the few remaining tarantate. Therefore, this is not based on their personal experience, but rather on second-hand written accounts, documentary film evidence, and speaking with Salentines on their own reflections and knowledge of the tarantate, and their experience of performing the music and dance. Even though this is a limitation, an analysis of embodied experience in this way can provide an alternate view on the ritual that may be of benefit in the attempt to understand the process of efficacy involved. It is not offered as another redefinition or categorization, but rather as a further piece in the mosaic. Additionally, this type of approach to the study of tarantism may help expand the debate of these forms of cultural performances within the field of performance studies, as well as anthropology and sociology.

A key feature discussed in Chapter One is the notion of connecting past and present through the embodied presence of the dance in a particular spatial-temporal location. The movements described in De Martino's book and seen in the documentary film made by Diego Carpitella are themselves a bringing together of the past into the present, as they bear close resemblance to those written in the historical records over many centuries, discussed in Chapter Two. The body, and the space in which it is moving, are both inscribing and being inscribed by the cultural forms from a memory of generations past, which through the liveness of the action of the dance in that moment create the sense of a 'presence' that contains that past within it.

To repeat Buckland:

It can be argued that dance has a particular propensity to foreground cultural memory as embodied practice by virtue of its predominantly somatic modes of transmission. Indeed in traditional forms of danced display, it could be argued that longevity of human memory is publicly enacted, demonstrating the ethereality of human existence and the continuity of human experience, as successive generations re-present the dancing. (Buckland, 2001: 1)

The three-part sequence within the ritual of the movements on the floor, starting with immobility, then the extremities of the body being gradually stirred by the music to move, with this impulse going through the body leading to a sequence of the movements on the floor, before standing and moving energetically round the space, until falling down immobile again, have been observed in the records from Alessandro di Alessandro onwards. Thus, the history of the ritual is re-enacted, re-played, and re-embodied with each tarantata's 'moment' of the dance, not just of her own 'ri/re-morso' repeating of the experience of the first bite, but also of all those other 'moments of prior tarantate which are made present in the space/time of the performance. The experience in the ritual is one of both the suffering which causes the condition, and of the release through the dance which 'cures' it, in part due to the belief in the efficacy created through the long history of this particular form of healing within the specific cultural context. For Mariella Pandolfi, talking of her informant Maria: Her suffering [...] is inscribed within her body and recounted through her body. [...] The lived experience of Maria is inscribed in a context — like that of peasant Italy — that is made up of 'stratified centuries' [...] History is absorbed in Maria's story so that its traces survive like the traces of the past in the ruins of the town, a past that people still speak of, age-old events that are described as if they occurred only yesterday. (Pandolfi, 1990: 260)

Pandolfi also notes that the potential danger of an historical perspective is that it can essentialize particular practices of healing and belief, and suggests instead the need for a phenomenological approach in order to offer a fuller understanding of an experience (ibid.: 260). In Chapter One, I suggested that a combination of seeing both the inner and outer, the lived experience and the socio-cultural-historical context, is a helpful means to understand the embodied experience of transformation within the Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited 179 'presence' of a performance event. The sense of a collective and historical suffering may be part of that experience which leads to the embodiment within the ritual; but it is also the personal story and bodymind of the tarantata that creates the particular presence of the 'moment through the dance, and embodies both past and present within it. For Pandolfi, it is ultimately that the women in the village with whom she spoke are 'narrating [themselves] "through the body" [which] is an attempt to manage emotionally the relationship between catastrophic external events and the catastrophic internal event in corporeal terms. A new sense of reality is taken on when this is enclosed in the body' (ibid.: 267). In this way, the inner and outer are united in the process of the ritual which has the potential to create a transformational experience that establishes a different perception of body and 'self' in the world.

Ada Metafune uses similar terms when speaking of women from previous generations who were not allowed a strong visibility within the community. They would dance pizzica on family occasions, at weddings, or during the harvesting in the tobacco fields, and in the act of dancing were able to express themselves physically, or as Ada states: 'in quel momento si poteva parlare con il corpo' (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [ 'at that point it was possible to speak with the body' ], thus creating a sense of embodied presence in the space of their lives and the community. This is not necessarily De Martino's notion of the 'crisis of presence' leading to a re-establishment of order and an historical and active agency, but rather a more personal efficacy of transformation through embodying past and present in the 'moment' of the action of the dance, both being and being-seen in the particular time and place of the event. This experience can also be viewed through the processes and movements of the dance itself. De Martino mentions the Salentine dialect verb 'scazzicare, which he describes as follows: it indicates an action of lifting or removing a material weight or compact mass (for example, moving a straw mattress), and in the psychic and psychosomatic framework, it denotes an abnormal and irresistible stimulation of sentiments and bodily needs, their indomitable pricking and unleashing. Thus, for example, [...] of someone compellingly taken by emotion, it is said i scazzicano li passioni. Among the passions which can scazzicarsi, the venereal appetite takes on particular emphasis, and one of 180 CHAPTER THREE the verb's most common meanings concerns the erotic impulse's uncontrolled bursting out against every discipline of civility and custom. (De Martino, 2005: 37) He also states that scazzicare can refer to the impulse and stimulation of the music and colours within the symbolic landscape of the ritual, as they ‘[evoke] latent urging in the state of total inertia; rather than release these urges in an incoherent psychomotor excitation, this stimulation releases them in a ceremonial order dominated by dance figures and the other symbolic themes of tarantism in action’ (ibid.: 37). Salentine scholar Antonella Rizzo explained to me that the notion of scazzicare in relation to pizzica is that the music and dance ‘stimulates (scazzica) or sparks off’ the impulse to move the emotions and passions, as well as the body (Rizzo, 2009). This notion of being ‘carried away’ or taken over and moved by passion, of a stimulation or urge which leads to an irresistible bursting out, is clearly of significance within tarantism. The definition of ‘scazzicare’ as removing a weight is itself interesting, as the embodied processes within the dance can be seen as the experiential transformation through the ritual from the state of being as a result of the ‘bite’, that of the lethargic immobility or uncontrolled spasms, into the movements of the dance which result in an upright vigorous running in the space. In metaphorical terms, this is a psychophysical process of ‘throwing off a weight." The weight results in the original condition of suffering, and the action of removing or throwing off the weight leads to the lightness of both the movements and the inner condition of release. The weight is one of both body and mind, as is the moving or release of that weight through the process of the ritual. Although this is a metaphor, it is one that can be seen to have a psychophysical relationship to an action and process, particularly if understood through the notion of the physical basis to metaphor found in the work of George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. In their book Philosophy in the Flesh, they offer a view of the way in which human reason is grounded in embodied experience: 2 Liidtke mentions that one informant spoke to her about her grandmother who became a tarantata, saying the she held a lot of tension in her body, ‘bearing a weight on her shoulders’ (Liidtke, 2009: 142). Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited 181 Reason is not disembodied [...] but arises from the nature of our brains, bodies and bodily experience. [...] It is the striking claim that the very structure of reason itself comes from the details of our embodiment. The same neural and cognitive mechanisms that allow us to perceive and move around also create our conceptual systems and modes of reason. Reason is not, in any way, a transcendent feature of the universe or disembodied mind. (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999: 4) Based on this view, they have explored the way in which people conceptualise, perceive and understand the world, and how this is shaped by bodymind experiences, ‘[b]ecause our conceptual systems grow out of our bodies, [therefore] meaning is grounded in and through our bodies’ (ibid.: 6). The embodied mind, in attempting to make sense of the world, creates metaphors that are inherently linked to the experience of the sensorimotor system. Lakoff and Johnson offer the example of the metaphor ‘More is Up, as in “Prices rose” and “Stocks Plummeted”. In the More is Up, a subjective judgment of quantity is conceptualized in terms of the sensorimotor experience of verticality' (ibid.: 47). Similarly, a physical experience, such as the difficulty in lifting a heavy object, is related cognitively in the mind to the experience of the difficulty of coping with responsibilities and problems. This cognitive connection is repeated until it becomes established as a pattern, and the conceptual metaphor arises: Difficulties are Burdens

Subjective judgment: Difficulty
Sensorimotor Domain: Muscular exertion
Example: 'She's weighed down by responsibilities'
Primary Experience: The discomfort or disabling effect of lifting or carrying heavy objects. (ibid.: 50)

If seen in this way, then the psychophysical experience of feeling weighed down, both physically and mentally, by the difficulties and oppressions experienced in life, is transformed through the scazzicare process of throwing off or removing the weight, releasing the feeling of immobility and discomfort, through the embodied action of the dance. The 'illness' and suffering are a state of being that is 'stuck' or trapped by the weight of the circumstances, thereby being unable to move, and the process of healing involves a means of 'getting out of' the feeling of being stuck, into 182 CHAPTER THREE

the dynamic movements of dancing, in other words, from immobility to mobility, from stasis to change. The late Buddhist teacher John Garrie Roshi defines healing as being the restoration of the natural process of change (Garrie, 1998: 105). If 'health' can be seen as change and flow within the bodymind, then when it becomes stuck or blocked in some way, this leads to the feeling of illness or suffering, which is relieved by removing the blockage, thus re-establishing the psychophysical condition of change and movement in body and mind.

To experience 'li scazzicano li passioni, being carried away by the passions (De Martino, 2003: 37), throws off the burden and blockage of the weight of difficulties and suffering which has resulted in immobility, freeing the bodymind to experience release and relief in motion and a sense of well-being through the action of the dance in the specific cultural and spatial-temporal location. De Martino mentioned that the stimulation created through the music and colour within tarantism has the effect of waking up the tavantata from the state of inertia, in relation to the notion of scazzicare.

This idea of inertia, as well as the need for change and the ability of dance to effect this change, is also explored by dance practitioner Anna Halprin. As noted in Chapter One, Halprin was a significant figure in the development of new approaches to performance during the 1960s, and she has continued to explore different ways of using dance and movement as personal and collective transformation, as well as choreography and performance-making.* She was diagnosed with cancer in 1972, and during her period of recovery, explored her own experience of the condition through movement and images. She developed this process into what she calls the Five Stages of Healing, which she has used with both individuals and large groups within communities: The first was simply to look and see and identify the issue, the polarity between the dark side and the light side. The second point in my journey was the actual confron- tation, which was followed by a release. After the release, the third task was finding some way to integrate the new changes in my body. The last step in my journey was an assimilation, a coming back to my community and my family and my life. (Halprin, 1995: 67) This describes what may be seen as a familiar ritual process, from the point of identifying and facing the state of crisis, to using a particular means to experience release, followed by an integration and assimilation of both the self and the community. This process can also be traced in the practice of tarantism.

Throughout her work, Halprin speaks of the ability of dance to create a transformation of the bodymind, particularly when focusing on a particular issue, and the importance of the process of change through this:

One of the things about working with real-life issues is that it can be transformative. […] It’s not about the dancers and it’s not about an interpretation of a theme, it is real. And by doing it you get to a different place with that issue, and in your life. The dance changes the dancer. The purpose is to create change. That’s when we start using the word ‘ritual.’ To distinguish that from dance as entertainment, dance as spectacle. Not that it couldn't be a spectacle or it couldn’t be entertaining, but that is not the purpose. (ibid.: 14)

Halprin here offers a view of dance in this context which presents a way of understanding the use of dance within tarantism, even though this still needs to be seen within the particular cultural manifestations of the ritual. Her point about the place when dance performance becomes ‘ritual’ as being connected to purpose is significant, and in Chapter One I used the word ‘intention’ rather than ‘purpose’ to express a similar idea. Inertia is the energy or force of a resistance to change a state of motion. As she explains: ‘Changing direction in movement is overcoming inertia. Have you noticed that when you are lying down at rest, it is often difficult to get up? You need to apply a great deal of will and often have to force yourself up — not just because you are tired but because you are overcoming and resisting inertia and gravity’ (ibid.: 34). The force of gravity acts as a pull on the body, and combined with inertia, can result in the feeling of being stuck or blocked and unable to move, if there is no opposing force strong enough to break this. It is the third factor, momentum, which gives the impulse to move- ment. She suggests that for the dancer, an awareness of these three together can be explored to create engaging and pleasurable movements, and it is at these points that the forces are ‘moving you. I often say to myself, “Let the movement take over and move you” (ibid.: 34).

The notion of the use and effect of these physical forces that Halprin discusses can be extended into a psychophysical view which encompasses both inner feeling and outer movement in approaching the shifting state of being in the ritual. Within tarantism, the state of the illness after the bite is one of gravity and inertia, of the feeling of being stuck in immobil- ity or locked into convulsive movement. This is transformed through the embodied responses to the impulse of the music, which is the scazzicare process of the urge exciting the bodymind, leading to the momentum of the dance movements both on the floor and upright, gaining in speed and intensity. This leads to a different experience of the relationship to grav- ity and inertia, until the stimulation of the music is stopped, resulting in another shift of falling to the ground so the process can begin again. This constant movement between gravity, inertia and momentum continues until the feeling of efficacy has been established by the tavantata, and they are able to be released from the cycle.

The impulse of the music to provoke and urge the change in the body- mind, or the process of scazzicare, is in part due to the nature of the music itself, as well as the particular types of movements which are performed in response. The music used in the ritual both stimulates and guides the tarantata through her process of the dance. One of the key features of the music is that of the ostinato rhythm created by the tamburello, which was discussed in the Introduction. This repetitive rhythm of triplets, in a tro- chaic pattern of an accented followed by an unaccented beat (~~ —~ | -” -”) is also the rhythmic pattern of the heartbeat, and the repetition and inten- sity of the playing can affect the heartbeat of the dancer in response, raising the pulse through the repeated rhythm of the musical beat. Kay Gardner points out that this rhythmic pattern is used in many types of ‘healing music for duplicating the heartbeat’ (Gardner, 1997: 80), citing the example of the drumbeat in Native American traditions, which is likewise in a similar pattern, though in 4/4 time rather than 6/8. The ambiguity of the rhythm in the pizzica music created by the melody on the violin being played in 4/4 with the tamburello ostinato in 6/8 was noted in the Introduction. Diego Carpitella, in his Appendix to De Martino's book discussing the 'jatromusical' nature of what the musicians are playing, states that: The result is that this type of music has a dual aspect which merits thorough analysis from a psychological point of view, in that it reflects two typical moments of religious techniques: dilation and exasperation of the crisis, musically resolved in particular expressive techniques (accentuated rhythm, syncopation, instrumental effects, various ways of striking the tambourine, cries, rhythmic laments); and control of the crisis, reflected above all in the ostinato of the isometric rhythm. (Carpitella, 2005: 299) There is an ambivalence in key between major and minor, which De Giorgi mentions in relation to the playing of violinist Luigi Stifani and his brother Pantaleo, for whom ‘lamivalenza maggiore-minore é impor-tante nella scelta del brano in grado di attivare il ciclo coreutico ed é in relazione con il temperamento dell’inferma’ (De Giorgi, 1999: 96) [‘the major-minor ambiguity is important in the choice of the piece able to activate the choreutic cycle and is in relation to the temperament of the ill woman’. For the musicians, the variations in the ambiguous nature of the music are important for discovering which particular melodic and harmonic structure and aesthetic is most pleasing for the particular tarantata, thus allowing the music to stimulate or excite (scazzicare) the ill person to move in response. This finding of a particular type of music which relates to the temperament of the farantata was observed as a key feature in the historical records in Chapter Two.

The use of an ostinato bass in the pizzica tarantata music is significant in the dance, leading to a sympathetic correspondence of movements and music. The ostinato, or basso ostinato (sustained ground bass) in musical melodic terms is ‘a base that is repeated intact while the melody above it changes’ (Grout, 1981: 294), which is a particular feature of classical Baroque music. Interestingly, this creates an ambiguity within the music that Grout claims is reflected in the contradiction and tension of ideas within the Baroque itself: Baroque music shows conflict and tension between centrifugal forces of freedom of expression and the centripetal forces of discipline and order in a musical composition. (ibid.: 299) The ostinato or repeated bass line acts as an anchor, or foundation, for the melodies that are played above it. In pizzica music, this leads to the tension referred to in the Introduction between the melody which is often freer in tempo, and the regularity or constraint of the repeated rhythmic bass.

When translated into the movements of the dance, this may be seen as allowing the freedom of expression and release of the tarantata within the dance, which is also ‘grounded’ or supported by the rhythmic bass which helps to both regulate the dancer’s heart-beat, encourage her to sustain the movements, and provide a solid bass to prevent her from ‘bursting out’ in a completely uncontrolled manner. So it gives a form and structure to the freedom of the ritual, or lends ‘a figure to the formless, to repeat De Martino (De Martino, 2005: 36), and as noted above by Carpitella.

Even though there is a release and expressivity through the movements, the feet in particular move in the regular rhythm given by the tamburello as well as guitar, if one is used, thus helping to give a sense of containment to the tarantata in her movements through the rhythmic contact with the ground. In this way, rather than an ambiguity, I would suggest this is a ‘complementarity’: a unity of opposites within the structure of the music and dance, allowing for freedom within the confines of the rhythm, as much as the movements are also contained by the space of the ronda in order to protect and focus the tarantata during the ritual. As Bruce Kapferer notes in relation to the use of music in rituals: The music envelops the patient and, through the organized rhythm of its sound, can enter into a direct, and internally experienced, relation with the body. It is in the body that music is heard, and it is with the body that the dynamic movement of the music may be expressed. (Kapferer, 1991: 259) Furthermore, the repeated rhythm of the ostinato bass can enable the tarantata to continue and sustain the actions of the dance over a long period of time. The shift from the irregular pulse noted in the illness stage, which involves palpitations and difficulty in breathing, to adjusting the pulse to the regular and fast beat of the zamburello rhythm, likewise operates as a means of the ‘throwing off’ the state of inertia which is the illness, leading to the efficacious state of movements in the dance. The descriptions and filmic evidence of the ritual demonstrate the continuous movements carried out by the ¢arantata, whether in skipping or running either on the spot or in circles, which continues over a long period of time. There can be a variation in the figures and movements, but the rhythm of the feet is always in relation to the beat of the tamburello. It is this act of endurance which is a particular feature of tarantism, with the extended periods of physical exertion through the dance. The regular beat assists in the ability of the tavantata to continue the movements over a long time, as is also seen in many kinds of ritualistic and popular musical forms, which similarly allow for a regular, fast, rhythmic pulse to encourage sustained dancing. The regular beat leads to a change and regularising of the systems and processes in the body, such as a rapid pulse and breathing pattern, the raising of endorphins through the action of the movements, and an increased body temperature often leading to sweating. The process of sweating was suggested by some of the physicians noted in Chapter Two as being a possible reason for the dance acting as a cure, in that it sweats the poison out of the body, and the use of sweating as a means of purging toxins from the body is one that is used in a range of cultural practices.

Extended periods of running or fast movement have been used in some approaches to performer training for a variety of reasons, which are useful to examine in relation to tarantism and the idea of scazzicare. One of the most well-known examples of this is the practice of night running used in the training of the theatre company Gardzienice, based in rural Poland, and founded and directed by Wiordzimierz Staniewski. One of the key features of Gardzienice’s work is that of ‘musicality’: Staniewski defines the term musicality as a specific feeling for music which corresponds with the Pythagorean concept of the harmonia mundi: ‘I am utterly convinced that the earth is musical, that it has musicality and that every part of nature can be musical’ (Staniewski 1993: 11). He regards musicality as the vital source for his theatre.

The actors are not attempting to imitate the sounds of nature but finding their own organic rhythmic sounds and gestures which are rehearsed repetitively with the precise momentum of a musical phrase. (Hodge, 2000: 231-2) The use of repetition in various forms during training is a key feature of Gardzienice’s work, which includes the learning and performance of songs from different traditions, and music and singing are often a mainstay of their performances. The notion of musicality is related to that of mutuality, which is the deep connection and interaction between the performers, a sense of ‘being in tune’ with each other. Musicality and mutuality are both at the heart of the night running exercise. The group of performers is led by one person who establishes a clear rhythm. The others sense this rhythm and run closely packed around the leader, often through complete darkness. See Zarrilli (1998) on kalaripayattu as an example. Remorse, Transformation, and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited 189 in the forest. The sound of their breathing becomes more important, and both the rhythms of the breath and the stamping of the feet play a counterpoint to the regular ostinato running rhythm created by the leader, the process of which can continue for an hour (ibid.: 236).

Staniewski speaks of the importance of the mutual rhythm found during the process, as well as mentioning the idea of ostinato in relation to the regular and repetitive running rhythms: "When you run through the night, when you run together with other people, you search for rhythms, for a common rhythm, for rhythm as dialogue, rhythms in which you look for the relationship with the person who is next to you, on your right side, on your left side, ahead or behind you. When you run, you search for certain dynamics which occur through repetition, through the continuity of the breath, through continuous rhythms, as in ostinato in music, and you feel your inner self is growing, extending somehow." (Staniewski 1993: 24, in ibid.: 236)

The notion of both musicality and mutuality may be applied to the relationship between the musicians and tarantata within tarantism, as it is the close interrelationship between the music and dance which allows for the process of healing in the ritual. The musicians need to align themselves to the needs of the dancer, and then she in turn will feel for and respond to the rhythms and mood established by the musicians to allow for a psychophysical transformation within the embodied action of the dancing.

Alison Hodge, who has worked closely with Gardzienice, describes night running as an "existential" activity (ibid.: 237), which develops the perception and heightened awareness of the processes of the bodymind through the action of the running, as described by Staniewski: "The gate of your perception is open, and in this way you can deal with many things around you. [...] Physiologically you could explain this by saying that your senses are reacting more sharply, that your blood is circulating more strongly." (Staniewski 1993: 25, in ibid.: 237)

The psychophysical shifts happen through the embodiment and experience of the action of the running, which are both provoked and sustained by the rhythm of the stamping of the feet and the breath. Within the ritual of tarantism, the sense of transformation and efficacy is produced by the 190 CHAPTER THREE provocation or urging of the music to wake up the body to the action of the movements of the dance; likewise, the arantata is aided in sustaining the dance over a long period of time by the regular rhythms of the music. The scazzicare process of the music and sometimes colour acts as a stimulus to activate both body and inner feeling, and it is through the resultant experience of continuous movements within the dance that the sense of well-being is reached. It is the action of the movements, supported by the music, that creates the shift in the bodymind, as well as the inner feelings that are stirred by the music, which assists in the urging of the body to begin and continue the dance. This can be seen as a two-way process or continuum between inner and outer, or between feeling and body, where these are in constant relationship or mutuality with each other. Theatre practitioner and academic Dorinda Hulton discusses a similar process in working with actors, exploring whether an emotion will lead to stimulating a physical response of a gesture or movement, or if the movement will provoke an emotional response, or in fact whether it is a continuum between the two. Hulton, who also uses repetition and running as part of her work (Hulton, 1998: 27), has found the writing of William James to be important in this respect. James' article "What is an Emotion?" (1884) examines the way in which emotions are produced by embodied action:

Our natural way of thinking about these standard emotions [e.g., anger, fear, rapture, lust] is that the mental perception of some fact excites the mental affection called the emotion, and that this latter state of mind gives rise to the bodily expression. My thesis on the contrary is that the bodily changes follow directly the PERCEPTION of the exciting fact, and that our feeling of the same changes as they occur is the emotion. Common sense says, we lose our fortune, we are sorry and weep; we meet a bear, are frightened and run; we are insulted by a rival, are angry and strike. The hypothesis here to be defended says that this order of sequence is incorrect, that the one mental state is not immediately induced by the other, that the bodily manifestations must first be interposed between, and that the more rational statement is that we feel sorry because we cry, angry because we strike, afraid because we are sorry, angry, or fearful, as the case may be. Without the bodily states following on the perception, the latter would be purely cognitive in form, pale, colourless, destitute of emotional warmth. (James, 1884: 7)

Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited 191

In this way, the initial reaction to an event results in a physical response, and it is the changes in the body which occur that lead to the resultant emotional state. These are usually experienced together, so there is no sense of separation between the physical and psychological reactions and states. Even though James' work may now be seen as somewhat dated, the significance of what he is suggesting has been of influence within actor training® in terms of approaching the relationship between inner and outer, or physical and emotional arousal and response. In tarantism, the transformation and efficacy, the feeling of well-being, occurs through the physical actions of the dance, which are in turn provoked by (scazzicare) the responses to the music, which is being played as a result of the need of the tarantata to be healed as a response of the psychophysical state of illness and inertia that has been established through the 'bite'.

Dorinda Hulton has also been influenced by the work of the late theatre practitioner Joseph Chaikin, who likewise explored the connection between inner and outer in his exercises with actors, and much of his work is about the processes of change and transformation within the psychophysical being. As an example, within his sound and movement exercise, he points out that sometimes it is not always clear for the actor whether the impulse is coming from internal or external sources, however, as Hulton points out, 'within the process of change and transformation, there is essentially a flow or dialogue between the two. "Don't let anyone tell you to go from the inside out — or the outside in. It's a circle" ([Chaikin in] Blumentahl 1981: 56)' (Hulton, 2000: 160-1). This is also connected to the two-way 6 Peter Hulton, the editor of Theatre Papers, explains why this article had an influence on actor training, particularly in New York as part of the avant-garde movement in theatre: “The article would have been current in New York theatre training circles in the 1960s and 1970s. Emotion arising from a physical source was clearly of interest to all the physical work coming out of Europe and moving across to the States. It would have been current to the Open Theatre [run by Joseph Chaikin] and others. One of the problems the then avant-garde in the States had to contend with was how to respond to the arrival of surrealist texts from France and elsewhere which did not rely on a psychological interpretation of behaviour. Impulses for action would come, they thought, more from the body than the mind — hence the interest in this article’ (P. Hulton, 2009: email correspondence). 192

CHAPTER THREE process and connection between body and mind, and it is through this that there is a constant sense of ‘emergence’: It is equally clear, however, when the actor allows a particular kind of shifting balance, or dialogue, between body and mind, in listening to and watching for the emerging form, the emerging image, and is able, moment to moment, to come into alignment with it. In such a case, there is a perceptible quality of ‘presence, moment to moment within the process of change and transformation. (ibid.: 161) The idea of ‘presence’ is connected to the present moment emergence of a psychophysical being engaged in the particular action and image that have arisen through the outer and inner impulses and associations. As Hulton explains, presence is ‘the quality of engagement between subject and object’ (Hulton, 1998: 27).

The notion of the emergence of both bodymind and ‘self, as well as performance, in each moment, was discussed in Chapter One in relation to the ideas of presence and embodiment. If this is applied to the process of transformation within tarantism, this may be seen as an emergence in the moment of the lived body of the savantata, engaged with both the external stimulus of the music and colours, as well as the figure and image of the taranta and St Paul which become internalised and provoke (scazzicare) the movements of the dance and the inner images and associations with the embodied history of the ritual. This can lead to the sense of transformation and efficacy through the engagement of and identification with both the movements of the dance and the image of the spider and the saint. Thus the sarantata embodies and makes present the spider through her movements, in this sense being ‘possessed’ by the saranta, ‘becoming’ it and making the symbol real through the actions of the dance and her engagement with the image, belief and embodied history.

The types of movements themselves can also lead to a transformation in the state of being, and to certain experiences caused by shifts in the bodymind. Movements such as the rapid shaking of the head from side to side, and fast spinning on the spot, can lead to feelings of giddiness, faintness, nausea, and also euphoria. The movements of spinning or turning are used in ritualistic dance practices such as the well-known example of those performed by the dervishes to establish a sense of connection with the divine, but often in these practices, as also in the execution of fast pirouettes by ballet dancers, the process of ‘spotting’ is used to prevent the dancer from becoming dizzy. However, in tarantism, it appears that the purpose of the spinning and shaking of the head is to establish a euphoric sense of giddiness, which results in falling to the ground as a stage within the ritual process. In this sense, it is part of a known structure, and the movements are thus within a framework that creates a form for the tarantata, a sense of order or control within the release and freedom of the movements. This was noted earlier in relation to both the music and dance embodying the tension between control and freedom, and Chaikin also uses this idea in his description of the actor's process in responding to inner and outer impulses: "The 'act' is one of balancing between control and surrender" (Chaikin, 1991: 10).

The tarantata may be giving herself up in surrender through the movements, however this is still contained within the culturally determined form of the ritual, through the playing of the musicians, the support of those around her, and the framing of the contained space of the ronda. This also recalls the play between order and chaos which was referred to in the Introduction as being perceived as a feature of the Greek cultural influence in Salento, and in the sound and structure of the tamburello itself. This notion of control has to be understood as a way to support and encourage the freedom, not as a means to exert a dominant power over and manipulation of the tarantata.

When I showed Carpitella's film of Maria of Nardo's ritual to a British dancer, her response was to comment on the way in which she saw the male musicians 'controlling' Maria, as she perceived this in her observation, in a negative sense. This was also emphasised by the way in which Maria was the focal point for a crowd of observers watching her dance. This may be an understandable response to seeing the film without a knowledge of the actual cultural process of what was happening. However, rather than 'controlling' in a puppet-like sense, the musicians can perhaps be seen to be guiding and framing the movements and experience.

Although the dervish dancers do not use the same process of spotting that ballet dancers do, they do attempt to establish a firm focal base as they turn in order to not become dizzy.

In Chapter One, I suggested that the complete engagement and absorption with the action of a performance or any activity in the spatial-temporal moment can lead to an experience of 'forgetting of the self' where the action seems to happen without 'me' doing it, or that the music is playing without a conscious sense of the musician playing it, and the dance is dancing without a dancer 'performing' it. This sense of forgetting the self occurs in the act of 'being with' an activity, being fully engaged and absorbed at a psychophysical level in the experience of the action in the moment. I proposed that this can be a way of explaining what might be called a 'trance' state, particularly by performers who sometimes express this kind of dissolution between subject and object, where the 'living through, or perezhivanie to repeat Stanislavsky's term for 'experiencing, means that the sense of a separate 'I' is forgotten in the present moment absorption with the action. Although clearly different in intention and process, Maria of Nardo expressed a similar type of experience after she had declared her recovery from the ritual process, when the doctor from De Martino's research team asked her some questions about her experience. From the replies he obtained, he was able to deduce that her notion of time had remained suspended from the previous day, when the exorcism had begun (she thought it was Thursday, when it was actually Friday). She knew that she had danced, but did not remember anything of what had taken place during the dance. Among other things, she did not recall that the team members were present for her choreutic performances, and indeed, she believed that they had entered the hovel for the first time that very moment. (De Martino, 2005: 43)

This indicates the experience of the 'forgetting of the self and losing awareness of the environmental surroundings, through surrendering and' Remorse, Transformation and Scazzicare: De Martino Revisited 195 being completely absorbed in the ritual process.' This was in part conditioned through a religious belief, and Maria explained that at the point of the cure, she heard the voice of St Paul telling her in dialect that he was giving her grace. De Giorgi mentions that there have been examples noted in other cases where during the periods of rest or being immobile, some of the '¢avantate' would have an intimate conversation with St Paul (De Giorgi, 1999: 93).

There can be comparisons made between this and the experiences of mystics in a state of divine union, however this has been written about extensively elsewhere, and is not the purpose of this study. Whilst not denying the religious factor has an important impact on the overall experience, it is the question of how the inner bodymind state in correlation with the outer socio-cultural circumstances creates the sense of presence within the embodiment of the action in the particular moment. The written, oral and visual records indicate a transformation of the self which happens through the action of the dance in response to the music, in a specific spatial-temporal location. It is this process of liveness in the dancing, of the being and being-seen, that leads to the self-declared efficacy of the ritual experience.

De Martino was aware that he was writing about a ritual that was in decline, as fewer people were openly becoming tarantati. Reasons for this included the increasing emphasis on psychiatric medicine, referred to in Chapter Two, heightening the feeling of shame connected to tarantism. Likewise, in post-war Italy the emphasis was on the modernisation and industrialisation of the country, so again tarantism was seen as being of the 'primitive past' and no longer relevant to modern Italy, and this led to a greater sense of disapproval of those who undertook the ritual. Some Salentines also said that the use of pesticides had resulted in the disappearance of tarantulas, 8 One of Liidtke's informants described a similar experience from his illness in 1967, where he climbed onto the statue of St Paul in Galatina, but had no recollection of how he managed this, or any awareness of the people surrounding him (Litdtke, 2009: 83). 196 CHAPTER THREE so this meant that the tavanta was no longer part of the landscape to bite those who suffered from tarantism (Liidtke, 2009: 1). Furthermore, conditions began to change in Italy, seen most particularly in relation to the position of women, as was discussed in Chapter One. With a greater sense of freedom and personal expression emerging over the past thirty years, along with some improvements in the socio-economic conditions, there is maybe less need to undertake the process of a ritual which was seen to be of a ‘pagan’ past. There are also now other avenues available for relieving the pressures of everyday life. In Salento today, there are countless festivals and performances of pizzica music and dance where people certainly appear to experience a process of release, though this time in the name of pleasure rather than suffering. It is this development, along with a reinforcing of local identity not only through the culture but also the long and complex history of tarantism, of which De Martino plays such an important part, which will be the focus of the next chapter.

CHAPTER FOUR
Revivals, Roots and Raves: the Performance of Pigzica in Contemporary Salento
10 August 2001

I arrived at the place in Parabita where we were to begin the workshops in pizzica music and dance. It was my second full day in Salento, and the sun was scorching. I was looking forward to learning to dance the pizzica pizzica with Ada Metafune. As we came to the entrance of the building, I saw a young man with blond hair pull up on a motorcycle. I wondered what he was doing here, and what connection he had with the workshop. We went into the space where we were to work, and as the musicians got ready to play, I saw the young man go to pick up a tamburello, and then as the music started, began to play the instrument with such passion and engagement that he seemed to express his whole life through it. I was astonished at the transformation in him, and at the skill and energy in his playing.

I had tended to associate the tambourine as being a ‘girl's instrument', so seeing a man play it so passionately made me both more intrigued about the place in which I had found myself, and also more aware of my own ignorance. As we began working with Ada, she taught us some of the basic steps of the dance. We then stood in a circle, and she invited us in to the centre one at a time to dance with her. As we entered the circle, she gave each of us a ribbon of a colour which she had chosen for us. We tied the ribbon round our wrist, forehead or neck, and danced with her for a time, before stepping back to the edge of the circle with the others. As Ada invited me to enter the space of the ronda with her, the pulsing music of the pizzica and Ada's encouraging quality led me almost instantly to drop the inhibitions and nervousness I was feeling, and move towards her in the centre of the circle. She gave me a pink ribbon, which I tied on my wrist, and we danced together, turning in circles, lifting and moving our skirts in flowing shapes, skipping to the rhythm, until I sensed the urge to move back from the centre to the edge, and joined in the clapping to the music with the others. I felt like some form of initiation had taken place, but was not really sure what this meant. A few days later, I went with some of those on the workshop to a festival of pizzica music. Alla Bua, the same music group that played when we danced with Ada, were performing a set in a hot evening. We walked amongst stalls full of food and drink, as well as those selling ‘ethnic’ jewelry and knick-knacks from Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. I caught the occasional smell of cannabis in the air, reminding me of a Southern Italian version of Glastonbury, but from the late 1980s to early 1990s, before it became as large and commercial as it is now.

When Alla Bua started playing on stage, a crowd gathered in front of the platform, some dancing pizzica pizzica. At one point, a young girl dressed in a skirt and with long hair got up on to the stage. She began to dance slowly, turning from side to side, with her arms flowing around her, and a glazed look in her eyes. I didn’t know who she was, or if she was part of the group and performance. It seemed at times that some of the musicians were turning towards her to play for her. After the concert, Giuseppe Memmi, the leader of Alla Bua at the time, explained that they felt she was ill, so they were playing for her.

Throughout these days and those that followed in the workshop and at the festivals, I was struck by the wealth of the history and culture of Salento, the enjoyment I experienced in the Revivals, Roots and Raves, in the music and dance of the pizzica, and my own naivety in the kinds of initial assumptions I had made. These were a few of my first moments of encounter with Salento and the pizzica, having only previously researched the history and practice of tarantism.

I found myself wondering how this contemporary use of the music and dance was related to the centuries of the culture-specific healing ritual, and in what ways the festivals and commercialization of the music and symbols of tarantism that I saw around me related to the identity of being Salentine for the younger generation.

The experience of working with Ada and Alla Bua, as well as the others who were leading the workshop and giving an insight into the history and culture of Salento, had made a deep impression on me, and I had a hint of the therapeutic potential of the music and dance. But what is the place for pizzica in a spatial-temporal location where tourism is becoming a mainstay of the economy, and tarantism is used as a means for local identity and global marketing, bringing a combination of curious visitors and numerous researchers to find a history in the present revival of a lost world?

How has the re-energizing of the cultural forms and practices led to heated debates on issues of authenticity, ownership, and the ‘contaminazione of pizzica? What new forms of music and events have emerged from this re-working of ‘traditional’ forms into those which have relevance in the third millennium? Is there still a connection to the religious context and therapeutic potential inherent within tarantism? If Chapter Two posed the question, ‘Whose history is it?, this chapter may well ask: “Whose present is it?) as similar issues of multiple voices and viewpoints, appropriations and definitions are found in examining aspects of the ‘revival’ and the ways in which past and present combine to form the lived experience in the people and culture of the serra of Salento. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

200 CHAPTER FOUR Revival/reinvention/restoration

The work of Eric Hobsbawm has been fundamental in approaching the idea of ‘neo-traditions,’ examining the debate between authenticity and invention in traditions that lay claim to a historical lineage. He discusses the use of ancient materials to construct invented traditions of a novel type for quite novel purposes. A large store of such material is accumulated in the past of any society, and an elaborate language of symbolic practice and communication is always available. Sometimes new traditions could be readily grafted on old ones, sometimes they could be devised by borrowing from well-supplied warehouses of official ritual, symbolism and moral exhortation. (Hobsbawm, 2000: 6)

Hobsbawm suggests that symbols from the past, as well as music and dance, can be used as a means to create cohesion within a community, and to strengthen the sense of regional or ethnic identity. The direct association with a heritage and history can offer a way to authenticate the neo-tradition, and to establish the feeling of ‘belonging’ within a particular group:

For all invented traditions, so far as possible, use history as a legitimator of action and cement of group cohesion. Frequently it becomes the actual symbol of study. [...] [Modern nations and all their impedimenta generally claim to be the opposite of novel, namely rooted in the remotest antiquity, and the opposite of constructed. (ibid.: 12, 14)

Chapter Two noted the use of myths to create a sense of panhellenic identity in the ancient Greek world, with both symbols and the integrated culture of mousiké acting as ‘a vital medium through which societies created and related to their past’ (Murray and Wilson, 2004: 2). Music and dance in particular can be used in this way due to their ‘predominantly somatic modes of transmission’ so that the performance of these forms becomes the manifestation of memory which is, to repeat Buckland, ‘publicly enacted, demonstrating the ethereality of human existence and the continuity of human experience, as successive generations re-present dancing’ (Buckland, 2001: 1). This also highlights the conflicts between continuity and fixity in the idea of tradition.

Felicia Hughes-Freeland points out that tradition is a process, not a thing. [...] Indeed, tradition should not necessarily be understood as referring to customs that are authentic, indigenous, and long established, although there may be particular instances, but rather as an ideology that attributes precedents to practices that may have recently been revived, recast, or reinvented, even if the label or contexts refer back to a previous practice. (Hughes-Freeland, 2006: 55)

In their work on the ethnomusicology of ‘popular’ and ‘traditional’ music in relation to place and identity, Connell and Gibson similarly suggest that tradition should not be considered as something that is fixed, but rather as a process that is in change, and also that the commodification of the idea of ‘traditional’ attempts to fix it as an object, rather than acknowledging its fluid nature: The moment of commodification — as music is transformed from cultural expression to product, as traditions are usurped by change — is crucial. Binary relations established in considering such commodification constantly appear — between ‘tradition’ and ‘contemporary’ in folk revival, in ‘regional’ traditions and in various expressions of ‘roots’ in music. Unpacking fixity implies that we begin by examining more closely notions of ‘traditional’ music and commodification, as they establish the character of a particular form of authenticity. (Connell and Gibson, 2003: 19) I have suggested throughout this study that the body, performance, and site/place can be reconsidered as being a process rather than an object. In a similar sense, the notion of ‘tradition’ is not fixed, but in constant change in relation to shifts in the socio-cultural surroundings and developments with multiplicities of manifestations and approaches. However, within the neo-traditions, there can be a tendency to attempt to fix the tradition into an object for the sake of commercialization, giving it a marketable legitimacy with a clearly defined lineage and associations of culture, history, and place. Music and dance can become not just the objectified representation, but also the perceived embodiment of a culture and history, which relates to the local and regional emic and etic sense of identity:

It was once assumed that communities and individuals were recognizable through relatively stable identities — traditions, cultural traits, opinions, and practices that could be collected, mapped, and objectified. [...] More commonly, these ‘fixed’ identities were imposed as clichéd images of place and culture in tourist promotions, political rhetoric, and sensationalist media, essentialisms that had little resemblance to everyday, lived experience. (ibid.: 117)

Connell and Gibson, however, do point out that this view has since been challenged, and that more complex ways of understanding the construction of a fluid sense of identity in relation to cultural productions such as music are being examined:

The ways individuals, communities, regions, or nations see themselves involves engagement with a potential myriad options: ethnicity, religion, gender, occupational status, political beliefs, and so on. Music remains an important cultural sphere in which identities are affirmed, challenged, taken apart, and reconstructed. (ibid.: 117)

The revival of pizzica music and dance in Salento, with its reference to a historical past that includes the ritual of tarantism, exhibits this type of complexity in the shifts of both culture and identity. If the histories of tarantism presented in Chapter Two demonstrated the appropriations by medical practitioners, the Church, and philosophers, the revival shows appropriations of not only the history of tarantism and the music and dance of pizzica, but also the land and the people of Salento by the tourist industry, politicians, academia, and the ‘World’ music and dance stage, leading to conflicts within the very society that was seeking a unification through its indigenous culture.

Roots of revival

The last section of Chapter Three noted the gradual demise of the ritual of tarantism for a variety of reasons. The music and dance of pizzica were heard less and less in the terra of Salento, as during the 1950s and 1960s, other forms of music from outside the region became popular with young people, and new types of social events and practices began to take the place of those associated with the older generations. Violinist Roberto Raheli suggests that the elders also began to play less of the traditional forms of music due to its associations with the pre-industrial past, a time of poverty, and the sense of shame and suffering: In the sixties and seventies, the older Salentines abandoned our traditional music. Our traditional culture fled from itself. Those songs and its music had been completely associated with suffering and poverty; therefore, when — fortunately — there was less poverty, the songs associated with the past were rejected too. There was less poverty, but also less poetry, less suffering but also fewer songs, less music. (Raheli, 2005: 125)

The publication of De Martino's La terra del rimorso had raised interest in the ritual of tarantism, resulting in an increase of academics and tourists to the region. But it was not really until the 1970s, and then a more influential move in the late 1980s and 1990s, that pizzica was performed and used as a source of identity and pride in Salento in a new way.

Tracing the beginnings or roots of how this revival of pizzica occurred raises the same sorts of problems with ‘origins’ that were noted in Chapter Two in relation to history. It is not always possible to place a finger on the precise moment that something began, nor then to trace a clear pathway from that moment to the present. Instead, what becomes apparent are a series of ‘moments,’ many of which operate within conflicting ideologies across contested spaces, that together may create a picture of the ways in which the so-called zeo-tarantismo movement gathered momentum.

The picture offered here is inevitably conditioned and limited by my research and choice of aspects to include, so, to refer back to Lynn Maners in Chapter One, this is offered as an interpretation based on my reading and field work, which itself is a reflection of what I did, where I went, and with whom I spoke.

Ada Metafune said to me, with an ironic smile, that in Salento, everyone is an expert in pizzica: “Noi salentini siamo tutti esperti, diciamo “si, io so” (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [‘we Salentines are all experts, we say “Yes, I know”’]. I certainly found many strong and often conflicting opinions and determinations of ‘what actually happened; and who was responsible for instigating the revival. As is often the case, it was most likely a combination of factors and people, but with the problematic concerns of ownership, authenticity, and legitimacy as part of the equation, there is no single answer, but rather a multiplicity of ‘moments’ in a complex picture.

The first wave in the re-emergence or re-animation of pizzica occurred in the 1970s, particularly with the formation of the music group the Canzoniere Grecanico Salentino in 1975, which included Luigi Chiriatti and Daniele Durante. They ‘became Salento’ first folk revival group’ (De Giudice, 2005: 241), performing a range of local music and, according to their website, ‘producendo numerosi fascicoli di studi sul folklore pugliese ed organizzando la prima rassegna delle minoranze linguistiche pugliesi’ (<http://www.Canzonieregrecanico salentino.net/> accessed 22 March 2009) [‘producing numerous collections of studies on Apulian folklore and organising the first festival of Apulia’s linguistic minorities’].

Additionally, efforts were made to collect and record some of the traditional music and songs from the elders of Salento, however Liidtke points out that ‘[o]ften these endeavours met with resistance, as they evoked memories of a past tinged with suffering and anguish, often looked back on with embarrassment’ (Liidtke, 2009: 104-5). It was the next attempt at a revival during the 1980s and particularly in the 1990s that changed the playing of pizzica from one of shame (vergogna) to one of pride (orgoglio), identification, and enjoyment. It is at this point in the story that different strands and ‘moments’ begin to appear in a weaving together of phenomena, each with their own motivation and outcome, that led to the diversity of traditions and contested spaces that emerged through the revival process. In part, this occurred through the influence of both academics and practitioners, each examining and promoting the new view of pizzica from their particular lens of enquiry and practice.

One strand occurred around the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli where, in 1982, musicians, dancers, and academics took part in ‘il ritorno a San Rocco’, to promote the music and playing of the tamburello in particular (ibid.: 107-8). It was in part from this that Ada Metafune and Guiseppe Memmi with Alla Bua began their journey down the path to reviving and performing pizzica. Additionally, the group I Tamburellisti di Torrepaduli was founded in 1989 by performer and ethnomusicologist Pierpoalo De Giorgi and Amedeo De Rosa in order to research and perform the music. With the help of Paolo Pellegrino and Revivals, Roots and Raves 205 Antonio Anchora, they attempted to revive the songs in the Griko dialect of the Grecia Salentina region.

"The interest in groups playing the pizzica encountered a second, and more significant, wave in the early 1990s, which resulted in many more groups of musicians and dancers being created, and performing in concerts as well as recording CDs of the music. According to Del Giudice: It appears that part of the motivation behind this second phase revival was the increasing multiethnicity of Italian (and Salentine) society. Many began to examine their own ethnic identity vis-a-vis foreign ethnicities in their midst. They asked themselves, for instance, why Moroccans and Albanians did not readily relinquish their cultural identities, while Salentines did so easily? Reflection on their own traditions and the search for what identified them as Salentines helped bring the pizzica to the fore, and spawned some of this folk music revival's reconfiguration. (Del Giudice, 2005: 241)

Today, there is an increasingly large number of pizzica groups who play in concerts within and outside Apulia, and record CDs and DVDs. Pigzica entered the 'World Music" stage and record markets, moving the music from the local to the global, allowing for a visibility of the musicians beyond Salento leading to a sense of celebrity and economic benefit for those groups which have become successful. Some of the bands have toured internationally, gaining greater recognition around the world. Officina Zoé, one of the most renowned groups in Salento, and whose website states that they 'triggered off the revival of pizzica' (<www.officinazoe.com/eng/main_eng.html> accessed 3 May 2009), have toured not only throughout Europe but also America, and in the last few years, in Asia.

In this sense, "World music" is a relativist term depending on what part of the world you are situated. 206 CHAPTER FOUR (Korea and Japan)

They have also provided the music for two films made by Salentine film director Edoardo Winspeare, Sangue Vivo (2000) and Il Miracolo (2003). As well as the revival of ‘traditional’ forms of pizzica music, another manifestation which contributed to the resurgence of performance was through the re-working of pizzica into new types of music, whether through the rise in techno music, or fusion with other genres from different parts of the world through the New Age and World Music movements. Some of these new forms were created through embracing new technologies and types of performance event, for example when DJs at raves and in discos would mix pizzica with techno music, inventing ‘techno-pizziche (Del Giudice, 2005: 240).

The rave culture, with its emphasis on ‘letting go’ through prolonged dancing to music with a repetitive and heavy rhythmic beat, in many ways leant itself to the younger generation seeking a two-way, Janus-like movement both back to their roots, and forward into the new world that was happening around them. ‘The identification with tarantism as being an occasion for prolonged dancing and entering into a state of trance to a sustained rhythmic pattern, merged with the party and drug culture of the techno scene, and raves and parties on beaches began to take place along the Salentine coastland. Edoardo Winspeare told me of his being involved with organising two hundred such beach parties in the early 1990s (Winspeare, 2007: Interview), which he believes contributed to the boom of pizzica in Salento: ‘Penso che abbiamo contribuito a far explodere il fenomeno della pizzica’ (in Nacci, 2004: 32) [‘I think that we contributed to the explosion of the phenomenon of pizzica’].

He speaks of his motivation to hold the parties as being connected to his desire to move the pizzica away from the realm of the intellectual élite as he saw it, into the popular domain: ‘7arantismo was the dominion of the élite of the left. I don’t like when the left is élite. [...] I wanted to do something popular, and I started to be very populistic. We are all Salentini, we all dance pizzica’ (Winspeare, 2007: Interview). There was a shift not only from the sense of shame associated with tarantism to one of celebration and enjoyment, but also from a personal experience of efficacy, to one of a shared group experience connected through the music: Revivals, Roots and Raves 207 Now, in neo-tarantismo, everybody goes in trance. And they go in trance with the music. It’s the same as when they listen to rock music, but because we have here the tambourine, maybe there is a suggestion of the tarantata. (ibid.)

The use of the tamburello as the instrument of pizzica and tarantism, was absorbed into the rave culture to provide a sense of roots and identity for Salentines, bringing enough of a flavour of the past into the present to allow for the feeling of embodying the history of the land and culture into a very different performative approach and experience. Another new form of music that developed around the time of the early 1990s and was influential in the development of the sense of identity for young people in Salento, was a fusion of pizzica with reggae, rap and ragamuffin, most famously found in the songs of the Salentine group the Sud Sound System. Reggae, perhaps more than any other form, exemplifies the movement of music from the local to the trans-global, and a source and resource for creating not only new musical forms, but also as a shifting means of identification and political resistance in its travels and transforma- tions. Its roots in Jamaica were a fusion of forms such as ska and rocksteady, focusing on themes of political resistance, personal freedom, and the criminal world of the rude boys in Jamaica. The connection to the Rastafarian religion and culture, which migrated from Ethiopia to Jamaica, encouraged songs of resistance and rebellion, as well as black pride. As the music became more commercial, it was appropriated and transformed in different countries with redefined meanings. Reggae's stylistically and semantically 'open' musical form made it easy for local groups to adopt and transform it in their own styles.

The Sud Sound System incorporated reggae music into their own style, creating songs of local resistance and global inclusion. They perform all their songs in their local Salentine dialect, which is a source of personal and regional identity and resistance. Their song, "Le radici ca tieni" from their 2003 album "Lontano," reflects the desire to protect the land and identity of Salento, while embracing the past cultural and ethnic roots of the region and the new cultures and races that were becoming part of it.

Revivals, Roots and Raves 209 This song uses reggae music and local dialect to express the importance of roots, as well as openness towards other cultures and peoples. Salentines are "citizens of the world, but still have their origins in the different civilizations which have inhabited the land" (Messapians, Greeks, and Byzantines), referring to the present identification with the past cultural influences discussed in the Introduction. These worlds are united now with the migration of Jamaican music. The Salentine dialect is equated with Jamaican, and a rejection of the hegemony of Italian. However, the music itself is both rooted in and united with the history of Salento and pizzica, as the introduction and first verse are set to an adaptation of the melody from a version of "Lu rusciu de lu mare" ("The sound of the sea"), one of the most well-known traditional pizzica songs. This song tells of an impossible love between a king's daughter and a soldier in a time when Salento was torn apart by war between the Spanish and the Turks.

The first verse is initially sung by a young woman accompanied by a guitar and tambourine in the manner of a traditional pizzica song, before the reggae music begins, and the verse is repeated in this new style by the group. Thus, the music embodies past and present, a sense of history and identity of being Salentine, with the new global world of fusion and migration, of resistance and pride in the roots of both "self" and "other".

The Sud Sound System are now well-known internationally and have toured and performed throughout the world. However, they were also part of the roots of the revival of pizzica in the 1990s in several different contexts. Liidtke points out that when they first started, they did not want to be labelled as part of the neo-tarantism movement, due to the associations of tarantism as being primitive and shameful. However, with the success of the revival and interest in the zuovi tarantati, the group "have promoted this image for themselves, taking advantage of the new wave of interest in tarantism" (Liidtke, 2000: 298). They had been involved with performing in the raves organized by Winspeare in the early 1990s.

In discussing these raves and the beach parties, Winspeare uses a similar notion of embracing different cultures that is seen in Le radici ca tieni, saying that the feeling of these events was that: "We are all Mediterraneans, we are all Balkans, we are brothers with the Arabs, with the Jews" (Winspeare, 2007: Interview). However, despite Winspeare's stated desire to create a site for pizzica that was populist and moved away from the intellectual élite, it was just such an encounter between an intellectual from academia and the Sud Sound System that furthered the history of neo-tarantism.

The academic in question was the French sociologist and ethnologist Georges Lapassade. He had a particular interest in altered states of consciousness, trance, and rituals from around the world. In collaboration with Piero Fumarola, who has similar interests, they conducted studies and experiments of both tarantism and the new emergence of neo-tarantism in the 1990s, most particularly through the performances of the Sud Sound System and the rave parties. They investigated both the effects that the new forms of music had in establishing a state of trance, and also the ways in which the neo-tarantism movement created a sense of collective identity for the younger generation of Salentines. Fumarola, ‘a pizzica pizzica e la transe del tarantismo sono la risorsa simbolica pit accattivante’ (Fumarola, 2004: 162), believed that the symbols created a sense of local identity. Lapassade highlighted the Sud Sound System as an example of the neo-tarantati, and he and Fumarola conducted experiments in technopizzica and the ‘contaminazi- one della pizzica con il reggae’ (Nacci, 2004: 47). Fumarola became interested in the ‘transe metropolitane’ (ibid.: 46), removing the trance state of tarantism from its historical roots and the countryside into the city, creating a new 'metropolitan trance.' This approach influenced the development of mergings of form and practice, which have continued to occur throughout the spatial-temporal site of Salento.

Lapassade's somewhat reductionist view of both tarantism and neo-tarantism has been criticized. He connected the historical origins to the Greek Corybantic cult and likened neo-tarantism to a range of rituals involving trance around the world. Despite this, he is still regarded with great respect in Salento. Following his death in 2008, publications and conferences are being planned on his work, organized by his former collaborator, Piero Fumarola.

The increasing number of academic researchers studying both the ritual of tarantism and the new world of neo-tarantism impacted the determination and definition of the history and culture, promoting further interest and visits by researchers. Researchers from various disciplines, such as anthropology, cultural studies, history, and performance studies, have played a direct part in the shifting nature of the revival.

Luisa Del Giudice, a Visiting Assistant Professor of Italian Folklore in UCLA from 1995 to 2001, furthered the study of Italian folklore traditions and gave a wider audience to the performance of pizzica music and dance. She began her research on pizzica and Salento in the mid-1990s, collaborating with Luigi Chiriatti and Roberto Raheli. To make the music more accessible, she recorded and translated some songs and helped organize festivals and conferences on the music, including 'Performing Ecstasies: Music, Dance and Ritual in the Mediterranean' in Los Angeles in 2000. The proceedings from this event were published in 2005, with a chapter on pizzica in contemporary Salento by Karen Liidtke, who stated that the 'origins of the term "neo-tarantism" remain, to my knowledge, unclear' (Liidtke, 2005: 37), but that it was suggested to her that the term might have been created by Lapassade. However, in an Editor's Note in her own chapter "The Folk Music Revival and the Culture of Tarantismo in the Salento," Del Giudice affirms in relation to the term "neo-tarantism": "Though not a perfect term because it is one which soon becomes dated, I coined this term in 1996 to refer, in conversation and in interviews, to the folk revival movement which had as its point of reference historic tarantismo. I note with the passing of the years it has become a term with a certain currency." (Del Giudice, 2005: 219)

In her 2009 book Dances with Spiders, Liidtke still states that the origins of the term are not clear, but cites Del Giudice's comment on her own invention of the word, as well as repeating that some people say it was actually Lapassade, and adding sociologist Anna Nacci into the equation as a possible source (Nacci wrote two books on neo-tarantism in 2001 and 2004). (Liidtke, 2009: 23-4). In this way, the term "neo-tarantism" is itself a site of debate on origins and authorship between the academics who are researching a small geographical area with a rich complexity of cultural manifestations.

In whatever way the term first came into being, it is now being used as a means of identification by some Salentines who call themselves "nuovi tarantati." Del Giudice explains that the term is associated with the "physiological urge to dance... That is, when the pizzica is played, those who are tarantati must dance (or vice versa, those who must dance may be identified as tarantati)." (Del Giudice, 2005: 262). This creates a distance from many of the culture-specific features of the historical ritual of tarantism while retaining, or reframing, the factor of the scazzicare, the response to the stimulation of the music, of being moved and carried away through the process, as discussed in Chapter Three.

The interest in Salento generated by academics and practitioners during the 1990s have led to a shift in the local and global perceptions of tarantism and pizzica, resulting in an increased number of visitors to the region, some of whom come for tourism, to enjoy the scenery, beaches, and the culture, and others to take part in the growing number of workshops, conferences, and events surrounding not just pizzica and tarantism, but also the history and culture of Salento. Pizzica has been used as a symbol and commodity not only by practitioners, but also by the tourist industry to attract greater income into the region, and by politicians who use the music as part of their campaigns, recognizing the importance that a cultural performance form can have on influencing voters. (Liidtke, 2005: 27).

Special festivals, such as the Notte della Taranta which will be discussed later in this chapter, have been created as a means to promote both local music, and global links with the "World Music" scene, and other local festivals, both new and old, have also targeted a wider audience than those of the particular town in which they take place. This mixture of forms of music and dance, of the "traditional" and the new, of a search for history and the contemporary, have resulted in some major schisms within Salento itself, most particularly in relation to the debate between the sense of "authenticity" and "contamination." Walter Wiora, writing in the Journal of the International Folk Council in 1949, recounts a dispute that took place 100 years earlier, surrounding the publication of Wilhelm von Zuccalmaglio's collection of German folk songs. Ludwig Erk claimed in 1848 that the songs were not genuine, but were invented or 'fashioned' (Wiora, 1949: 14) by von Zuccalmaglio. Romantic composer Johannes Brahms disagreed and incorporated songs from the collection into his own music, suggesting that it was the melodies in Erk's collections that were not 'authentic' (ibid.: 14).

In Chapter Four, Wiora discusses the notion of 'authenticity' and the dispute between a scholar and a practitioner regarding what each might consider to be musically 'authentic' for their own purposes. Wiora proposes two categorizations: Kategorie (category) and Wertidee (inspiring ideal). He suggests that scholars are interested in the 'authentic' folk song as a fixed object, while practitioners or artists consider folk music as an inspiring ideal, and only what realizes this ideal deserves the honor of being classed as a folk song (ibid.: 15).

Wiora compares this distinction to the phenomenological terms 'Kérper' and 'Lieb', or body as object, and the lived or living body in the world. He states that the inspiring ideal of the Wertidee is as important as the Kategorie in performing the 'true folk song' and that the history of the folk song revival, which includes a romanticized view of 'truth' and ideal, needs to be appreciated as much as the 'drier' sociological scholarship.

Wiora sets up an inherent dualism between 'authentic' and 'inauthentic' as absolute categories, as well as a division between a scholarly approach to folk music, in contrast to that of composers and performers. This notion of authenticity became important during the folk music revival of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, but took on a different connotation during the age of modernity. Erik Cohen points out that "Authenticity" is an eminently modern value [...] whose emergence is closely related to the impact of modernity upon the unity of social existence" (Cohen, 1988: 372). He suggests that through the periods of modernism and postmodernism, institutions and social constructs have lost their meaning, so people turn back to themselves and their roots to find this meaning: "Modern man is thus seen, from the perspective of a contemporary existential philosophical anthropology, as a being in quest of authenticity" (ibid.: 373).

Cohen, in writing on tourism and questioning the idea of 'staged authenticity' and commoditisation, suggests that a motivation for such a tourist experience is seeking the authentic in the 'other' and looking for something that is not part of the 'modern' world: "Recreational tourists, whose concern with authenticity is relatively low, may well accept even a substantially staged product and experience as 'authentic.' This would not be necessarily because they have been misled by the staging, but because even the faintest vestige of, or resemblance to what experts would consider an 'authentic' trait of the product, may suffice for them to play the make-believe game of having an 'authentic' experience" (ibid.: 379).

When questioning the revival and performances of pizzica music and dance in contemporary Salento, these issues are all significant. There can certainly be a tension between what the 'authorities' may decide and define as being authentic, and the types of performances that occur. However, if performance is understood to be process rather than product, then the idea of 'authenticity' is itself a construct. Cohen suggests that authenticity is "not a primitive given, but negotiable" (ibid.: 379) and Buckland, writing in relation to forms of traditional dance and folk culture and rituals, states that authenticity is "more often than not a speculation" (Buckland, 2001: 1).

In this way, as with the previous discussion of 'tradition,' it is the point where 'authenticity' itself is commoditised and marketed into a fixed object that creates the conflict between this and the process of change and fluidity, which is the experience of those who are engaged in the playing and dancing of the forms. This raises the question that has been prevalent throughout this book concerning the problem of origins and an evolutionary approach to forms of music and dance, framed through the chicken and egg dilemma. Is it possible to say at what point in its history and development a piece of music or choreography can be fixed into something that is labelled as 'authentic,' or even at what point it becomes 'inauthentic'?

If traditions and cultures are seen as process rather than object, then the naturally fluid and porous manner in which they develop and encompass different forms which they encounter, and shift in response to them, questions the notion of these traditions as being either authentic or inauthentic. Connell and Gibson point out, "there is, therefore, no particular moment at which any culture somehow becomes inauthentic, in its incorporation of external elements, since society was and is always in flux" (Connell and Gibson, 2003: 27). In discussing the notion of authenticity in relation to traditional music, they go on to state: "Authenticity remains an intangible concept. Essentialist perspectives construct authenticity in relation to concepts such as 'spontaneity' ('live'), 'grassroots' and 'of the people', in opposition to their antithesis: 'manipulation; 'standardisation, 'mass' and 'commercial'". Authenticity in its strictest sense, applied to museum objects, entails a process where historical artifacts are verified as having originated from particular places and being genuinely what they are claimed to be. However, in terms of more fluid and ephemeral aspects of culture, such as music, it is impossible to measure authenticity against any given scientific criteria. Discussions of musical authenticity imply a different use of the term, constituting interpretations of the validity of music from particular contexts and in certain modes of consumption. What is "authentic" is socially constructed in various ways. If authenticity is socially constructed, then it is concerned with the views of those voices who are defining what is authentic and what is inauthentic: it is their own constructed and often disputed version of authenticity, as seen in both Wiora's example of the disagreement between Ludwig Erk and Brahms, as well as in the revival of pizzica music and dance in Salento.

Revivals, Roots, and Raves

The magazine guide to events happening within the region, Qui Salento, discussed a CD entitled Tavantavirus in July 2007, which was sold optionally with copies of the magazine. They described the CD as being "a disc of transition, from the ancient to the modern, from the 'old' to the new, it's a representation of the Southern spirit through the means of 'technology', it is a natural 'contamination' of the old atmospheres with new technologies, new desires, new dances" (Qui Salento, 1-18 July 2007: 75). This description highlights both the importance of the connection between the old and the new, and particularly between the older generation and the younger, as well as using the word 'contaminazione' to explain the mixing of styles of ancient and modern. This term is often used to label such kinds of music, but not necessarily in a 'negative' way. It describes the process of what might be otherwise termed 'mixing' or a 'fusion' of forms, rather than seeing it as a problematic contamination by one form on another (see Nacci's quotation above regarding the 'contaminazione' of reggae and pizzica).

However, there are also those within Salento who do express their concern at such a process which may be seen to threaten the 'authenticity' or 'purity' of the music and dance through the introduction of other or 'foreign' elements, as well as the appropriation of traditional forms and symbols for entertainment or commercial gain. What will be demonstrated in the following discussion of elements including family, bloodline, and the use of particular symbols and words, is the use of what may be considered to be 'old' or from 'ancient times' as the means for demonstrating 'authenticity' and the connection of the past to the present. One key aspect inherent within Salento is the importance of the family, and of traditions being passed through the family line, and the significance of blood and bloodline in relation to the performance and understanding of pizzica music and dance. The notion of the 'tradition bearer' as being the source of the authentic knowledge and practice can lead to a valorization and commodification of the elders as embodying and transmitting this authenticity. This will have a marked impact on those in their families, who then become the heirs of the tradition bearers through their inherited bloodline and learning, and a present manifestation and embodiment of the past traditions and performances. In this way, a musician or dancer can lay claim to presenting the authentic form of the music or dance because they had been taught this by their parents and grandparents. A 'genealogy' of this kind can also be marketed by promoters as providing a 'genuine' version of culture to those wanting to study or experience it, and thus can lead to a sense of competition amongst the practitioners.

The Canzoniere Grecanico Salentino are still described as 'il "papa" (Qui Salento, 1-18 July 2007: 5) of the revival groups in Salento, even though now Daniele Durante and Rossella Pinto's son Mauro has taken over as leader of the group. However, in an article entitled 'Di padre in figlio, la musica nel sangue' (Quarta, 2007: 77) [‘From father to son, music in the blood’], it is made clear that Mauro is the inheritor of the music through his bloodline.

The importance of the family is very significant in Southern Italy, but this feature of music being passed down through the family line is one that also exists in many other musical forms and traditions, including reggae. On 15 July 2007, there was a concert as part of the Respect Salento Reggae Festival held in San Donato, given by Ziggy Marley, the son of Bob Marley. Not only does this demonstrate a festival which makes a connection between the musical and cultural traditions of Salento and reggae (the Sud Sound System were also playing at the event), but the publicity states that Ziggy is 'lerede del grande Bob Marley' [‘the inheritor of the great Bob Marley’], that he has a similar voice to his father, and his music is rooted strongly in his father's traditions and ideals, as well as the Rastafarian philosophy and the land of 'Mother Africa' (Qui Salento, 1-18 July 2007: 27).

The identification of being the inheritor of a cultural tradition through the family and connection to the land, can also be seen in Salento in metaphorical terms relating to blood. Liidtke notes that '[s]ome Salentines speak of having the pizzica in their blood, creating a sense of community defined on the basis of musical DNA' (Liidkte, 2009: 15). The connection with the land and the identity of being Salentine was noted in the Introduction through the writings of Antonio Verri and the idea of the 'sibilo lungo; or the 'deep murmur' and Del Giudice points out that Verri and his work have been an inspiration for the generation of Salentines engaged in the revival Revivals, Roots and Raves 219 (Del Giudice, 2005: 265).

Connell and Gibson indicate that the connecting of music to cultural histories and a sense of "roots" in place can aid in the establishment of authenticity: "Tying music to cultural histories and a sense of "roots" in place becomes an important part of strategies to locate sounds in a cultural plane to buttress authenticity' (Connell and Gibson, 2003: 113). This correspondence between music, blood and land which creates the sense of authenticity is articulated by Raffaella Aprile, writing in the CD notes of the soundtrack to Edoardo Winspeare's film Sangue Vivo performed by Officina Zoé, where he makes a direct correlation between blood, the music of pizzica, and the ¢erra of Salento: Blood that flows ... in the veins, in the heart, in the soul. Blood that, drop by drop, from the deepest silence, penetrates the fissures in the Earth, mixes, and collects in a single vital rhythm. Blood flows, always alive. Its music plays in us and in you, the ripe fruit of notes that spring forth in hypnotic melodies, sliding, filtering, and meshing into the passages in the Earth, mixing with its nerves and pulsing endlessly. Time and memories flow in all of us — alive, they free the melodies of a time gone by, that continues to slip away.

'Sale' (Salt), 'Don Pizzica' and 'Macaria' [three songs on the CD] show not only authenticity, but also the surprisingly contemporary nature of this music - the continuous pulsing in all of us, the centrifugal and hypnotic force of the 'Pizzica. (Aprile, 2000) The rhythm of the pulse in the blood is thus in direct correspondence with the rhythm of the land and the rhythm of the music of the pizzica. In this way, the music itself becomes the embodiment of the land and the blood of the people through the connection of the same pulsing rhythm, so the musicians are playing the land of Salento as much as their own inherited culture. Aprile also states that the music played by Zoé is both authentic and contemporary, and that this occurs in part through the pulsing of the blood which links the old and the new, but also justifies the contemporary because it is still the living blood which is in the veins of the musicians, the blood which links them to the past of both their ancestors and the land. Thus blood becomes a metaphor and symbol of communal identity, as well as authenticity and direct connection to the historical line of the traditions.

Edoardo Winspeare, writing in the notes of a later CD by Zoé, says of this pulse of the pizzica that it is: 'il ritmo del cuore e il respiro, il pulsare della terra. Rimanervi indifferente ¢ impossibile perché il crescendo ostinato dei “battiti” dei tamburelli va dritto al cuore' (Winspeare, 1997) ['the rhythm of the heart and the breath, the pulse of the earth. It is impossible to remain indifferent to it because the rising ostinato of the “beating” of the tambourines goes straight to the heart']. Winspeare explains that he was focusing on the idea of family in making the film of Sangue Vivo, apparent even in the title of 'Living Blood': "The only thing that is important here is the family. The government has many problems. But we have the family. Sangue Vivo is the family' (Winspeare, 2007: Interview). This may offer a somewhat romanticised notion of 'family' and transmission, and certainly there have been members of the older generation who have expressed their concern about the ways in which the younger members have inherited and at times 'contaminated' the music and dance in changing both the nature of the forms, and the ways in which they are performed which may have moved away from the 'older' ways of understanding and playing pizzica.

Renowned musician Umberto Panico speaks of just such an issue in relation to the playing and dancing within a ronda, that had previously been the space/place of a transformational experience through the music and dance, but which today he feels does not occur in the same way. In the past, the musicians would play in the ronde from evening through to dawn, often continuously, and thus needed a strong level of stamina in order to be able to sustain this. However, Panico feels that musicians today do not play for long enough in order for the music to have an effect, partly because they do not have this same level of stamina. He explains that if the circle only lasts for five minutes, it does not have the ability to attain 'un suono ideale che permetta la liberazione di questa magia della musica nostra' (in Collu, 2005: 208) ['an ideal sound that allows for the release of this magic of our own music']. Panico states that it takes at least one hour of playing to find the right rhythm within the circle in order to establish this sense of a magical transformation. He claims that the new ways of playing the music and the form of its performance, with a shortened playing time and too many instruments being played in a ronda, are not able to achieve this. Panico quotes: "Questa musica deve essere cadenzata e precisa; dieci Revivals, Roots and Raves 221 tamburi in dieci minuti o anche in mezz’ora che cosa possono fare?" (in ibid.: 208) [“This music must be measured and precise; ten tambourines in ten minutes or else in half an hour, what can they do?’].

However, there are those of the younger generation who feel that the changes in the music and style of performance are necessary to match the shifts in the socio-cultural world of Salento which have taken place. Apolito speaks of Salento wanting to move towards modernisation, which is also a promise of ‘nuovi tempi’ (Apolito, 2000: 139) [‘new times’]. Tempo can also mean time or speed in a musical sense, and modernisation has also brought its own change in the speed of life in Salento. Liidtke cites some of the musicians from the group Alla Bua stating that they play what they describe as ‘hard pizzica, which is played faster than the music had been previously due to the increased speed and rhythms at which young people live today (Liidtke, 2009: 124-5).

According to the group's website, their intention is still one of cure, but instead of the illness being that of tarantism and its associated socio-cultural conditions, they play now for contemporary illnesses and conditions: 'oggi, similmente, contro la frenesia e la piattezza della societa moderna, una cura a suon di pizzica pizzica, danza forte, calda eliberatoria' (<http://www.allabua.it/o9_gruppo.html> accessed 21 March 2009) [‘today, similarly, for dealing with the conditions of frenzy and the dullness of modern society, there is a cure to the sound of pizzica pizzica, a strong, heated and liberating dance’]. In this way, the group are making a connection back to the healing powers of pizzica within tarantism, but transforming it into a contemporary context, changing the speed and style of the performance of the music, whilst still retaining its inner nature, thus embracing both authenticity and adaptation.

The potential conflict between the older and younger generations can be articulated and sometimes resolved in this way of maintaining a sense of the past, whilst acknowledging the need for change. Ada Metafune speaks of enjoying her position of being situated between the tradition bearers (z portatori) and the new generation, stating that she is in the middle of the two: 'mi piace il posto situato tra i portatorie le nuove generazioni. Io sono in mezzo' (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [‘I like the place between the elders and the new generations. I am in between’]. She attempts to keep both a strong sense of the tradition of the bearers, whilst also finding new ways of performing the music and dance in contemporary Salento. She feels that one of the most important aspects for musicians and dancers today is the need to have respect (rispetto) for the music, dance, and the space of performance. Related to this, in the past, it was important to have respect for the sacred in the playing of pizzica, for example having respect and devotion to San Rocco during his festival in Torrepaduli, which will be discussed later in reference to the pizzica scherma. She speaks of her remembered experience of seeing the musician Umberto Panico from Tricase, who was referred to earlier, playing in ronde some years previously: "Cera una perfetta armonia tra suono, danza, canto, un profondo rispetto, e a distanza di anni ancora adesso mi emoziono. C'era una spiritualita profonda in quelle ronde, perché era realmente dedicata al santo." (ibid.) [there was a perfect harmony between sound, dance, song, a profound respect, and after so many years it still moves me. In those ronde there was a profound spirituality, because it was really dedicated to the saint.]

She explains that Panico had told her that when he plays, it is always with devotion and feeling to the saint, and this is a vital part of the respect for the embodiment of the music and dance which creates the spiritual and inner nature of the playing and dancing. In contemporary Salento, it is not uncommon to see some dark stains on the tamburello, which have been caused by the musician beating the instrument so hard and long that their hands have bled. This blood is sometimes seen as proof of masculinity, or as one musician at a festival said to me, 'it means that the tamburello is no longer a virgin, and there can be a sense of pride in the mark that the blood has left.

However, Pamela Maglie, who has conducted research into the festival of San Rocco and the pizzica scherma, states that in relation to the sacred devotion to the saint, the playing of the tamburello and the blood that comes from the hands can also be seen as a sacrifice to San Rocco in the context of his festival (Maglie, 2007: Interview). This aspect of the sacred has mainly been lost from the playing and dancing of pizzica in contemporary Salento. It tends to be only at the festivals of San Paolo in Galatina, and San Rocco in Torrepaduli, that there is a stronger public demonstration of religious devotion in relation to pizzica.

The introduction of new concerts and festivals now held throughout the region are often divorced from the Church's calendar and space, thus leading to a secularization of pizzica which has also caused some conflict between the generations. However, this is perhaps a better reflection of the modernized world in which the younger generation are on the whole attending Church far less than their forebears, often seeking experiences of spirituality from different, sometimes non-Western or New Age cultures, again resulting in a dispute over the sense of 'contamination' of the socio-cultural and religious space by other or 'foreign' elements.

This is also reflected in the performances of the music and dance, where the mixings or contaminazione of pizzica with other forms has led to intense debate. Ada Metafune and Pamela Maglie have spoken of the 'Proteggiamo Torrepaduli' (‘Let us Protect Torrepaduli') movement that began in 2004, which protested against the young people who were 'contaminating' the festival through their secular approach to the music and dance in the ronde, but also through the introduction of instruments from other cultures, particularly African drums such as the djembe. The Proteggiamo Torrepaduli movement sought to establish a separate zone in the piazza in front of the Sanctuary of San Rocco in order to protect this as a sacred space, uncontaminated by either a secular and commercial approach to the music and dance, or by 'foreign' instruments (Maglie, 2007: Interview). Ada explains that the sound of the djembe in particular disturbed the pizzica scherma dancers, especially the Rom (the Roma or gypsy (zingari) community, who will be discussed later in this chapter in relation to the pizzica scherma), and so this in part led to the tension between the contested views on tradition and adaptation or revival. The contamination of pizzica with instruments and musicians from other cultures is often part of the neo-tarantism culture. This has been noted in groups such as the Sud Sound System, which uses forms like reggae and ragamuffin, and other groups like Alla Bua and Officina Zoé, which have deliberately sought to play with and incorporate musicians and musical styles from Africa, Asia, and the Middle East. Dance movements from these other cultures are sometimes used within the ronde. This contaminazione is not necessarily seen as negative, but rather as a further means of identification with being Salentine, which reaffirms itself through being open to others.

Giuseppe Memmi, former leader of Alla Bua, explains the conflict between the idea of a fixed tradition and young groups wanting to evolve in their own way creatively using forms from other places. He emphasizes the importance of maintaining ethnic roots and at the same time encountering other cultures. Historically, Salento has always welcomed people from the East. However, it is necessary to recognize and respect one's own roots. The strong points of every form of ethnic music must influence the choice of other musical forms. Memmi highlights that 'authenticity' and 'tradition' can be found in both discovering and expressing the 'roots' of a cultural form, while also being able to mix this with other forms in a way that does not threaten the identity of the people or the music.

He also points out that for this to work meaningfully, the 'foreign' music must inherently contain within it the same type of pulse found within the pizzica, which connects the rhythm of the music to that of the heart, blood, and land of Salento. Thus, while it is 'other,' it is able to align itself with pizzica because of this correspondence of rhythm. This leads to a meeting place between cultures where the essence of neither is lost in the process, an expression echoed in the verse of the Sud Sound System quoted earlier, and acts as a means of bringing the past into the present, which does not need a fixing of the music and dance as 'authentic' forms in a place and time, but rather acknowledges and embodies a fluid process of transformation and adaptation.

Transformation and commercialization of symbols

If the music and dance of pizzica demonstrate contested spaces between tradition and modernization, authenticity and contamination, purity and mixing, then this can also be seen in the shifting meanings of some of the objects and symbols of pizzica, tarantism, and Salento, which have undergone a transformation through appropriation by both Salentines in the identification of a past in the present, and of tourism and commercializing of these symbols into objects for purchase. In referring to Apolito (2000: 141), Karen Liidtke suggests that tarantism "is a free-flowing discourse, an image, spot or slogan [...] that can be put to manifold uses. Paradoxically, it is precisely this free-floating attribute of tarantism as perceived today which lends itself to the marketing of this phenomenon as anchored in time immemorial" (Liidtke, 2005: 43). She aptly observes the ability of the symbols and ideas related to tarantism and its history to be appropriated and utilized in a range of ways, often in the attempt to provide legitimacy to the present manifestation by connecting it to the past, and the marketing of this as a tourist attraction.

The changes in the use of these symbols not only provide new meanings for marketing purposes but also for the locals in Salento, as they become transformed into new resources for identity. As Erik Cohen states in relation to the production of "cultural products" for tourists and commercial enterprise:

"For, just as a new cultural product can become with time widely accepted as 'authentic,' so it can, although changed through commoditization, acquire a new meaning for its producers. Thus, what used to be a religiously meaningful ritual for an internal public, may become a culturally significant self-representation before an external public. Moreover, the two kinds of meanings are not necessarily mutually exclusive but could be additive: new meanings may be added to old ones, which persevere into new situations." (Cohen, 1988: 382)

This can be seen in the additive meanings given to the symbol known as "il dio che danza," or the dancing god. In 1970, a cave, now known as the Grotta dei Cervi (Cave of the Deer), was discovered by the Gruppo Speleologico Salentino. The cave is on the Ionian coast at Porto Badisco, the place where, according to Virgil's Aeneid, Aeneas landed in Italy before going on to found Rome.

The cave contains a series of extraordinary Neolithic paintings made out of red ochre and bat guano, that are a mixture of images of animals and hunting, as well as geometric patterns and shapes, spread out over the walls. One of these images appears to be that of a dancing figure, with short vertical strokes on top of its head. This has been interpreted by some of the neo-tarantati as being "il dio che danza" or "stregone dan-zante" (De Giorgi, 1999: 209), the "dancing god" or the "dancing wizard." Together with images from the caves which have been interpreted as being a tambourine and a spider, it is used as "proof" that the ritual of tarantism existed in some form in the Neolithic period, so that it is part of the ancient history of the land and the people who lived there.

It is pure speculation to interpret the images in this way. But the enculturation of the symbol into neo-tarantism has created an identification for some Salentines of a continuity of ritual and magical practices connected to the land and the music and dance. The symbol has become increasingly used on "cultural products" such as t-shirts, printed on tambourines, and in images and promotional material used by some of the music groups and tourist companies.

Similarly, other symbols and objects have been used to create such a connection to the past. Hobsbawm, quoted earlier, points to this use of "materials" from the history of cultural practices in the establishment of new or adapted traditions in the present through re-using symbols from the past. As well as the symbol of the dancing god, there are other verbal and visual images which have been used in this way. Del Giudice indicates that some music groups have named themselves after the Greek past of the region, connecting to the supposed Greek roots of tarantism: 'Arakne Mediterranea' (Mediterranean spider), Ghetonia (barrio in Griko), Novarakne (new spider), Zoe (life)'(Del Giudice, 2005: 240), as well as Alla Bua, whose name means 'other cure' in Griko (<http://www.allabua.it/o9_gruppo.html> accessed 21 March 2009). The spider symbol, the most recognizable feature of tarantism, is abundant on posters, websites, cards, clothing, and souvenir items produced for tourists. Other symbols associated with tarantism, such as the tamburello, are also available to buy as 'cultural products', some produced for display rather than for playing (see Illustration 6 for an example of the image of a spider on souvenir tamburelli sold in Otranto). The symbols of the past are now available for sale throughout Salento, and particularly at the times of the festivals. These festivals have sometimes been invented with a genuine desire to preserve and revitalize the music and dance of the past, yet have become commercial products that have served to draw attention to pizzica on the global stage, attracting new swathes of tourists to the land of Salento.

Illustration 6. Tamburelli decorated with images of the spider for sale in Otranto. (Photograph: Jerri Daboo)

The widespread development of large-scale music festivals has been part of the growth in musical tourism, and the connecting of a type of music to a particular location. The tourist and cultural pilgrimages to places such as Nashville, Woodstock or Glastonbury, which have become associated with a specific music or type of performance event, or the memory of such an event in the case of Woodstock, encourages an increase in the tourist development of that location in relation to the promotion of the concerts and festivals. Connell and Gibson explain this connection between place and musical tourism:

Music and space are actively and dialectically related. [...] Some tourist destinations have developed because music (or the performers themselves) had some connection with those places. [...] Music is a cultural resource bound up in how places are perceived, and how they are promoted. It is one means by which places can be represented in wider mediascapes, shaping local or regional identities; and, by design or default, music influences the images that attract tourists. [...] Music festivals have become common features of music tourism industries. [...] [M]ost festivals are explicitly commercial, either from the point of view of tour promoters seeking out fruitful markets in which to stage festivals, or of local planners seeking ways to boost local economies. (Connell and Gibson, 2003: 192, 221, 245)

For Buckland, speaking of traditional dance festivals, there are also the important elements of nostalgia and exoticism linked with authenticity: the use of a dance to evoke former or authentic contexts of performance may often be encountered in the public domain. Performances of traditional dances in international festivals and in tourist displays owe much to a twin embracing of the powers of nostalgia and exoticism. (Buckland, 2006: 14) Malcolm Crick, in discussing the notion of ‘staged authenticity, points out that ‘what in a culture is not staged? What does cultural authenticity consist of? (Crick, 1989: 336). If culture is seen as being a process rather than a fixed object, he asks: ‘if change is a permanent state, why should the Revivals, Roots and Raves 229 staging bound up in tourism be regarded as so destructive, and why should the changes be seen in such a negative light?’ (ibid.: 336).

These views on tourism and music and dance festivals highlight some of the issues that are present in the debate concerning one of the most well-known and largest of the new festivals in Salento, La Notte della Taranta (‘The Night of the Tarantula’). The event began in 1998 as an initiative by the Unione dei Comuni della Grecia Salentina and the Istituto Diego Carpitella. This institute was formed in 1997 to study and promote the arts and culture of Salento. Their main objectives are:

a) to recover, restore and keep the documents about the oral history of the Salento region, and to buy (if possible) the documents kept elsewhere (in Italy or abroad), including manuscripts or printed texts, photos, videos, iconographic documents, material objects, and any other;
b) to create source archives to be consulted by scholars and citizens;
c) to promote research campaigns, training programmes, both directly with a resolution and with agreements and collaboration with other research corporations and educational institutions;
d) to produce records of the results of research and training (on paper, records, videos, cd-rom [etc.]), and to disseminate them;
e) to support any type of artistry inspired by the issues and languages of Salentine culture;
f) to produce regularly exhibitions, concerts, and other events, to communicate and disseminate the results of the research and productions carried out. (<http://www.lanottedellataranta.it/eng/istituto_carpitella.php> accessed 7 April 2009)

The festival was focused on the Grecia Salentina, or Greek region of Salento, which consists of the small towns of Calimera, Carpignano Salentino, Castrignano de’ Greci, Corigliano d’Otranto, Cutrofiano, Martano, Martignano, Melpignano, Sternatia, Soleto, and Zollino, with additional towns including Alessano, Otranto, and Galatina being included in the locations for concerts over the years. The first event in August 1998, directed by the Neapolitan musician Daniele Sepe, consisted of a series of concerts held on one evening in nine of the towns, after which the musicians gathered in the Piazza San Giorgio in Melpignano, where they played, sang, and danced for several hours to a crowd of 5,000 people. Over the years, the festival has grown in popularity and length, with more concerts being added over the days preceding the final concert in Melpignano, until the time of the tenth anniversary event in 2007, where there was a series of sixteen Notte della Taranta concerts held over eighteen days, culminating in the final night concert in Melpignano, which attracted a crowd of over 100,000 people, and was broadcast both nationally and internationally. The extraordinary growth of the event has helped to propel pizzica and the culture of Salento from the local to the global stage, attracting tourists for the festival and to explore and enjoy the region, and increasing the visibility, sales, and tours of pizzica groups. Alongside this, there have been disputes within Salento about the effect that this has had on the music. Within the local papers at the time of the concerts every year, there are debates concerning whether the concerts have led to a ‘contamination’ of the culture, or if they reflect the shift that was happening within Salento anyway. In his Introduction to the book La Notte della Taranta 1998-2007, Sergio Blasi describes the purpose behind the festival from the perspective of both celebrating and enhancing the cultural life of Salento:

In the first half of the Nineties, a group of young administrators of the Grecia Salentina had, by a lucky coincidence, government responsibilities each one in his own community. We suddenly realized we had the privilege of deciding and then making the choices able to influence the turn of coming events. We have been squabbling with each other and the first choice we made was to overcome the differences, to try to be an ‘area, a territory starting again from itself, from its most ancient identity, from a common language by then out of use and doomed to decline and oblivion. A Grecia Salentina handling the problem of winning the challenge against modernity not trying to be the North [...]. Therefore we pinned our hopes on culture, the extraordinary historical and architectural heritage, an unpolluted environment, traditions on which concentrate to win the challenge. The challenge of growth, progress coming out from our wish of liberation that could make that history, that tradition a mainstay of our project. In this context, the Istituto Diego Carpitella first and then La Notte della Taranta were created. Tradition was considered not as a fossilization, a stone round our neck, but ‘knowledge of the people’, a part of culture able to provide relevant information on the evolution of human history and their places. [...] [The music] was a tonic, a remedy for the anxieties, crisis and solitude of global citizen, able to unite generations with rhythm, labour and love songs, but also to take on itself the universal need of friendship and knowledge. (<http://www.lanottedellataranta.it/eng/decennale.php> accessed 7 April 2009)

Revivals, Roots and Raves 231

Blasi states that the festival aims to be a challenge to modernity, to create a link back to the pre-industrial past, while also allowing for the process of change within the music, particularly with the meeting of other cultures, and maintaining a local identity that was opposed to that of the industrial and modernised North. The contradictions between preserving tradition and entering the global stage are embedded in the development of the festival. There have been a wide range of pizzica musicians and dancers who have performed in the concerts over the years, some of whom are attempting to rediscover the traditional songs and instruments as well as the efficacious potential, others who are freely adapting and ‘modernising’ the music, sometimes including fusions with other forms. Additionally, a number of international and well-known musicians from outside Salento, as well as popular musicians from within, have been invited to participate in the Notte della Taranta experience. Joe Zawinul, the founder of the Weather Report, became the artistic director for the final concert in Melpignano in 2000; in 2002, the Israeli singer Noa performed in Melpignano, and in 2003, Stewart Copeland adapted and performed in some pizzica songs on the final night, bringing in African and jazz rhythms and sounds into the traditional music. For the tenth anniversary concert in Melpignano in 2007, the final song, the well-known Kalanitta sung in Griko, was performed by Giuliano Sangiorgi, the lead singer of the highly popular Salentine rock band Negramaro, with the 100,000 people in the crowd joining in the chorus. The success of the concerts has certainly established a direct connection between music and place, as Connell and Gibson suggested, heightened by the connection to the land and identity already discussed. This has made Salento into a place for musical and cultural tourism, as well as being increasingly promoted as a holiday destination due to the weather and beaches, resulting in an increase in economic growth for some Salentines. Yet apparent growth can also act as a mask for the underlying problems of unemployment and lack of prosperity that still exist in the region. As 6 Thename for the group is taken from negroamaro, the famous black and bitter wine of Salento. 232 CHAPTER FOUR Buckland pointed out, another factor involved in such public festivals can be the sense of nostalgia and the exotic in relation to the culture. This has tended to be a feature of Salento through history, as has been seen throughout this study, and has certainly been reemphasised through the increased spread of interest in the music and dance, as well as the history and culture of Salento, with its stories of people dancing to cure themselves from the bite of a spider. The music itself can become objectified into being seen as the embodiment of this exotic view of the Mezzogiorno as becoming the representation of the ‘past in the present’, a place where modernity has passed by, as suggested by Blasi. I spoke with one Italian man after we had both attended a Notte della Taranta concert in Otranto in August 2007. He had recorded the music on his MP3 player, and happily played it back to me, saying that he was from Bologna, so a Northerner, and that he loved coming to Salento to experience the ancient past, the traditional life that was no longer present in the industrial North, but which he could hear in the music of the pizzica, now captured on his player. He also travelled to Salento every year for his summer holidays, to enjoy the relaxed lifestyle and landscape of the South, though bringing with him the technology which represents modernity and industrialisation in the form of his MP3 player to capture and preserve the music which identifies the traditional past for him. As well as a commodification of the music, the history and symbols of the culture have also been turned into ‘cultural objects’ available for sale. The logo of the Notte della Taranta consists of a picture of a spider, with a heart at the centre of its body, its large single eye gazing up at the moon casting multi-coloured auras. A whole series of merchandise now accompanies the festival, sold at stalls at the sites of the concerts, with t-shirts, posters, CDs and books available as ‘Official Products’. The Notte della Taranta festival has succeeded in promoting the land and culture of Salento, and been one of the driving forces behind the revival and development of the performances of pizzica music and dance. Although Blasi may nostalgically claim that this is a way to preserve Salento from modernity, it is by its nature an event of modernity: a secular festival, which utilises technology as its basis and means of dissemination, and a source of identity and release for those coping with the stresses and conditions of modern life. The contradiction between the need to express and protect a local identity alongside an embracing of others, which has been explored throughout this chapter, is also a feature of the festival as a representation of the nature of Salento. An article in Qui Salento describes the coming together of musicians and musical forms from different cultures as being the 'straordinaria forza dell'incontro delle differenze. E Panima del Salento' (Qui Salento, 15 August-September 2007: 7) [‘extraordinary force of encountering differences. This is the soul of Salento'].

The next section examines another festival in Salento that has grown in popularity over the last few decades: the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli. Similar issues of tradition, reinvention, authenticity, contamination, appropriation, and secular and sacred are manifest, bound up with the performance of a dance that enacts and embodies contests over territory, honour, and pride: the pizzica scherma.

The Pizzica Scherma and the Festival of San Rocco

8 August 2001

On my first evening in Salento, I was drinking wine with the others who were participating in the workshop in Parabita. We were standing outside, in the courtyard of the Historical Archive run by Aldo D'Antico, when some of the musicians present began to play. At one point, Ada Metafune went into the space with a young man, the rhythm and speed of the pizzica music changed, and someone whispered to me that they were going to dance the scherma. What followed next seemed to me to be like two spiders fighting together, or the mating dance of scorpions which looks like both fighting and courtship. The flowing circular movements combined with the sudden, fast darting moments of attack with the index and middle fingers of the hand extended to imitate the blade of a knife, appeared to transform the music and feeling of pizzica from being a dance of playful enjoyment to one resembling a martial art or street fighting form accompanied by music, such as capoeira or hip-hop.

The next day, Ada spoke of her experience of dancing the pizzica scherma, usually only performed by men, as being of importance for her not only in being able to express herself physically in this way, but also of 'taking her place in the circle.'

15 August 2001

In the evening, I went to visit the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli for the first time. After seeing the procession of the statue of the saint being carried around the town, visiting the inside of the Sanctuary of San Rocco, followed by watching the fireworks which are a competition between local towns to see who produces the best display, and strolling around the many stalls of the market festooned beneath the avenues of the /uminarie,' we gathered amongst the pressing crowds of tens of thousands of people in the space outside the Sanctuary. At about 11pm, Giuseppe Memmi and some other musicians with amburelli forced open a space in this crowd, pushing back people to create a circle, around the edge of which they began to play and sing. Two young girls went into the centre of this circle, and began to dance the pizzica pizzica. Suddenly two large older men broke into the circle and pushed the two girls out, and began to dance the scherma. I was very surprised, as I had not previously seen this type of aggressive behaviour in Salento. After a few minutes of the two men dancing, Giuseppe stopped playing and left, saying that the space of the ronda had become 'contaminated by their energy and actions. As I walked around and observed the other rode, I noticed that sometimes the dancers were adding movements from other martial forms such as kick-boxing and karate to the scherma movements. Watching the men dancing in this way, I had an understanding that when Ada talked of the importance of taking her place within the circle, she meant both being present and visible in the space of her local community, and also being able to step into the physical space of the circle in order to dance.

On August 15, 2007, I visited Torrepaduli for the festival yet again. Everything seemed to be the same, but with more visitors. I had been to the home of Ada Metafune nearby a few days before and was struck by the extreme shift in the site of Torrepaduli, which had been a quiet, dusty, small town, to the brightly lit, noisy, chaotic, and crowded space it had become for the festival.

Walking around the ronde that formed outside the Sanctuary after midnight, I felt disappointed watching the quality of some of those dancing the scherma, who seemed to me to be performing the movements with a lack of clarity and inner connection.

At about 1 am, a group of people arrived who all knew each other, some from the same family. They posed for a group photograph and then chose a spot on the piazza that had more light to form a ronda. I managed to get to the front of the circle and watched as they started the scherma. It appeared that this ronda contained dancers who were well-known and respected, and also expert exponents of the form.

As I watched, two men would enter the circle, some wearing the colored ribbons (de zacareddhe) available to buy from nearby stalls. These were referred to in Chapter One, and Illustration 7 shows such a stall in Torrepaduli at the festival. The men took each other's right hands, held high in the air, circled each other, released their hands, and moved to the edge of the circle. To the constant beating of the tamburelli being played around the circumference, the men began the flowing, circular movements of their arms, stepping around the circle with their eyes always fixed on the other, until suddenly moving towards each other with a kick or dart of the hand with two fingers extended to try to touch the other. When one succeeded, the loser went back into the crowd, and another dancer would step into the circle to challenge the winner.

As this continued, I admired the skill of some of the dancers from the group who had created this circle in particular and seemed very familiar with the subtleties of the movements. Some of these men were also directing the circle, deciding who should fight with whom, and if a rule was infringed, they would step in to stop the fight. The energy standing at the edge of the circle watching this became highly concentrated, with the sounds of the tamburelli and the intensity of the fight of the dance. At one point in the middle of a fight, two men suddenly paused very close to me, holding their positions, staring intently into each other's eyes for nearly twenty seconds. It was an extraordinary moment, reminding me of some of the great exponents of martial arts that I have seen who could focus their energy in this way. In another pairing, one elder moved with such lightness and skill that he did indeed seem to be a dancing, fighting insect flowing and circling, enticing his prey in towards him for the kill. It was only afterwards that I discovered that the group in this ronda consisted of some of the leading figures in the performance of the scherma, all of them Salentine, in particular connected to the family of the late Raffaele Donadei, who had been of great importance in the continued presence and practice of the dance in Torrepaduli, as well as others who learnt from him, and danced with him over the years of the scherma being used as a means for resolving issues of honour and disputes over pride and territory.

These ethnographic ‘moments’ of some of my experiences at the festival of San Rocco are based around the complex and fascinating performance of the pizzica scherma. The scherma (‘fencing’ in English) is one of the three forms of pizzica music and dance as they are often classified today, along with the pizzica pizzica and pizzica tarantata, as discussed in the Introduction. However, there is much debate concerning the scherma and its associations with pizzica, and indeed whether it can even be considered as a dance. There has been little written about the pizzica scherma in English, so this next section will seek to examine the possible origins and developments of the form, and its performance at the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli.

Not only is the form and its history fascinating in itself as an example of a mixing of fighting and dance, it also demonstrates the strong connection between culture, identity and place which is inherent throughout this study. This is in relation to Salento and the performance of pizzica, and additionally introduces two further elements into the picture: the criminal underworld and malavitosi families of the region, and the immigrant Rom, the Roma or zingari (gypsy) community whose own history has been fundamental in the development of the scherma. Although on the surface it is perhaps more difficult to see a connection of the scherma to tarantism and the other forms of pizzica, there are still themes in common particularly, via the association with San Rocco, to healing, and personal and social transformation, as well as the resolution of conflict.

San Rocco is an important saint affiliated with healing, who has a strongly devoted following throughout Europe (he is usually known as St Roch or Rock in Britain). He is one of the thaumaturgic saints which, though a word not often used in English, is common in Italy to refer to those saints who are connected with miracles of healing, and often have been either doctors or performed acts of healing during their lifetime. San Rocco was born in Montpelier, France, in approximately 1295. When he was twenty his parents died, and he gave away all his wealth and began a pilgrimage to Rome. He arrived in Italy during a time of severe plague, and became known for looking after the sick in hospitals along the way, where he is reputed to have performed miracles of curing those smitten with the plague through prayer and making the sign of the cross on the afflicted. He fell ill himself, and went to live in isolation in a hut in a forest near Piacenza, where the legend tells that a dog which belonged to a local nobleman brought him bread, which enabled him to survive (Illustration 7 shows the statue of San Rocco in Torrepaduli, which includes the dog). It was due to his ability to cure the sick, as well as his own survival, which led to his cult becoming established throughout Europe in the following centuries where the Black Death and other plagues were rampant. 8 There is some dispute over which is the best term to describe the community. Melchioni (1999) suggests that the correct word should be zingari (gypsies) because ‘Romy refers to a specific ethnic group, whereas zingari encompasses all such groups under the one term. However, many of those I spoke with felt that the word ‘zingari’ can have negative connotations, and both Salentines and the migrant communities themselves used the word Rom (Italian for Roma or Romany) when speaking with me, so I will use this term to represent this group in this study. 238 CHAPTER FOUR Illustration 7. Torrepaduli, 15 August 2007. Top: the uminarie (illuminations). Bottom left: the statue of San Rocco in the Sanctuary. Bottom right: stall selling Le zacareddhe (ribbons). (Photographs: Jerri Daboo) Revivals, Roots and Raves 239 In Salento, San Rocco is associated with the small town of Torrepaduli, part of the commune of Ruffano in the south of the region, 22 km from the Jinibus terrae, the edge of the land, at Santa Maria di Leuca. He has become part of a triangle or fraternity of three healing saints in specific towns in this part of Salento, each associated with particular conditions: San Paolo in Galatina, connected to tarantism; San Donato in Montesano, related to those afflicted with epilepsy; and San Rocco in Torrepaduli, linked to healing victims of plague. As well as the affiliation with San Rocco, the space of the Sanctuary has itself become one of experiencing healing, and today contains relics and testimonials from those who claim to have been healed. In this way, there is a direct correlation between a specific place, and the identity of both a medical condition and a saint who cures it, attracting pilgrims to that place to pray to the related saint. Melchioni explains that through this, the three saints have become ‘brothers’ in the collective imagination of Salento (Melchioni, 1999: 18). In the way that Galatina is known as the ‘land of San Paolo, Torrepaduli is seen as being the ‘land of San Rocco; or in dialect, ‘u paese te Santu Roccu’ (Inguscio, 2007: 27). Leonardo Donadei, the son of Raffaele, also indicates that the connection of San Rocco to the fighting of the scherma is in part due to the infliction of wounds, blood and pain: ‘un santo delle piaghe, del dolore, della piaga del sangue, é la tradizione di questo paese’ (in Monaco, 2006: 17) [‘he is a saint of wounds, of pain, of the sore of blood, the tradition of this land’]. The feast day of San Rocco occurs on 16 August, which nowadays coincides with the national summer holiday in Italy. Within Torrepaduli, this has for many centuries also been the day of a large market-fair, traditionally agricultural, which drew in crowds from the surrounding areas to trade goods in the last main fair of the summer before the autumn arrived. Many would come the day before and stay over-night, and it was in the playing of music and dance during these nights that the performance of the scherma developed into a particular cultural manifestation, created by the coming together of the different groups present. It is, once again, difficult to point to a precise origin of the scherma, nor to state with any real certainty the way in which it became established into the form in which it is seen today, and there are many factors which have played a part. Luigi Tarantino acknowledges the complex origins of the scherma by stating that ‘non esiste un'originale [...] ma una lunga genesi’ (Tarantino, 2001: 12) [‘there isn't an original source, but a long genesis’). He suggests that there are several historical antecedents, including sword dances (danze della spade) performed throughout medieval Italy and other parts of Europe, duels for resolving matters of honour, and the influence of the Rom community merging their own form of fighting and knife-dancing with the Salentines. Tarantino also mentions the influence of sword dances, duels, and the criminal underworld as potential contributors to the development of the scherma.

The sword dances were often highly choreographed means of practicing movements with the sword, and sometimes replaying or re-enacting historical battles. Within the scherma, there is a coming together of fighting and dancing, although the movements are improvised rather than choreographed. Tarantino suggests that the scherma is a more recent development than the much older European sword dances (ibid.: 13). The scherma's connection with the tradition of duels using weapons, even with a knife instead of a sword, may indicate the more 'rusticano' rather than aristocratic form, as Tarantino observes.

The duels are often fought over a matter of honour which needs to be resolved, with particular rules to be followed, and a code of 'omerta' or 'silence' surrounding the event of the duel (ibid.: 34). Raffaele Donadei points out that '[g]li schermatori hanno un loro codice d'omert®' [‘the fighters have their code of silence’] (in Monaco, 2006: 10). Both Raffaele and Leonardo Donadei state that the scherma originated in the streets and in prisons by the malavitosi, the criminals (ibid.: 11, 22).

Tarantino suggests that there is evidence of 'accademie di scherma di coltello' (Tarantino, 2001: 33), schools of knife-fighting within prisons, provided by none other than Antonio Gramsci, mentioned in Chapter Three as a major influence on the work of Ernesto De Martino. Gramsci was imprisoned for his political views and, during his imprisonment, wrote not only his notebooks but also an extensive number of letters. In a letter to his sister-in-law Tania, Gramsci described the events that occurred when he was being moved across different prisons in the South of Italy, including a prison in Caianello, about 60 km north of Naples:

Entertainments were organized in my honor: Romans improvised a splendid actors' school. [...] Apulians, Calabrians, and Sicilians exchanging lessons on how to wield a knife according to the rules of four regions of southern Italian low life (Sicilian, Calabrian, Apulian, Neapolitan): Sicilians against Apulians, Apulians against Calabrians. There's no fighting between Sicilians and Calabrians because of the enmity between the two, even a practice session turns into something serious and cruel. The Apulian is the master of all the rest, an invincible knife-wielder who uses a secret, deadly technique surpassing all others. One sixty-five-year-old Apulian, who others looked up to, despite not claiming any 'regional' honors, beat the champions of the other 'regions'; afterward, he battled with a young Apulian of excellent build and amazing agility, held in awe by the rest. For half an hour, they went through all the moves there are, one after another. Grandiose, unforgettable scene for everyone, actors and spectators alike; the revelation of an extremely complex underworld with its own passions, points of view, codes of honor, and cast-iron hierarchy.

The weapons were simple ones: spoons rubbed against a wall to leave whitewash marks on clothing. (Gramsci, 1975: 84) This indicates that such knife-fighting practices were performed within prisons, and different regions of the South would compete against each other. The use of spoons with chalk to mark clothes to demonstrate a successful strike echoes the use of the two fingers to represent the knife within the scherma as an alternative to actual weapons. Gramsci also observes that the Sicilians and Calabrians would not fight each other, as these bouts would end in a more real combat, which was not the aim of the event, nor within the codes that governed the fighting in this context.

He states that the Apulian elder was the best exponent of the form, and within the scherma today, the contest is still one of regional pride, but also of a more local nature, where those from the towns close to Torrepaduli such as Taurisano will fight against those from Gallipoli or Taranto who come to the festival of San Rocco, for pride and defense of the 'space' of the land that is represented and manifested within the site of the ronda.

Whatever way that the families connected to the criminal underworld were significant in developing the scherma, they are still acknowledged as being the best exponents of the form. Pamela Maglie explains about the malavitosi, that 'loro sono il pit bravi tiratori di scherma' (Maglie, 2007: Interview) 'they are the best fighters of the scherma'], and fights over honor and pride, as well as the rigidly upheld rules of combat and a code of silence, continue to feature in the scherma at the festival of San Rocco.

The other major influence in the development of the dance is found in the migrant Rom community in the south of Salento. There have been waves of migration into Southern Italy by Rom from Eastern Europe, including the Peloponnese, Kosovo, Macedonia, and Albania over the past seven hundred years (see Melchioni, 1999: 8-9 for an overview). They came in part to trade, often in horses, and this occupation still plays a major part in the community today. Some of these traders settled in the region, particularly in the southern towns such as Taurisano and Casarano, where there are a number of significant Rom families, including the Bevilaqua and Rinaldi. There has often been a difficult history of integration of these families into the native Italian communities, and even today, there tends to be a separation between them. However, Melchioni suggests that it was a coming together of the two groups which led to the particular form of the pizzica scherma as it exists today. She suggests that on the night of 15 August, when Salentines would come to spend the night before the fair in Torrepaduli, some of the Rom would also come in preparation for trading horses and selling iron goods in the fair the following day. Just as the Salentines would sing and dance pizzica pizzica in ronde in front of the Sanctuary of San Rocco, the Rom would likewise form circles, playing, singing, and dancing their own cultural forms. The Rom also practiced particular sword and knife dance forms such as the Calus (see Giurchescu (1992) for further information). Melchioni posits that in the shared space of the piazza during the night, the two groups in the different ronde began to influence each other, leading to what became the pizzica scherma, with the fighting aspect of the dance accompanied by the pizzica beat of the playing of the tambourines (Melchioni, 1999: 22). Tarantino additionally suggests that it is possible that the Rom community from Calabria, who have their own form of the scherma, brought this to Salento when they came for the fair (Tarantino, 2001: 39).

The participation of the Rom dancing the pizzica scherma is a particular feature of the festival of San Rocco, however, there is still some dispute about whether they really had such an influence in the origin of the dance. Both Leonardo Donadei and Alfredo Barone state that the dance which the Rom perform is not the same as the scherma undertaken by the native Salentines. They feel that the Rom’s version is more like a dance, specifically a form of tarantella (in Monaco, 2006: 16, 19), and Leonardo Donadei believes that the scherma should not be seen as being a dance at all, but rather a martial art (in ibid.: 16). This determination of difference may also be connected to a desire to make a clear distinction between the communities, and of wanting to preserve the idea of the scherma as being ‘purely’ Salentine, without any influence from outside. However, the pizzica scherma as it is performed today certainly appears very similar when danced by both the Salentines and the Rom, and it is most likely that there has been some level of influence by each on the other.

Ada Metafune states that some Salentines claim they taught the dance to the Rom, but in fact, the Rom already had their own form, and these two became united in the spatial-temporal location of the festival of San Rocco, thus creating a new form of embodied action through the specific socio-cultural conditions which emerged from the event of the festival. Ada Metafune has danced the scherma with both Salentines and Rom, and believes that the difference between the ways in which they perform the dance is informed by their own identity and connection to the land. She states that the Rom tend to be faster in their version of the scherma, and that they are more upright and perform more jumping and skipping movements in comparison to the Salentines. The Rom are overall faster and more agile, as she describes it, ‘come gazzelle’ (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [‘like gazelles’]. She explains that the Salentines have a lower center of gravity when they dance, their postures are deeper, and the movements are directed towards the earth. She interprets these differences by identifying the Rom as being a nomadic population, and therefore less rooted, so they tend to hop or jump more, to be more upright and less grounded than the Salentines, for whom rather ‘noi abbiamo bisogno di radici anche nella danza, il nostro baricentro deve stare molto basso per prendere forza dalla terra’ (ibid. "During the festival of San Rocco, the dance and identity of the Salentines find a connection with the ground and culture of Salento. The festival, which had declined in attendance, was revived in 1982, leading to a growth of interest in the event. However, this revival also led to disputes over the contaminazione of the music, dance, and space of the ronde.

The scherma, a dramatic re-enactment of knife-blade movements, was not always the same. In the past, actual knives were used, leading to fatalities. The festival provided a place to settle scores, with incidents of murder and vendetta in Salento, particularly in the Torrepaduli area. The scherma used to be dangerous, and was practised with knives. It was often over family disputes or a woman, and the fights were postponed to be resolved in the spatial-temporal location of the festival of San Rocco in Torrepaduli." He cites a ritualized phrase and response in dialect that would be given. One would say: ‘Ne vitumu a Santu Roccw’ ([‘T’ll see you at San Rocco’]) as a challenge to the other who, if they accepted, would reply: ‘a Santu Roccu ne vitimw’ ([‘at San Rocco I'll see you’]) (Tarantino, 2001: 37). Thus, the festival became the site where such conflicts were resolved without resorting to spilling blood in the heat of the moment of the occurrence of the offense. In addition, greater respect could be gained from the scherma and its resolution being witnessed in a public place.

Even though fingers are used instead of knife-blades, the movements of the dance still embody aspects of a real fight, with specific codes of honor and offense, which acts as a means for resolving conflicts, as well as an expression of pride in the winning of the bouts. Ada Metafune explains that sometimes the circle where the dance is performed is headed by an elder, known as the capironda (head of the circle), who directs and acts as a referee over the bouts that take place within it. He sometimes decides who will be allowed to dance with whom, observes closely to make sure no one breaks the rules, and can stop the fight if this happens (Metafune, 2007: Interview).

The target area for striking the body through a touch (tocco) with the fingers is on the torso, from the neck to the waist. The face, in particular, must not be touched, and it is a grave offense, especially among the malavitosi, for this to happen. One hand, usually the right (though I have seen dancers who use their left hand) acts as the knife, with the index and middle fingers extended and the others curled down when making a strike. The other arm is used for protection and covers the torso and vital organs of the body. This arm would have been wrapped in a jacket in the past to protect it from an actual knife-blade, but now the jacket is not used.

The initial movement when the two dancers first step into the circle together is a saluto, or salutation. They approach the center of the ronda, and clasp each other's right hands, then turn around a few times before releasing the other's hand and moving to the edge of the circle. This is a very important move, and symbolizes that the duel is to be amichevole, or friendly (Tarantino, 2001: 24), and that they agree to abide by the rules and will act with respect to each other. This is the significance of offering an open hand to the other: to indicate that the fight will be undertaken in friendship, with no intention to harm the opponent.

If at any time during the fight a rule is infringed, such as striking a forbidden part of the body, then the offender must approach the other to apologize, and they embrace to show that this has been acknowledged, before continuing the dance. After the saluto, the two stand at opposite sides of the circle facing each other, with the legs apart, looking the other in the eyes. They will sometimes mime the movement of opening or unsheathing the knife with the arms extended above the head, and then the arms are opened and wave to the left and right. This is also an opportunity to study the opponent. After this, the two move around the circle, crossing one foot over the other, with knees bent, and the arms moving in circular, sinuous movements, sometimes using the whole arm, sometimes just the hand with the wrist rotating in circles, looking almost like the movements of a snake. When ready, one of the dancers will make a quick movement of the hand towards their chest, which is an enticement or incitement of the other to attack them. There then follow moments of alternation between the circling round each other, and suddenly darting forwards for an attempted strike. As one hand strikes, the other hand and arm defends the body from a counter-strike by the opponent. When one of the dancers has achieved one or three strikes on the opponent, depending on the particular rules of the ronda, the other acknowledges defeat and moves back into the crowd at the edge of the circle, then either the winner or the capironda chooses the next opponent to come forward for the following bout. (See Illustration 8 for examples of the saluto, strike, and kick in the scherma).

The rules and code of honour and silence that govern the scherma, as well as its history, demonstrate the focus on its performance by men. However, Ada Metafune has been one of the few women who have studied and practiced the dance in Torrepaduli (see Illustration 8 as a ‘moment’ of Ada demonstrating the scherma). She explains that her decision to learn the scherma in such a male-dominated world was in order to explore and enjoy her ‘male’ side and energy, to speak through her body, and defend her territory (Metafune, 2007: Interview). The strength of the movements within the dance, as well as the fighting aspect when dancing opposite a man, allow her a release and freedom of expression which goes beyond what is possible in the pizzica pizzica. She says that this has been important for her in finding her own sense of openness and sensuality as a woman, as well as taking her place within her local society, to refer back to the comment earlier about the scherma being a means to take her place within the space of the circle. In this way, the ‘taking her place’ refers to both the physical site of the ronda in which she dances, as well as the wider area of Torrepaduli, in which she lives.

Although Ada is well-respected within the community, it is still unusual for a woman to be seen dancing the scherma, and she has spoken of occasions where a man would refuse to enter into the ronda with her to do the scherma, and for her to even invite some men to dance with her, particularly those older than herself, is an infringement of the rules. However, Ada deliberately chooses to do so because she likes dancing with the elders as she appreciates their skill and quality, even though she is sometimes rejected. On one occasion, when an elder refused to dance the scherma with her but instead agreed to dance the pizzica pizzica, he said to her: ‘tu stai al tuo posto’ (Metafune, 2007: Interview) [‘you stay where you are’], indicating that she needs to remain in her position defined for her both within the dance, and the society. Ada, though she knows she is breaking a rule, explains that this is important for her because ‘nel mio spirito, quindi io cercherd sempre di continuare, perché duellare fa parte di me’ (ibid.) [‘it is in my spirit, so I'll always try to continue, because to duel is part of me’). Thus the spatial-temporal location of the ronda becomes a site of contestation for her in terms of her own embodied experience of expressing herself as a woman in the society, of being heard and seen by the community, and transgressing the norms of behavior by women which have been established. She is a unique example in this respect, and she now sometimes also includes the scherma in her dance classes with girls in order to allow them the opportunity to access the particular nature of embodiment of the play between fighting and dancing which the scherma offers. This chapter has traced many threads through the contemporary performances and uses of pizzica music and dance in Salento, with numerous complexities surrounding questions of revival, authenticity, ownership, and tensions between old and new, sacred and secular, tradition and modernization. The shifting meaning of symbols, contexts, and performance material all indicate the nuovi tempi, the new times for pizzica and the Salentines, where the sense of shame (vergogna) once associated with tarantism, has now been transformed into that of pride (orgoglio) in being Salentine, and in the culture of the land, and the relationship between culture, place, and identity.

The following Conclusion will address questions of the changing nature of efficacy within pizzica, and whether there can be still be any sense of ‘healing’ for those who dance at the secular festivals today. At the beginning of this chapter, I suggested that a relevant question might be ‘Whose present is it?', and what has been revealed are many presences, many voices, and forms of embodiment, which all form part of the experience of the new times that lie ahead within the region of Salento.

Conclusion: Vestiges of transformation

Archaeologist Michael Shanks, who has also worked with performance practitioners, suggests that archaeologists study the remnants from the past. In his discussion of Ichnography, or dealing with the impressions of what was in the past, he makes the distinction between traces and vestiges. Traces are the material remains from the past: shards of pottery, columns left standing, pieces of bone. Vestiges, however, are what is not present. The word comes from ‘vestigium’ in Latin, ‘ichnos' in Greek, giving the implication of footprints from the past, the ghosts which remain in the traces of those who were once present. The combination of traces and vestiges creates what Shanks calls the ‘non-absent past'. This is found in the gaps or absences in the physical presence of the traces, which do not tell the complete story of the past. This offers an invitation to fill in the spaces, seeing an object as it was, but in a different way. Thus, the archaeologist gives a voice to that which is ineffable, which is past and lost, and yet has the remains of traces and vestiges in the present (Shanks, 2009).

This has been a similar process to the investigation of the history and contemporary presences of tarantism and pizzica within this book. What have been examined are a combination of traces and vestiges, of footprints and ghosts from the past found within the material remains of documentation and oral history, but also in the gaps in-between where the voices have not been heard. These footprints of those who have danced the ritual of tarantism have been sedimented into the body, culture, identity, and terra of Salento and the Salentines, who still feel the ghosts and traces of those who have danced and played before them. In this way, history is made flesh in the presence and present-ness of the performance in the particular temporal site and ‘moment' in which it occurs and is embodied.

As Peregrine Horden states in relation to the history of the use of music as therapy throughout the centuries: “Today's vestiges apparently reveal yesterday's full-blown activity” (Horden, 2000: 249). In giving voice to the past, but in a changed way as Shanks suggests, as well as seeing the present practices in relation to past traces and vestiges, the next section will examine the process of transformation and efficacy within the past and present embodiments of tarantism and pizzica. This questions the changing nature of the experience of the process within the music and dance in the different historical and socio-cultural contexts, and each in their turn leave sedimented layers of traces and vestiges for present and future voices to hear and to respond.

Healing, transformation, and forgetting of the self
The revival and re-working of pizzica and the symbols and history of tarantism within Salento have demonstrated complex issues of tradition and identity through the embodiment and experience of cultural performance practices. In attempting to address the connection of past to present, of the traces of the ritual of tarantism in contemporary Salento, it is useful to ask if any element of the efficacy inherent within the ritual is still perceived to occur in the experience of playing and dancing pizzica in the spatial-temporal location of the modern world. Or, is there a different understanding and phenomenological engagement with the notion of ‘illness’ and ‘being healed’ which may be conditioned by the history and symbols of tarantism, and yet is not the same. A Salentine woman informed me that: ‘I think I was treated by pizzica sometimes when I danced it, like every woman of the Salento.

The consideration of what ‘being treated’ by the experience of the dance might mean raises questions of the definitions of illness and healing, and the importance of understanding these terms as being culturally conditioned. Medical anthropologist James Waldram offers the following suggestion of Conclusion 253 the difference between ‘curing’ and ‘healing’ in relation to the efficacy of traditional medicine:

Curing refers to a primarily biological process that emphasizes the removal of pathology or the repairing of physiological malfunctions, that is, disease, while healing refers to a broader psychosocial process of repairing the affective, social, and spiritual dimensions of ill health or illness. Together they describe sickness. (Waldram, 2000: 604)

In this way, curing may be seen as an attempt to provide a more permanent solution to a condition at a biological level, whereas healing is a means of dealing with a crisis as it arises which may be not only physical, but also due to repression, socio-economic problems, or stress. Thus healing can be a temporary relieving of the bodymind, a transformation in the moment, without offering a pill which will ‘cure’ the particular biomedical symptoms for good. However, Waldram also points out that curing and healing are not necessarily completely separate experiences: it is erroneous to assume that biomedicine only ‘cures disease’ or that traditional medicine only ‘heals illness, or that they are completely distinct phenomena. It is also erroneous to assume that only illness, and not disease, is culturally constructed. (ibid.: 604-5)

Both curing and healing are determined and defined by particular socio-cultural positionings, as was certainly seen in the medical writings and definitions of tarantism in Chapter Two. However, the notion of healing as a process rather than a cure as a one-off solution is certainly useful in understanding the efficacy of tarantism and the contemporary experience of pizzica. For Waldram, "healing may also be a lifelong process in which total recovery, however understood, is never achieved" (ibid.: 611). This offers a way to approach the 're-bite' or reoccurrence of the ritual process within tarantism, which was the reason given why many of the medical and scientific writers in Chapter Two labeled the arantati as being 'fakes, because it indicates that a one-off cure in a biomedical sense does not occur. If tarantism is framed within the context of healing as process, then it can be seen as an efficacious means of coping with a particular crisis which is potentially created by a response to both personal and socio-cultural conditions, but does not necessarily resolve or change the conditions themselves in a permanent way. This establishes a means of dealing with the crisis in the moment created by circumstances over which the person themselves has no ability or power to change or control, thus there may be a need to repeat the healing process over a period of time to treat these crises as they arise, rather than effecting a permanent 'cure'.

To repeat Peregrine Horden, tarantism is a 'culture-bound syndrome, or folk-illness; with social and psychological "poisoning" rather than a "biological threat" with a performance that is learnt rather than a cure that is administered' (Horden, 2000: 250), or for Karen Liidtke, 'the healing of the illness within such a cultural system is often the management of the underlying disease, rather than its cure' (Liidtke, 2000: 270). Kay Gardner cites dance anthropologist Allegra Snyder discussing this culturally determined potential of dance forms such as Haitian Vodun, Sufi dancing and Balinese trance dancing, as means for healing:

"The very tensions that for most of us must be held in check, until for some they explode and because they have exploded must be hidden off in a mental hospital, in other societies have been accepted and are actually in the realm of the commonplace." (Snyder, American Dance Therapy Association Journal (1972) in Gardner, 1997: 100)

If it may be possible to approach understanding the experience of tarantism and the re-bite of the ritual in this way, it can additionally offer a suggestion for how pizzica music and dance can be considered as efficacious in the very different conditions of contemporary Salento. To repeat Del Giudice quoted in Chapter Four, the zuovi tarantati of today may be understood to have a 'physiological urge to dance. [...] That is, when the pizzica is played, those who are tarantati must dance (or vice versa, those who must dance may be identified as tarantati)' (Del Giudice, 2005: 262). The irresistible urge to dance was discussed in Chapter Three through the notion of scazzicare, or the stimulus of the music to incite and excite the movements of release through the dance. In this way, the dancer experiences the feeling of being 'carried away' or removed from their sense of self through the inner and outer movements. Within neo-tarantism, this experience of scazzicare can still occur, though framed in a very different context to that of the specific socio-cultural manifestations of tarantism. As Roberto Raheli states about the results of the process of the development of pizzica music: 'today we have a music constructed to "capture the mind', and it makes it possible for us to be taken by the pizzica without requiring the tarantismo ritual side of the phenomenon' (Raheli, 2005: 127). In other words, there can be an experience of being carried away or captured by the music, without needing the particular features of being a tarantato in the former sense. Clearly, there is a difference between the performance and process of tarantism as has been described throughout this study, and that of the nuovi tarantati dancing in festivals, clubs, and beach-parties in the modern world. The vestiges from the past may still be present in the symbols, landscape, and songs, yet the changes in the socio-cultural environment create a different type of experience of embodiment of the dance movements to those presented by the ¢arantati of the past.

One vestige which has continued is the question of entering into a state of trance. In Chapter Four, Georges Lapassade was seen to have used tarantism as a resource, transformed through the rave culture, to explore the notion of trance as a modern phenomenon. In the past, the condition of the illness and healing of tarantism was that the ¢avantata would enter into a state of trance as she danced, and this would in part prove that she was a genuine sarantata, or as De Giorgi states: “Tutti i tarantati autentici entrano in “trance”’ (De Giorgi, 1999: 92) [‘All the authentic ¢avantati enter into “trance”’]. In the world of neo-tarantism, a state of trance is still often described as being present in the experience of the dance, even if transformed into a more ‘modern’ version. Fumarola used the term ‘transe metropolitane’, referred to in Chapter Four, as a means to describe the condition of those who now live in the urban environment. Alla Bua play their music at a zuovo tempo, a faster speed, to match the change in pace of life, and the faster and more insistent rhythmic beat found in rave music which raises the pulse rate and creates a state of being often leads to the dancer describing themselves as being ‘in trance’.

Roberto Raheli suggests that instead of using the term ‘trance’, another way to explain it is as an experience of ‘andare fuori, to go or spin out, ‘that 256 Conclusion is, to go outside one’s normal state of consciousness, to lose sight of one’s immediate surroundings’ (Raheli, 2005: 263). This connects back to the experiences of musicians and dancers discussed in Chapter One, where there can be a ‘forgetting of the self” in the process of being absorbed in the action of playing, dancing or acting. This experience is generated by both the inner, phenomenological world of the bodymind, and also by the outer socio-cultural circumstances and environment operating together in acontinuum to create the factors that can lead to the specific state of being ina particular moment. To repeat Shilling from Chapter One, ‘action, expe- rience, and identity arise from the ongoing interaction and transactions that occur between the internal environment of the embodied organism and its external social and physical environment (Shilling, 2008: 4); and likewise Csordas: “To attend to a bodily sensation is not to attend to the body as an isolated object, but to attend to the body’s situation in the world. The sensation engages something in the world because the body is “always already in the world” (Csordas, 1993: 138). Thus inner and outer experi- ence and conditions combine to create the state of being in the action of a particular moment in a specific spatial-temporal location. ‘The sense of release and ‘forgetting of the self” that may be experienced by someone dancing pizzica in certain situations today, whether choosing to label it as ‘trance’ or not, can lead to a sense of well-being that may be described as efficacious. This is the corrected text:

This is the potential meaning of the comment by the Salentine woman cited earlier as saying she felt healed when dancing; that she could experience a release from the sense of self through a heightened state of being and feeling of presence in the world through the experience of performing the movements of the dance in response to the urging of the music. The heightened presence is established through the embodied experience of the changes in pulse, breathing, movements, and focus in the moment of the dance, and also in the specific response caused by the playing of pizzica music related to the history and identity of the culture and land, indeed the rhythm of the land itself. Both these conditions create the particular experience of efficacy in that moment.

In 2007, I was at an open-air nightclub near a beach in Salento where the DJ was playing a mixture of pop and rock music. The mainly young people present were enjoying dancing in response to this. However, at one point, the DJ put on some pizzica, and everyone present suddenly erupted in a joyful shout and began to dance much more freely and energetically than before. It is not just about the movements of dancing, it is about dancing pizzica, and the particular transformative experience that this can create due to both the nature of the music and the identification with a cultural history and embodiment.

Robert Desjarlais, writing about Membe Bombo, a Yomo shaman in Nepal, states that the rituals he uses work ‘to negate a sensibility bound by loss, fatigue, and listlessness and create a new one of vitality, presence, and attentiveness. [...] Membe changes how a body feels by altering what it feels. [...] The activation has the potential to “wake up” a person, alter the sensory grounds of a spiritless body, and so change how a person feels’ (Desjarlais, 1996: 143). In this sense, pizzica also operates to ‘wake up’ the bodymind through the experience of scazzicare, and this waking up leads to the heightened sense of awareness and presence in the moment, and the potential for transformation of the bodymind through changing the way it feels and experiences.

For Salentine musician Roberto Raheli, speaking on the pizzica music used in tarantism, there is a ‘rhythmical side whose function it is to obsess, to haunt the ¢avantata, and a melodic side which must surprise and wake her up’ (Raheli, 2005: 127). This type of experience, as repeated from Chapters One and Three, can lead to a dissolution of the distinction between subject and object, or a sense of ‘being at one’ with the embodied action and environment, and the sense of Stanislavsky’s notion of perezhivanie or ‘experiencing’, where the sense of a separate ‘T’ is forgotten in the present moment through the action of the dance. It is this experience and engagement which creates the sense of emergence of the bodymind in each moment, and the potential for this to be experienced differently to the ‘everyday’ self, with all the stresses and problems which are present in that everyday world.

Chapter Four observed how neo-tarantism is often understood as a way of treating ‘modern’ illnesses and conditions, such as stress and a sense of fragmentation of the self, rather than the conditions present in former times that were healed by the ritual of tarantism itself. Certainly, there are contemporary examples of performance and the arts being used in this type of way to create an efficacious means to relieve the pressures of a crisis as it arrives, particularly in response to external socio-cultural-economic circumstances beyond the control of the individual. This can be seen within contemporary studies of self-harm, which is defined by Babiker and Arnold as any act that involves intentionally inflicting pain to distract from or counteract emotional distress, feelings of guilt, shame, and provide an emotional outlet for expression. Self-harm is a coping strategy for dealing with unbearable emotional pain and distress that cannot be articulated. (in Bhat and Taylor, 2004: 11)

Chapters Three and Four discussed how both tarantism and neo-tarantism have been described as ways of coping with the crises and pressures of life, and the dance being used as a 'safety valve' for relieving these pressures in a culturally conditioned manner. The author has previously conducted research on the high incidence of self-harm among Asian women in Britain, finding that it can be a way to cope with self-hate, low self-esteem, and needing to punish themselves due to feeling shame and guilt. The code of honor expects women to uphold the family's honor, be dutiful and obedient, and tolerate domestic violence. If they don't adhere to this code, they can bring shame on their family and be ostracised by the community. (Daboo, 2007: 58-9)

Clearly, this is a different socio-cultural and ethnic example occurring at a different time and place. However, issues of shame, honor, repression, and violence in relation to women, in particular, have been an important feature of this study of tarantism and the historical positionings of those from Salento, along with issues of oppression and conforming to defined gender, class, and cultural roles. Some of the Salentines the author spoke with told of difficult stories involving sexual abuse and domestic violence experienced by ¢arantate they knew, and how the pain and suffering from these experiences were often expressed through and relieved by the ritual of tarantism.

Although the situation for women has changed, there are other pressures, including stress, work, socio-economic hardship, and the rapid development within Salento itself, which may lead to the need for some form of release. If these pressures cannot be relieved or articulated, there can be a build-up of physical, mental, and emotional tension. The Newham Asian Women's project points out that it is this build-up that can lead to self-harm as a means of release. They suggest that a long-term way of dealing with the pressure is to 'encourage alternative ways to express feelings and emotions, e.g. talking, writing, drawing' (Bhat and Taylor, 2004: 14), and theatre, dance, and music have been used in similar ways. Although not making a direct correlation with self-harm, it could be suggested that the culturally conditioned experience of the movements of pizzica dance can lead to a sense of release and relief from the problems of everyday life, thus providing a means to alleviate the pressure which is otherwise not expressed or articulated. If the underlying socio-economic or personal conditions do not change, there is a need for the "healing" as opposed to "cure" through regular releases to relieve the continual build-up of pressure caused by these conditions. Dance as an embodied medium of expression can create a space of transformation and forgetting of the self through absorption in the action of the movements and music. This process can allow for confrontation, release, integration, and assimilation, as suggested by Anna Halprin in Chapter Three. If there is a need, one can attend an occasion where musicians are playing, and the music creates a process of scazzicare, urging the bodymind to move. This breaks the feeling of being "stuck" in a bodymind state, leading to a change in the state of being through the process of the dance, until the dancer feels they have experienced release.

This does not mean there needs to be a self-conscious sense of "illness" and "healing" but simply feeling "the need to dance" and the enjoyment and pleasure of the experience of dancing, resulting in "feeling better." As Halprin stated, "the dance changes the dancer" (Halprin, 1995: 14). The process of change experienced through the dance can lead to efficacy when the build-up in pressure becomes too much to bear. This happens through the body and the embodied experience, which is able to express and release in a culturally conditioned and acceptable form that allows for this sense of change.

In Chapter One, I mentioned a Salentine woman who would dance at night on the beach, accompanied by her husband and neighbor, in a private space of transformation and efficacy. Ada Metafune explains that pizzica is about liberation from repression "perché ti permette di esprimere con il corpo quello che non riesci ad esprimere con le parole" (in Tarantino, 2001: 98) [because it allows you to express with the body what you can't express with words]. It is not simply the dance steps and sounds of the music that create the efficacy, but the whole history and socio-cultural environment bound up in the experience of the performance.

This reinforces the notion of the need for both a phenomenological and socio-cultural, or inner and outer, investigation of the "moment" to understand the nature of that experience and the potential for transformation within it. As Chris Shilling from Chapter One stated:

Thus pragmatism's insistence on the human potential to "make a difference" turns what sociologists have sometimes treated as exclusively socially determined organisms into phenomenologically aware, active body-subjects whose corporeal properties enable them to intervene creatively in the world. At the same time, pragmatism's recognition that embodied actions are shaped in part by the distinctive properties of the social and natural world also avoids the dangers of viewing actions as emanating from monadic subjects who are hermetically sealed from other people and from the material contexts in which they live. (Shilling, 2008: 4)

It is this potential ability to "make a difference" that can offer the potential for change within the bodymind, which can be experienced as "feeling better" that happens through the engaged embodied action of the performance. It is indeed, perhaps, the nature of performance itself that creates and allows for the possibility of a spatial-temporal framework in which this can happen. Jill Dolan, writing in "Utopia in Performance," suggests that performance "provides a place where people come together, embodied and passionate, to share experiences of meaning making and imagination that can describe fleeting intimations of a better world" (Dolan, 2003: 2). This potential for the particular experience of the moment of performance, in its nature of both constant presence and ephemerality, can allow for the belief that things can be different, that there may be "the possibility that in its insistent presence (and present), my fellow spectators and I might connect more fully with the complexities of our past and the possibility of a better future" (ibid.: 5).

These moments lift everyone slightly above the present, into a hopeful feeling of what the world might be like if every moment of our lives were as emotionally voluminous, generous, aesthetically striking, and intersubjectively intense. (ibid.: 5) Utopian indeed, but this is also the potential inherent within the experience of the ritual performances of tarantism, and that of contemporary Salentines dancing pizzica. Although different in form, context, intention, and outcome, it is the ability of the experience of the body in the action of the dance and music that offers the possibility for change and transformation, a glimpse into the way that things can be different to how they are usually seen.

To repeat Michael Chekhov from Chapter One, it is this desire for transformation that can lead actors to feel the need for characterization. It can also be the drive, the scazzicare impulse, which sets up the need and response in the body to a particular type of music to move in certain ways, in a specific space and time, and change the feeling of the bodymind and its surroundings through a forgetting of the self in the act of the performance. This, as Halprin states, is where and why the dance changes the dancer.

The long history of tarantism, with all the appropriations and silencing of the voices of those who suffered, and needed to relieve the suffering through a ritualized performance experience, united in the symbol of the spider and St Paul, may have disappeared from the lives and land of Salento, and yet the vestiges, the footprints from the past, are still embedded in the bodies, minds, hearts, and landscape of those who dance and play music today. It is this experience, the joy of dancing to pizzica, along with the pain of the history of the land and its people, which combine to provide the site where past and present unite in an experiential "moment" of being at one 262 Conclusion with the bodymind, the community, the history, and the serra of Salento.

As Dolan says of her ideas in her book: "The utopian performative moves me into the theoretical and experiential realm of affect, into the live, present-tense relationship between performers and spectators in a particular historical moment and a specific geographical location. This work tries to describe the most ineffable, most difficult aspect of performance to capture, to manipulate and to 'prove': how it makes people feel." (ibid.: 65)

For the Salentine woman for whom dancing pizzica is a means for healing, or for Ada Metafune wanting to take her place in the circle and speak with her body through the dance, it is the presence, the experience of being fully in the present moment through the embodied performance, which changes the way they feel. This is bound up with the past history, as was shown in Chapter One where the sight, the embodied presence of the prior ¢avantata had such an effect on those seeing her in Galatina. A glimpse of a vestige of the past, still present, if in a different way and much altered world. The spiders may have gone from the land of Salento, but the tamburello still plays the pulse of the earth and the beating of the blood of those who dance in the present. Afterword August 2007, I travelled to Galatina on a hot, dusty afternoon. I knew that it was siesta time, and everything would be closed, but I wanted to walk through the town and see the buildings when it was quiet. The streets were deserted and the sun beat down as I walked from the station to the Piazza San Pietro, with the large church dedicated to St Peter and St Paul in its Baroque splendor. The empty square in front of it made me remember the footage from the film of La Taranta, of seeing screaming women running and crawling in circles on the festival of St Paul, watched by a crowd of people. Today, there was silence and stillness. I turned round to the small doorway that leads into the chapel of St Paul, where the sarantate would go to experience the re-bite of the ritual each year, and to my astonishment saw that it was open. All the buildings in the rest of the town were closed for the afternoon, and the chapel itself is only very rarely unlocked. I had no idea why that particular afternoon the door was open. I went inside, and stood alone in the space that had held so many ‘moments of tarantism’ within it. It seemed tiny in comparison to seeing it on the ethnographic films. How had so many women been able to fit in there, dancing and climbing on the altar? I sat down on one of the stone benches, and thought about all those women; their stories, their suffering through the many centuries when their lives were recorded and used by medical practitioners and scientists to prove their own point. And yet in this space, it is the lived presence of the tarantate which still breathes in the air.

I thought back over my own time of researching the ritual, of coming to Salento and learning the dance and music, of speaking with many people, and making friends. This was part of my research I hadn’t expected at the beginning. I also had not known, nearly ten years ago, that my own body would go through transformations beyond my control, and that due to arthritis, I now live with the label of being ‘disabled.’ However, even though I may not be able to perform all the movements of the pizzica pizzica any more, I know that when I hear the music, something stirs in me, and even if the external movements are limited, inside I am still dancing, my pulse is racing, the blood is beating in response to the tamburelli.

[I had not expected this either. Weaving my way between being academic and practitioner, researcher and performer, my journey echoed back to me off the walls, along with the vestiges, traces and footprints of all those who had undergone such a profound experience within the small space. I stayed for about an hour on my own in the chapel, and felt immensely grateful for the opportunity to be there and spend time with the memories and reflections of the past in the present. Eventually I got up, and walked through the doorway back onto the Piazza, dazzled by the blazing sun and blasting heat outside. I took some photographs of the doorway and the outside of the building. The bar next to the chapel was open, so I went in, and asked the owner for a drink of juice with ice. He said that he had noticed me taking photographs, and asked if I would like him to move his car which was parked near the chapel doorway, so I could get a clear picture of it without the car. I thanked him, but said it was fine, as I would prefer to record the scene just as it was, rather than try to manipulate it in any way. "Ah?" he said, rolling his eyes, "another researcher!" I smiled, and gratefully drank my juice.

This corrected text has removed the extraneous characters and separated wrongly appended words. The number in the original text was not part of a header or footer, and thus it has been removed. The text is now cleaned up and corrected.