 The notion of collectivity carries a nostalgic charge, which is especially evident in Marxism and its derived discourses. Collective action is seen as necessary to change social arrangements. However, this nostalgia is present because collective action seems increasingly difficult or outmoded, relegated to the status of the 'primitive'.

Primitive participation in ritual is intensely sincere and loaded with faith. It is corporeal and fully 'engaging' of all the capacities of the body. Conversely, modernity has seen the rise of individuation of bodies and the ideological individuation of the person. Ulrich Beck has argued that 'the basic figure of fully developed modernity is the single person' (Beck 1992: 122).

The debate in modernist studies about whether or not 'primitivity' can be 'left behind' is pertinent to the discussion of 'collective madnesses' that have existed in the past. These events enigmatically escape the explanatory frameworks of 'individual' disciplines or modes of thought. This suggests that modes of individuation in thought and its practical application to the treatment of illness might need to be revised. This situation requires theories of complexity and interdisciplinary appara-tuses to come to terms with it.

When the search for causes in individual bodies reaches practical and theoretical limits, we must turn to the more biophilo-sophical position. This position asserts that multiple life forms circulate in and beyond individual bodies as epidemics, and even less materially as codes and forces on life-enhancing missions feeding and starving each other in particular ecological environments.

In many cases, even the dead are still part of the equation for life. The Madagascans, obsessed with death and their ancestors, become possessed — some of them — by spirits of the dead (Sharp 1996). These spirits may come to them in dreams or may permanently occupy individuals. In the northern parts of the island, the possessed are most often older single women, and they are possessed by spirits called tromba, who are actually royal ancestors. The possessed might dress up in the style and period of the King or Queen inside them. This kind of possession may or may not be quite unrelated to an episode of choreomania, noticed in the late 19th century and reported by James Sibree early in Maurice Bloch's book, Placing the Dead: The Imanenjana, or Dancing Mania.

In the month of February 1863, the Europeans resident at Antananarivo (Tananarive), the capital of Madagascar, began to hear rumours of a new disease. It was said to have appeared in the west or south-west. The name given to it by the natives was imanenjana, and the dancers were called ramanenjana, which probably comes from a root signifying 'to make tense'. The name did not convey any idea of its nature, and the accounts given of it were so vague as to mystify rather than enlighten. After a time, however, it reached the capital, and in the month of March began to be common. At first, parties of two or three were seen dancing in public places. It spread rapidly and reached the central province of Imerina. The public mind was in a state of excitement, as the late king, Radama II, introduced remarkable political and social changes. An anti-Christian, anti-European party opposed progress and change. The epidemic aligned with this party. The patients complained of pain in the praecordia and great uneasiness. They became restless, nervous, and uncontrollable when excited or hearing music. They danced rapidly with amazing endurance. The eyes were wild, and the countenance showed an abstracted expression. The dancing was regulated by the music, often becoming leaping. The patients exhausted the patience of musicians and continued running until they fell, almost insensible. After exhaustion, the patients were taken home, and the morbid impulse was destroyed. Some professed to have intercourse with the departed, particularly with the late queen.

James Sibree, with the London Missionary Society, was an eyewitness. He wrote about the phenomenon but may have spoken to doctors, as the dancers were referred to as "patients" and used technical terms like "praecordia". The other discourses intersecting here concern religion and politics, revealing more about the phenomenon. The syntax in the title, "The Public Mind," betrays a desire to entertain the collective singular. Bloch, the anthropologist, adds more threads to the multiple causality, mentioning the dancers' belief in preparing for the return of the recently dead traditionalist queen, Ranavalona. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

As noted above, Madagascan cultures are strongly centered around cults of the dead, and the major ceremony (famadihana) involves ritual reburial where the power of the ancestor is made manifest. In the case of spirit possession by royalty, this dancing mania may well be thought of as a kind of collective re-embodiment. And Bloch notes that (in addition to the crucial element of music which makes the events social and planned rather than accidental), the movements are meaningful: The dancers believed they were carrying [the Queen's] baggage from the coast to the capital and they mimed carrying heavy loads which they passed one to the other in relay. . . it recalls the famous cargo cults and other millenarian cults which it has often been convincingly argued are closely linked to violent foreign contact. In this case, however, the somewhat surprising element is the absence of any clear leaders of any kind, and perhaps the closest parallel is therefore with the ghost dancers of North America.

The significant aspect of the movement is the combination of the frenzied situation, reaffirmation of the past, the focus on tombs and the dead, and the total rejection of western influences. (Bloch 1971: 25) The rejection of things western was manifested in the dancers (or perhaps we could now call them, anachronistically, demonstrators) knocking off people’s hats and killing pigs, both western imports. The dancers were not self-contained, they were interacting strongly with bystanders, forcing them to greet them, smashing contents of houses, and encouraging them to join the movement, which even a parade of soldiers did, going into a frenzy and attacking their officers (Andrianjafy 1902: 60).

The anthropological comparison with the ghost dances of North America encourages us to think of this as an anti-colonial protest, but that particular global political framing was certainly not available to the locals. The local newspaper, the Moniteur universel, reported on 7 juillet 1863 that the dancers said that Ranavalo et Radama 1st emerged from their tomb to declare their son unworthy of the crown. It was said he had sold his country to the whites. His mother and father were groaning under the weight of this monumental crime. Their spirits were weeping and beseeching all their old subjects to seek the help of sikidys (diviners) so as to deflect the curses cast by on their unfortunate successor. (Andrianjafy 1902: 61)

The expatriate doctor Andrianjafy wrote a thesis about this phenomenon in Montpellier in 1902, remembering what he had observed as a boy, and gave it a medical explanation: an origin in malarial infection. But at the same time, he saw that it was literally orchestrated; musicians had to be there playing fast music for the dancers to ‘cure’ them. His prescription was not only treatment for malaria, but also, as a second step, modernization of the whole society, including an ‘uncompromising ayjany rout of witches, diviners and others exploiting the credulity of the people. Ancestral prejudices, superstition, and ignorance, which are jealously maintained by these people, must be eliminated by progress, civilization, and science’ (Andrianjafy 1902: 62).

Then towards his conclusion, his rhetoric becomes more strident: ‘This is a battle for moral hygiene on three fronts: political, religious, and social’ (Andrianjafy 1902: 63). A little research discovers that there is a fairly large body of writing on the other dance manias which have been known to history, especially St Vitus’s dance and Tarantism: between the eleventh and seventeenth centuries, manias swept across Europe______ It is little wonder why psychiatrists and medical historians classify such episodes as group mental disorder affecting those overwhelmed by the stresses of the period. During outbreaks, many immodestly tore off their clothing and pranced naked through the streets. Some screamed and beckoned to be tossed into the air; others danced furiously in what observers described as strange, colorful attire. A few reportedly laughed or wept to the point of death. Women howled and made obscene gestures while others squealed like animals. Some rolled themselves in the dirt or relished being struck on the soles of their feet.

An Italian variant was known as tarantism, as victims were believed to have been bitten by the tarantula spider, for which the only cure was thought to be frenetic dancing to certain music which supposedly dissipated the 'poison' from their blood. Commentaries, including the classic treatise of Hecker (1888), are a queer combination of medical, social and cultural discourses. While, as a physician, Hecker is sensitive to the after-effects of the plague on the early manifestations of dance mania in Europe, with the correlative factors of starvation among lower classes. He also notes that the concentration of the dancing around the festival of St. Jean related it to earlier pagan rituals, so that the clergy attempted to exorcise this clear influence of the devil, and to stop it spreading to the more respectable classes of their congregations.

Hecker, in his secularism, can refer to the effects of "Oppression, insecurity and the influence of a very rude priestcraft, as the powerful causes" of this phenomenon (1888: 169-70). Hecker speaks freely of these manias as epidemics, of the bacchanalian freedoms enjoyed by the participants, and of the 'morbid sympathy' which united the people involved, drawing ever more into the crowd behavior.

Clearly, this phenomenon set the stage for the analysis of hysteria, even though it was not a particularly female phenomenon. So we note that after the 'mass' effects settled down, the activity could be regularized and localized to individual acts in the heat of mid-summer: "It grew every year more rare, so that at the beginning of the seventeenth century it was observed only occasionally in its ancient form."

In the year of 1623, G. Horst saw some women who annually performed a pilgrimage to St. Vitus's chapel at Drefelhausen, near Weissenstein, in the territory of Ulm, that they might wait for their dancing fit there . . .They were not satisfied, however, with a dance of three hours' duration, but continued day and night in a state of mental aberration, like persons in an ecstasy, until they fell exhausted to the ground; and when they came to themselves again, they felt relieved from a distressing uneasiness and painful sensation of weight in their bodies, of which they had complained for several weeks . . .After this commotion, they remained well for the whole year; and such was their faith in the protecting power of the saint that one of them has visited this shrine at Drefelhausen more than twenty times, and another had already kept the saint's day for the thirty-second time at this sacred station. (Hecker 1888: 129-30)

In the Europe of the middle ages, dancing was a courtly practice not available as an 'outlet' for the pleasure of the lower classes, so while bodily movement in the dance manias tended more to the berserk than the graceful, the almost obligatory presence of music as stimulant and 'cure' is a significant factor in the pre-history of mass entertainment, which would no doubt repay further research. Hecker is sensitive to such cultural factors entering into the manifestations of dance manias as cultures. He notes, for instance, that in Liége the possessed assembling in multitudes, frequently poured forth imprecations against [the priests] and menaced their destruction. They intimidated the people also to such a degree that there was an express ordinance issued that no one should make any but square-toed shoes, because the fanatics had manifested a morbid dislike to the pointed shoes which had come into fashion immediately after the ‘Great Mortality’ in 1350. They were still more irritated at the sight of red colours . . . (Hecker 1988: 108)

Tan Hacking, in his book Mad Travellers (1988), looks at ‘transient mental illness’, in particular the fugue syndrome appearing in France about the time of the invention of the bicycle. The bicycle, an ideal mode for individual escape, is to the fugue as music is to choreomania: an exciting technical prosthesis. All factors must be looked at for an understanding of these phenomena, such that Hacking’s evocation of the ‘ecological niche’ is useful in that it invites the kind of complex analysis proper to ecological studies. But he also finds major cultural tensions in operation, saying that one of the vectors within which mental illnesses find themselves is ‘cultural polarity: the illness should be situated between two elements of contemporary culture, one romantic and virtuous, and the other vicious and tending to crime’ (Hacking 1998: 81).

For the middle ages, such a cultural and social polarity finds its sanc- tioned reversal in Rabelaisian ‘carnival’, for which the dancing manias may well have been dangerous precursors. In the case of Madagascar the cultural polarity is the one set up by colonialism and the late Queen's rejection of it. The cult wants to bring her back from the dead to fight the battle again, and reject the foreigners. But it is too late, Madagascar from this moment on will enter the colonial world.

Under conditions of immense social stress the collective body reacts, especially if it has no lines of escape or contact with effective power. If God can be no help, because there is a struggle between, say, Christianity and paganism, if there are no govern- mental mechanisms in place to relieve suffering or at least listen to its complaint, then the collective body convulses and reacts in ways to confound all meaning in a hyper-sensational combination and ‘wastage’ of corporeal forces, the magic of ritual, and flamboyant ‘mass’ political expression.

Medicine rushes in to isolate the symptom and individuate the ‘patients’, but this practice is only partially effective and its discourse reveals itself as lacking any real explanatory power. Mass reactions of this kind convulsing ‘our’ body are rare today because of modern methods of individ- ualization and treatment, but even medicine knows of the social, cultural and historical factors which go into creating a ‘niche’ where a disease can propagate.

When an ‘epidemic’ fired up by a strange complex of forces causes the whole social body to convulse and react, we might have to think again, with Isabelle Stengers, about the ‘way human beings construct both their individual and collective identities’: | will simply remind us that it is not impossible for our descendants in the quite near future to find themselves in a position where they are classified into ‘risk groups’ and their relatives, under pain of social opprobrium, are con- strained to submit them from an early age to procedures which will bring about ‘at some stage’, responsibly, a statistical probability which today appears still to come. Insurance companies, employment procedures, techniques for procreation, and the right to healthcare: all these things, we know, are going to be redefined based on technical developments for which the sole vocation at the beginning was the relief of individual suffering. Beyond the legal and regulatory problems, what is at stake is the way in which humans hope, anticipate, fear, and imagine, and the way in which they conceive and construct their own identities.

The only difference, and it is a weighty one, is that they refuse, on this point, to think about what they are doing. (Stengers 2003: 34) Thinking about the historical phenomenon of choreomania is a way of thinking biophilosophically about the ecological complexity of life forms and the political struggles they engage in, which underscores the need for open experiment and analysis in interdisciplinary fields.