 Dancing to Utopia: Modernity, Community and the Movement Choir
Author: Colin Counsell
Source: Dance Research: The Journal of the Society for Dance Research, Vol. 22, No. 2 (Winter, 2004), pp. 154-167
Published by: Edinburgh University Press

Established by dance and movement theorist Rudolf Laban, the Bewegungschoren or 'movement choirs' of the 1920s and 1930s were a spectacularly visible element of German national culture. A network of amateur clubs, each run by a graduate of Laban's schools, the choirs were modern, urban phenomena, operating in cities and large towns against the backdrop of German industrial society. Their membership represented that society's diversity, for although choir leaders and many dancers were drawn from the educated middle class, those traditionally concerned with cultural generation and preservation, anecdotal evidence suggests they also recruited from the industrial working classes. Their amateur status was central to their aims, such that, as initially conceived, choir works were to have no audience. Although groups quickly became involved in public performance, taking part in community festivals and celebrations, their works were originally envisioned as an end in themselves, an experience for those taking part.

Historically, movement choirs have attracted specific forms of critical attention, and hence been construed in particular ways. Most often they have been addressed as a side issue in studies of Laban's life or work – or, less frequently, as part of the wider phenomenon of German Körperkultur, placed alongside the practice of 'Swedish' gymnastics, and contemporary fads for health food, body building, racial 'hygene', nudism and 'wilderness' experiences. Rarely have choir events been addressed as acts of performance. It is in this light that I shall consider Bewegungschére work in the following piece – not as the child of Laban's authorial genius but as live cultural representation, whose significance was a function of the socio-historical relations in which it was enmeshed.

In pursuing this project, the perspectives offered by Raymond Williams prove particularly apt. If the aim of his cultural materialism is to illuminate artifacts in terms of the social relations in which they are embedded and the cultural consciousness they display, he nevertheless warns against the dangers of seeking such consciousness solely in explicit utterance. He states:

The general tendency, within bourgeois sociology, has been a reduction of the sociology of consciousness to the 'sociology of knowledge'... [This] has been especially weak in relation to important kinds of art and literature. For consciousness is not only knowledge, just as language is not only indication and naming. It is also what is elsewhere, and in this context necessarily, specialised as 'imagination'. In cultural production (and all consciousness is in this sense produced) the true range is from information and description, or naming and indication, to embodiment and performance.

For Williams, then, historically specific consciousness is evidenced in a continuum of cultural products, extending from discourse proper – ideas presented as ideas – to action: real, mobile bodies engaged in tangible practice. While the former tends towards explicit 'naming', the latter typically involves embodiment, social subjectivity encoded in the very rationale of somatic shaping. If this most readily leads us to posit a doxic habitus, it equally importantly implies conscious acts of 'imagination'. Performance can be creative, Williams suggests, not merely reproducing dominant ‘structures of feeling’ but postulating alternatives. It therefore makes possible acts of opposition, commenting on and contradicting the social conditions from which they emerge. It is from this perspective that I will consider the dances of the Bewegungschéren. Movement choirs, I will argue, are the somatic expression of a specific social consciousness, one which, moreover, exists as a critique of the very conditions that gave it birth. Despite its relative scarcity, existing evidence, especially pictorial, actually provides a keen sense of the Bewegungschéré work as a live event. Probably because the choirs’ amateur participants had limited formal training, the movements demanded of them individually appear to have been relatively unchallenging in dance terms. The opposite was true of the choreography of the group, however. Involving anything from fifty to fifteen hundred participants, choir ‘dances’ were composed entirely of group action, members moving, gesturing, and adopting body shapes together to form complex, shifting patterns of a geometrical or biomorphic kind. Aesthetic success rested entirely on coordination, as it was only when actions were flawlessly unified that patterns formed at all. This was lent urgency by the fact that choir pieces were abstract, for without characters, stories, or allegorical subtexts, each dance consisted solely of the forms that grouped bodies traced in space. Movement choir performances, then, were most of all mass performances, and as such they were supremely evocative.

For in the first third of the twentieth century, the concept of ‘the mass’ possessed extraordinary resonance in Western culture, largely as a result of those developments that gave the century its shape. Cities, loci of that second wave of industrialization begun in the 1880s, offered the spectacle of teeming, hurrying masses, their anonymity expressive of a modern alienation. The fruits of that industry, in the form of identical, mass-produced goods, were similarly perceived as threatening both individual taste and the uniqueness of the hand-made artifact, seemingly predicating the erasure of producers and consumers alike as choice-bearing subjects. In subjecting workers to the behavioral discipline of machines, the Fordist mass production techniques eventually used to manufacture those commodities imposed a degree of behavioral uniformity that was historically unprecedented, a regime from which community and individuality were visibly absent. The cumulative effect of such developments was massive disruption, the displacement of those forms of social functioning characteristic of the old world, as society moved towards industrial work patterns, class relations, urbanization, and the nuclear family. The social order, which had once seemed a given, was revealed as ephemeral. Equally important, it now required reinvention.

Whatever their social effects, such developments had a profound impact on representation. For in the absence of any agreed conception of the social whole, symbologies of the mass became inherently speculative, each image functioning as an implicit argument for one or other model of human communiality. Reflecting humanist distaste for modern, Fordist populism, Lang’s Metropolis (1926) figured its swarms of proletarian workers as at once pitiful and threatening, both an oppressed poor and an anarchic mob throwing civilization into peril. In contrast, the ‘Odessa steps’ sequence of Eisenstein’s Battleship Potemkin (1925) posed a crowd, which is the innocent victim of history, against a faceless, automaton mass in the form of the Imperial Army. Later, with its image of revolutionary sailors arrayed in perfect, cooperative unity, it showed the workers triumphant, transformed into history’s agents. Over the following decade, the filmed choreographies of Busby Berkeley and the high-kicking dances of the Ziegfeld Follies’ and Radio City Rockettes deployed groups of women in moving, geometrical patterns, their interchangeability suggesting their commodification, while their pliability en masse functioned as a metaphor for sexual compliance.

National Socialist rallies, Wall Street tickertape parades, Communist Party street festivals, and N. N. Evrienov’s Moscow mass performances—all such spectacles functioned as tacit proposals regarding the nature of the social whole. It was into this arena of representational speculation—effectively, of socio-political contest—that Bewegungschére performances were inevitably drawn. Vying for cultural space alongside bourgeois, Marxist, and National Socialist representations, as well as others less easily defined, they, like all images of the mass, became canvases onto which anxieties endemic to developed societies were projected.

If this ‘structure of feeling’ was evident in Europe and the USA generally, in Germany, mass images such as those presented by movement choirs carried added symbolic weight, the result of a uniquely German history. The majority of states that would go to make up the unified Germany had approached the middle nineteenth century as primarily rural, agricultural societies. It was only under the mid-century hegemony of the Prussian Junkers, and particularly in the early years of Bismarck’s chancellorship (1862-90), that most regions of what would become the German nation took their first steps towards industrialisation. Additionally, once it was begun, industrial development proceeded largely without check, a consequence of the 1848 failure of German liberalism and of the ‘top-down’ social modernisation which that failure permitted.

While the notion of a German Sonderweg (‘special path’) to industrialisation has in recent years been called into question, the late start and unchecked development combined to ensure that change was both rapid and seismic, major social shifts that had taken over a century in Britain occurring in little more than forty years. While all developed nations underwent social upheaval, in Germany, it was experienced in a particularly condensed and abrasive form. Visible at the level of lived experience, it became a component of shared cultural memory. Evident in German culture as it neared the twentieth century, then, was a perception of negative social change, the loss of those communal forms that had once given life its shape, and this was to underpin one of the key tropes structuring critical thought. In 1887 Ferdinand Ténnes published his Community and Association, the seminal work of modern sociology in which he proposed a fundamental distinction between two forms of social organisation: Gesellschaft or ‘society’ described social relations built upon contractual obligations and divisions of labour, relations which exist only between discrete individuals and which are entered into solely for those individuals’ self-interest; Gemeinschaft or ‘community’ referred to social aggregates based on affect, kinship, and group membership. With these terms, Tonnes was, of course, offering analytical abstractions, ways of thinking about the social per se rather than descriptions of actual or possible societies. However, he drew upon a conceptual dichotomy already found in German thought, which was apparently validated by historically recent experience. It is not incidental that comparable cognitive binaries can be traced in the writings of Nietzsche, Klages, Wagner, and Fuchs, and they underpin the ‘primalism’ so central to late nineteenth-century and fin de siècle German literature.

These otherwise diverse writings articulate and render abstract what is at root a historical distinction, operating socio-cultural critiques founded in perceived differences between the industrial and pre-industrial worlds. Moreover, it was a distinction with an inherent value judgment: if the past was a Golden Age of communitas, it had now been lost. The German perception was thus paradigmatic of the Western experience of modernization per se but rendered in an extreme form.

If early twentieth-century artistic ‘primitivism’ was in part developed society’s response to the loss of the old world, German culture evidenced a structure of feeling in which that loss had become a lack: something to be overcome. Consequently, some responses to this consciousness, this perception of degraded sociality, were very concrete, including direct proposals to rebuild the community. In 1904, brothers Wolf and Harald Dohrn, under the auspices of the Deutsche Werkbund, initiated the construction of the new town of Helerau, near Dresden. Conceived as a utopian community, Helerau was planned and built with housing suitable for different social classes, central, communal facilities for education and recreation designed to ‘enrich’ the individual, and access to health-giving nature in the form of the surrounding countryside.

Even more than Morris’s Hampstead Garden Suburb (by which it was almost certainly influenced), Helerau was an attempt to give physical form to a kind of society deemed to have been lost, a supremely organic community in which diverse social levels and dimensions of existence, fractured in modern life, would exist in holistic union. This ethos, written on the scale of urban planning, is equally evident on the micro-scale of interpersonal relations, with fin de siècle and early twentieth-century German social life displaying what has been termed a ‘passion for association.’

This wealth of voluntary, recreational organizations constitutes evidence of income newly available for pleasure — paradoxically, a material excess produced by modernization itself — it is significant that this was expended on what were in effect forms of communal activity, pastimes that exceeded the narrow, modern limits of work, family, and commodified, passively-experienced entertainment: the profits of the new world were employed to ‘reconstruct’ the old. Clearly, the Bewegungschore was a part of this phenomenon, a recreational institution no less expressive of a widespread urge to sociality. Most important, however, is that, like those other initiatives, it entailed or presumed actual behaviors. Rather than represent the ‘idea’ of a pre-modern communitas, as painting or literature might, Germany’s proliferating bunds and leagues enacted it, tracing the shape of a hypothetical society via real social interactions. This is true even of the construction of Helerau, for as a built environment, it predicted very specific forms of use from its occupants—the cooperation between, and happy acceptance of distinct classes, the implicitly premodern melding of work, art, and social exchange, and the interpenetration of human life and nature. This set of group processes sketched in cameo a projected social whole. Rather than acknowledging and lamenting the loss of a world retrospectively construed as a utopia, these cultural phenomena instead sought to be socially active, to rebuild it.

This active, constructive quality is perhaps best exemplified in one of the most successful recreational networks of the period, the Wandervogel. An organization of pacifist 'walking clubs' for young people, the Wandervogel was founded on the belief that a combination of group activity, physical exercise, and exposure to nature would promote spiritual wellbeing. Like Helerau, it thus invoked nostalgia for a past, pastoral mode of existence, one in which such experiences were supposedly the norm.

But the full social significance of the Wandervogel derives from its relation to the much-debated 'Jugend question': whereas some could remember a life graced by genuine communitas, it was argued, the young in today's Germany had experienced only the brute instrumentalism of modernity, and so had not assimilated those values necessary for truly collective living. If the creation of a generation of delinquents was to be avoided, it was necessary to provide for young people group activities founded on different principles, a taste of the communality of the club and the friendly league.

No less than Helerau, then, organizations like the Wandervogel explicitly or implicitly had at their core a social project, key to which was their character as essentially performative. While such as Tonnes and Klages gave abstract, theoretical recognition to the perception of social decline, in their very rationale these activities embodied an alternative to it. It is in this socially active light that we can view movement choirs, for like Helerau, the Wandervogel, and Germany's blooming recreational culture, they too sought to counter the ravages of modernity by reshaping real behaviors, remodeling social relations to recreate a lost communal experience.

This remodeling of experience is key to the principles shaping movement choirs' initial aims. We have noted that, as originally envisioned, choirs were not to give public shows, the pleasure of their 'dances' being reserved for those taking part. While this affirms their status as recreational organizations, it also constitutes a denial of the usual, modern commodification of performance—as something to be produced by one class of participant, and purchased and passively consumed by the other.

Such denial evokes more than a preference for the communal logic of the Gemeinschaft, it is a refutation of the inherently contractual principle underpinning commodification, a rejection of the orthodox social relation between spectator and performer. The rejection of orthodox spectatorship bore a particular ideological charge in Germany at the time, one rooted in the architecture of the modern, Cartesian subject. Founded on the splitting of mind from body, Descartes' self necessarily posited a distance between them, enabling mind to assume ascendancy as the true site of selfhood. Such notional distance formed the basis for the subject's supposed capacity for rational and scientific objectivity, the validity of the Newtonian scientist's explanation of phenomena deriving from his position of disinterestedness, not compromised by involvement with the world he sought to understand. The same logic underpinned the development of the modern stage. Whereas premodern theatre typically required the coexistence of locus and platea, modern performance was distinguished by increasingly profound ‘illusion’, a firm interpretive distinction between performer and character, social space and the hypothetical space of the fiction. The spectator was thereby separated from the notional world he or she viewed, the edge of the playing space marking a symbolic boundary between the worlds of viewer and viewed, subject and object, social world and its fictional counterpart.

No less than science, then, the stage’s design came to reproduce the epistemological arrangements of the Cartesian individual, that relation between self and other that was the foundation of modern subjectivity. Demanding interpretive assumptions analogous to those on which the bourgeois self rested, the position offered the spectator was thus redolent of modernity — but a modernity which, in Germany, had profoundly negative connotations. If ‘the modern’ would frequently evoke images of a degraded sociality, the analogue of this at the level of the subject was not the Gesellschaft’s economic individualism but its threat of alienation, that isolation of the self resulting from its separation from community, and emblematised in images of the factory floor.

It is not incidental that so much of the performance theory emanating from Germany in the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries took as its model an archaic, ritual-like form, for ritual’s insistence on a unified experience promises the reengagement of the onlooker as part of the event, not its distanced observer, making it an apt model for those seeking to disavow modern spectatorship. By the 1920s, when the movement choir network developed, such disavowal was no longer restricted to theories of a reactionary or nostalgic kind. Left rationalists in Germany such as Brecht and Piscator welcomed the new world of mass production and technology for its promise of surplus capacity and a montage-based, critical aesthetic. Nevertheless, in seeking an alternative to the cognitive arrangements of bourgeois representation, they too redrew relations between the auditorium and stage, rejecting a model of spectatorship which, they felt, reinscribed the ‘passivity’ of the ideologically integrated subject.

Of course, the Bewegungschére too offered an alternative, but one very different to Brecht’s. Not originally envisaged as being for public performance, movement choirs were to eschew the auditorium-stage division of modern theatre and dance in the most literal way. They were in effect to deny the identification of their participants with the bourgeois self — and hence deny the baggage of alienation such identification was deemed to carry with it. With all involved committed to the same task, there was to be no separation of viewer from viewed, individual from community, worker from the fruits of his labour. In this, movement choirs were by no means unique, for they were part of a contemporary trend, a tendency towards radical nostalgia quite at odds with the work of such as Brecht. Nuremberg rallies, Thingspeil, clubs dedicated to staging medieval passion plays, and the theatres proposed by Wagner and Fuchs - all in their different ways sought ‘premodern’ alternatives to modern spectatorship. Such strategies imply more than a change in the social relations of performance, for spectatorship is in reality always active, requiring that audiences perform the interpretive activities presumed by the event in its cultural context. In effect, the relations demanded by a given spectatorial context merge into terms of identity: to carry out the activities predicted by the event is to perform the role of (appropriate) spectator. Albeit that these activities require no literal, physical action, they nevertheless constitute an ‘embodiment’ of social consciousness in Williams’ sense, for they rest on (psychic) activities. Viewing a performance at a Cartesian remove, with all that entails, constitutes a short-lived enactment of modern subjectivity. It is in a similar light that we can view the Bewegungschére’s rejection of modern spectatorship, its proposed avoidance of public performance going beyond the mere refusal of commodified subjectivity to implicitly demand a different cognitive arrangement.

In this, the key quality of choir works was their unity, that spectacular coordination of all participants into a single whole, on which each piece depended. As performer and (notional) spectator combined, the choir member’s experience is inevitably suffused with the awareness of social gestalt, every individual action coming to bear the charge of group significance. As each gesture is carried out in the awareness that it is, crucially, part of a whole, every moment is permeated with the knowledge that one is acting in concert with others, part of a larger, communal project. Movements thus bear a dual status, as both individual acts, experienced kinesthetically, and components of a coherency that cannot be seen by the participant, only pictured in his/her mind. The experience, reshaped, thus addresses the Cartesian rupture directly, infusing self-conception with a consciousness of one’s position within the social totality.

In carrying out their individual roles, performers in effect enact a place in a surrogate community, demonstrating the one-ness of the group by acting in remarkable unison. Each participant thereby performs the identity of a ‘pre-modern’ community member, adopting that subjectivity: for the duration of the performance, you are your place in this society.

IV Movement choirs ultimately did perform in public, showing their wares by participating in festivals etc, but far from negating their denial of Cartesian spectatorship, from the performers’ point of view this enhanced it. Distinct from those taking part, the real and separate audience can function as witness to group coherence: performing, we are aware that others will observe our coordination, note the union implied in our kinesic unity. The performers’ notional ‘perspective’ on what takes place is thus given a concrete locus, albeit a hypothetical one, in the gaze of onlookers — or, more accurately, in the performers’ imagining of the gaze of onlookers.

Not only are performers seen, they can see that they are seen, spectators’ eyes acting as the vantage from which individual actions possess group significance. But the greatest paradox of the Bewegungschire performances is that despite the palpable suspicion of modern spectatorship they emblematise, the ultimate expression of this social consciousness is to be found in the experience they provide for spectators. This is a result of the very form that their works take, notably their refusal to symbolise. We noted how choir performances had no characters and told no stories, their aesthetic ‘work’ consisting entirely of the formation of patterns. Being abstract, those patterns offered no specific, decodable meanings, and spectators were denied the opportunity of reading what occurred as ‘representation’ in the familiar sense, of translating the works’ elements into the objects and events of some hypothetical other-place. Interpretive focus therefore remained not on what the patterns meant or stood for but on the occurrence of pattern making. To observe a choir performance was to be treated to a vision of otherwise idiosyncratic individuals operating in a fashion that was spectacularly collective. This is at the core of the interpretive experience choirs offer, for pleasure in viewing a Bewegungschire work, even today, derives from the act of kinesic orchestration itself. It is an act that, because it lacks a dimension of representation, remains emphatically real, not standing-in-for events of some other, fictional realm but remaining of the spectators’ own. As we saw, as onlookers we are always emphatically aware that the success of each choir performance relies on the unity and precision of the performers’ actions. This reliance is absolute, for if choir members do not fulfill their roles exactly as scripted, patterns simply do not form, and the performance therefore does not take on the status of an aesthetic object at all. Comprised only of kinetic unity, Bewegungschére dances remain visibly built of communal action, actually consist of real individuals functioning as an organised collective, and it is this ‘embodied’ rationale which so spectacularly presents itself to the audience.

The Bewegungschére provides not simply an ‘image’ of Gemeinschaft but an example of it, a successful working model of social interaction which refutes the logic of modern instrumentality, proffering instead the relations of an actual, albeit short-lived community. While this idea perhaps remains somewhat abstract on the printed page, for spectators to a live performance it is immediate. The key quality of movement choirs is that they do indeed move, forming not the static tableaux of the photographic record but formations evolving and shifting over time. As a result, the aesthetic object is never ‘safely’ complete but remains temporally and spatially fragile, continually being remade; indeed, having to be remade, arms, legs and torsos realigned in space to form the next figure, then the next. This has direct consequences for those watching. Placed in the position of having always to trace new spatial forms as they emerge on a second by second basis — a position of anxiety, saturated as it is by the possibility that the next form may not coalesce — the spectator’s experience is of a continually re-found group cohesion, the periodic endangerment of collective unity followed by that unity’s immediate and successful reaffirmation. It is this that makes the movement choir performance unique.

Metropolis and the Ziegfeld Follies provided tacit models of modern society: the Wandervogel, Thingspeil and restagings of passion plays at Oberammergau supposedly offered the experience of a past communiality. But movement choirs first provided the experience of that communality’s break-down, only then to restore it once more. They thus implicitly promised the triumph of Gemeinschaft in the age that had all but succeeded in destroying it. This presents us with something of an irony. Far from reestablishing a notionally premodern communitas, choirs provide an experience analogous to its modern loss, doing so in order that that loss may then be overcome. The task spectators are required to undertake, that of refinding cohesion under the continual threat of its dissolution, provides an ongoing experiential correlative of the persistence of community despite the social reality of its failure, the onlooker’s endlessly moving eye actively demonstrating the irrepressible one- ness of the group. The choirs' final impact is on the interpretive consciousness of the spectator, for it is in this performed 'role' that a social consciousness, a 'structure of feeling' of the kind described by Raymond Williams, is embedded. To be the spectator of the Bewegungschére work is to find and find again the endangered communality of the group. If movement choirs defer to a prelapsarian utopia in which the community was intact, their works effectively dance that utopia into tangible, somatic being, such that seeing the dance is utopia's reaffirmation.

While the political allegiances of some Bewegungschére participants are a matter of record — the socialism of Berlin choir leader Martin Gleisner, Laban's own relations with a triumphant National Socialism — positioning the form itself in socio-ideological terms is complex. We noted that the anxieties informing movement choirs were endemic to developed Western societies. Further, in Germany, the perception of a degraded sociality crossed political boundaries, reactions to it arguably being realized in activities as diverse as Communist Party festivals, trade union parades, the tacitly reactionary revivals of medieval passion plays and Nazi rallies.

One cannot therefore simply brand the Bewegungschére as reactionary, a proto-fascistic artifact of the same order as Thingspeil, tales of a lost Teutonic past and theories of racial hygiene. After all, movement choirs did function to critique social conditions, physicalizing a social consciousness that opposed the status quo. For all that, there is finally an inherent, albeit oblique conservatism to the movement choir project. The image that choir performances provided was of communality. In showing that communality to be endangered, they evoked what was a widely recognized myth of a premodern utopia: by reaffirming it in the face of peril, they implicitly promised that utopia's reestablishment for the future. In their original cultural context, then, movement choirs always looked back. Fritz Lang proposed contemporary capitalism's moderation via benign dictatorship, while German Communist Party festivals constructed a space of notionally unfettered interaction that predicted the arrival of class-free society. While these both sought to change the modern, the Bewegungschére instead retreated from it, finding solace in a world that was already irretrievably past.