 Decadence in the Late Middle Ages: The Case of Choreomania

KATHRYN EMILY DICKASON

In most scholarship, Choreomania conveys a context in which dance is inextricably linked to medicine. Choreomania, or dance mania (from the Greek terms choros, or dance, and mania, or madness), refers to the dance epidemics that swept Europe between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries. During this time, French, Flemish, and German chroniclers reported how hundreds of people erupted in excessive, frenzied movements, sometimes dancing themselves to death. Although once a medieval phenomenon, Choreomania has since become integrated into modern, medicalized understandings of chorea (from the Latin word for dance). Today’s medical literature typically defines Choreomania as ‘a hyperkinetic movement disorder characterized by excessive spontaneous movements that are irregularly timed, randomly distributed, and abrupt.’

The neuropathological (and sometimes psychiatric) reconstitution of Choreomania may acknowledge its medieval predecessors, but tends to divorce this disease from folkloric legends and superstitions. Choreomania entered western medical discourse as early as the sixteenth century. The Renaissance polymath Paracelsus (born Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim in 1493) rejected the medieval assumption that demonic possession caused dance mania. Instead, he studied the physiological symptoms of choreomaniacs (dance maniacs) and prescribed specific remedies. In the following century, Thomas Sydenham renamed Choreomania as Sydenham’s chorea (or chorea minor), a disorder characterized by involuntary and jerky motions. (This diagnosis, however, actually refers to a form of acute rheumatic fever.) Due to overlapping physiological symptoms, Choreomania in the nineteenth century had been associated (erroneously) with Huntington's disease, a neurodegenerative genetic disorder.

In an effort to diagnose medieval choreomaniacs, more recent studies on Choreomania applied modern epidemiology to the extant medieval evidence. In the twentieth century, the Swedish pharmacologist Eugene Louis Backman argued that Choreomania was caused by ergotism, a species of poisoned fungus (Claviceps purpurea) that exhibits properties similar to that experienced with Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) use. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

Following the multiple floods that occurred in Flanders and the Rhineland in the Late Middle Ages, Backman suggests that ergot would have infected the grains consumed by medieval subjects, particularly peasants. Backman explains that the ergot in rye induces hallucinations, agitation, intensely colored vision, and increased susceptibility to external influences (such as rhythm, which initiates dancing). Other scholars align Choreomania with an early manifestation of tarantism, a disorder that allegedly comes from a spider’s bite and can be remedied by wild dancing. Most recently, the historian of medicine John Waller suggests that medieval choreomaniacs were in a trance state, which may explain their involuntary motions and the long duration of their dancing. Similar to Waller's findings, Robert Bartholomew has diagnosed medieval Choreomania as Mass Psychogenic Illness (MPI), or an epidemic hysteria of collective symptoms that defy any plausible pathogenic explanation. In sum, scholars have generally reduced this phenomenon to a collective pathology.

See especially Paracelsus, Four Treatises of Theophrastus von Hohenheim, Called Paracelsus, trans. by Henry E. Sigerist (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996); Volumen Paramirum und Opus Paramirum, ed. by Franz Strunz (Jena: Eugen Diederichs, 1904), pp. 321-28. Geneviéve Aubert, ‘Charcot Revisited: The Case of Brueghel’s Chorea, Archives of Neurology, 62 (2005), 155-61 (p. 155); Wild and Tabrizi, “The Differential Diagnosis of Chorea, p. 361. Eugéne Louis Backman, Religious Dances in the Christian Church and Popular Medicine, trans. by Ernest Classen (Binsten, Hampshire: Noverre Press, 2009), chapters 22 and 23; see also Frederick Cartwright, Disease and History (New York, NY: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1972), p. 202.

For studies on tarantism, see Alessandro Arcangeli, ‘Dance Between Disease and Cure: The Tarantella and the Physician, Ludica, 5-6 (2000), 88-102; Jerri Daboo, Ritual, Rapture, and Remorse: A Study of Tarantism and Pizzicata in Salento (Bern: Peter Lang, 2010); Karen Liidtke, Dances with Spiders: Crisis, Celebrity, and Celebration in Southern Italy (New York: Berghahn Books 2009). John Waller, A Time to Dance, A Time to Die: The Extraordinary Story of the Dancing Plague of 1518 (Cambridge: Icon Books, 2008); ‘Dancing Death, British Broadcasting Corporation, 12 September 2008, p. 2. Robert Bartholomew, “Tarantism, Dancing Mania, and Demonopathy: The Anthro-Political Aspects of “Mass Psychogenic Illness”, Psychological Medicine, 24.2 (1994), 281-306 (pp. 281, 289).

Differing from past studies, this paper examines Choreomania as a performance practice within a religious context. Rather than re-pathologising Choreomania, I intend to demonstrate how dance mania became integrated into the religious life and culture of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. In doing so, I shall follow the work of the historian Gregor Rohmann,______ The following chapter traces the development of late medieval Choreomania, in which deviant displays of devotion shifted towards sanctioned exercises of worship that were authorised, formalised, and memorialised by local religious communities. Departing from a diagnostic analysis, it reconsiders Choreomania as a collective manifestation of religious expression that evolved from an aberrant to a manageable means of devotion. Despite their unruly symptoms reported by contemporary chroniclers—stomping, spinning, gesticulations, and convulsions—medieval choreomaniacs gradually became less deviant and more devotional. As such, they contributed to the shaping of late medieval spirituality.

Firstly, I address early outbreaks of Choreomania which befuddled local clerics and resembled demonic possession. My analysis situates Choreomania within the context of late medieval dance practice. Incorporating anthropological theories on trance, I suggest that dance maniacs cultivated religious experience through their bodily performances. Secondly, I investigate how Choreomania entered institutional religion via pilgrimage and the cult of the saints. This section reveals how dance maniacs, as liturgical performers, helped shape the contours of orthodox religiosity. Moreover, I consider how Choreo-mania belonged to a larger repertoire of ecstatic and spectacular dancing in the Late Middle Ages. To conclude, I describe a contemporary tribute to Choreomania, which shows the channelling of cultural memory into a reg-ularised, performative practice. By localising and historicising medieval chore-maniacs as dance practitioners and religious devotees, I hope to show how the decadence of dance—or decadance—partook in the recalibration of religious life in the Late Middle Ages and beyond.

The first ramifying, and perhaps most perplexing, outbreak of medieval Choreomania began in Aix-la-Chapelle (Aachen, Germany) on 15 July 1374. Over the next four months, these dancers migrated to Cologne, Flanders, the Rhineland, Liége, and Trier, infecting others along the way. Writing in the late fourteenth century, the Flemish chronicler Jean d'Outremeuse reports a peculiar event that transpired in the city of Liége, in present day Belgium: on the 11th of September in 1374, there came from the north to Liége [...] a company of persons who all danced continually. They were linked with cloths, and they jumped and leaped [...] They called loudly on John the Baptist and fiercely clapped their hands. Such a disturbance they did create that all who heard them were afraid, their hearts trembling with fear, and so they were driven out of Liége. [Illegible] For the Devil in hell was their master [Illegible] The men were without reason and the women abandoned themselves to frivolity. All these people from various parts danced with each other. The country was full of them [Illegible] Some of them returned to Liége, shouting and bawling and making such a din that it seemed the whole world was coming to an end [Illegible] The attacks were such that in their homes and in secret people could not help dancing.” According to this chronicle, an itinerant mob infiltrated the streets of Liege and danced incessantly. The dancers’ movements were so excessive that they percolated into the privacy of their own homes, thus confounding the distinction between public and private, theatrical and mundane. Jean insinuated that

1 Chronicum comitum Flandrensium: ‘Anno MCCCVVIYV, venerunt in Flandriam de Rheno et de Brabantia tripudiatores ducentes chorea per totam Flandriam, cited in Madeleine Braekman, ‘La Dansomanie de 1374: Hérésie ou Maladie?’ Revue du Nord, 63.249 (1981), 339-55 (p. 341).
2 Jean d’Outremeuse, La Geste de Liege: ‘sour fan XIII* LXXIIII, en septembre XI jour, vinrent en la citeit de Liége, droit d’aquilone (oncques bins n’y venoit), conpangnie de gens, dont cascuns fors dansoit, et loiiés de tuelhez, et trippoit et sailhoit ; et s. Johans - Baptiste don't en hault rélcamoit; et leurs palmes ensemble cascons mult fort batoit. Teil tempoest mainent, que cascons en hisdoit, et de la grant hisdeur tous li cuer li trembloit: si que tous fours de Liége adon tons les cachoit. ... car li dyable d’ynfer trestous les governoit. ... Les hommes astoient tous gens sens raison, et les femmes deleis érent femmez legier; tous dansoient ensemble les gens de tous costeis. Li paiis en fut tout plains: par les engliesez aloient ensiment atourneis; en citeis et en vilhes de Liege et dyoceis en pou de gens a Liége astoient retorneis en deminant teilh frinte si grande tempesteis; bin sembloit que li monde dewist estre fineis [...] et savoit de cesti de teilhe volenteis quen leur maison dansoient en toudis en secreis’ in Corpus Documentorum Inquisitionis Haereticae Pravitatis Neerlandicae, ed. by Paul Frédéricq (Ghent: J. Vuylsteke, 1889-1906), III, p. 43; my translation after Backman, Religious Dances, p. 212.

144 Downloaded from <https://www.cambridge.org/core. Access paid by the UCSF Library, on 14 Nov 2019 at 09:37:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at <https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787440784.010 DECADANCE IN THE LATE MIDDLE AGES: CHOREOMANIA the clamorous crowd served as corporeal vessels of Satan.'* Since these danc- ers invoked St John the Baptist, some sources made a correspondence between Salome and the death of St John (Mark 6. 22-25; Matthew 14. 6-8), thereby blaming the seductive saltatrix, or female tumbler, for inflicting Choreomania."* Indeed, some accounts reported that choreomaniacs beheld the head of St John, Salome’s victim, swimming in blood as they partook in their own dance of death.’* The dancers’ relationship to both St John and Sal______ 'Le Roman de la Rose': A Medieval Masterpiece

The Romance of the Rose, a popular literary work about courtship, contains a celebrated depiction of carole. In the text, the narrator describes the dancers' peerless noble quality: "These people of whom I speak had begun to dance, [a la querole] [...] the dancers moved and [...] tread daintily, executing many fine steps and turns on the fresh grass [...] but I need not say how beautifully they danced: one would approach the other very elegantly [...] They knew well how to sway in the dance. I cannot describe it to you but as long as I could have seen those people thus exerting themselves in the rounds and dances, I would have wanted to move!"

Since some choreomaniacs shared an affinity with John the Baptist, 'St John's Dance' became an interchangeable term for this malady. It is also noteworthy that St John's Day was associated with heathen customs and pagan dances in the Middle Ages.

Medieval chroniclers writing in Latin often described choreomaniacs with the term saltare, which refers to springing or jumping, but saltare in the Middle Ages commonly referred to a lively dance (hence the Italian saltarello). However, saltator or saltatrix also denoted an itinerant, low brow entertainer.

In this passage, the carolers exude grace, beauty, and fineness. A manuscript miniature from Le Roman de la Rose demonstrates further the carolers' elegant restraint [Fig. 1]. Compared to the carolers, the choreomaniacs of 1374 could scarcely be more different. The choreomaniacs' distorted, unbridled gesticulations seem to contradict the norms of medieval dance practice.

Fig. 1: Dancers from Le Roman de la Rose
London, British Library, MS Yates Th Paris, c. 1380. © The British Library Board.

In the passage, Jean's chronicle continues by providing a detailed description of the disturbing dancers. As he explains, the dancers bound themselves with cloth, perhaps in an effort to mollify the physical pain induced by their physiological symptoms and bodily exertion. In a sense, this aspect of dance mania serves as a grotesque inversion of medieval secular dances, which on occasion were performed while holding handkerchiefs. For the choreomaniacs, the cloth accoutrements were not decorative; they apparently functioned to quell the dancers’ discomfort. The exhausting list of observed symptoms included ram-pant movement, chanting, hallucinations, bodily convulsions, chest and abdominal pains, hyperventilation, foaming at the mouth, sexually suggestive gestures, and, in later cases, even public copulation.

As a couplet from another Strubel (Paris: Livre de Poche, Lettres Gothiques, 1992), pp. 76-80, ll. 727-55: trans. by Francis Horgan, The Romance of the Rose (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), p. 13.

Le Roman de la Rose, London, British Library, MS Yates Thompson 21, fol. 8°. Although a thirteenth-century work, The Romance of the Rose survives in approximately 300 manuscripts and several incunabula, testifying to its consistent popularity throughout the Middle Ages.

Thus far I have not come across any textual descriptions of dances with cloths or handkerchiefs, but there are many examples of these dances in late medieval dance iconography, e.g. Le Roman du Saint Graal, Dijon, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 527, fol. 146.

The Flemish chronicle stated succinctly, “Uneasily the people fall / as they foam at the mouth in their pangs’ [Gens impacata cadit / dudum cruciata salivat].”

Reporting on the 1374 incident, the Dutch chronicler Petrus de Herenthal reported that ‘the people danced and leaped violently. One lightly touched another’s hand, then shrieked. “Frisch, Friskes’, women and men cried it with joy.” The word frisk, from the German frisch, referred to the whooping cough or other maladies marked by epileptic and convulsive mannerisms, though it could also signify health and vitality.

De Herenthal’s account suggests that the dancers were aware of, yet also expressed joy toward, their abnormal condition. Others stated that some choreomaniacs refused to wear poulins—the fashionable pointed shoes of the day—lest their discomfort become more insufferable. Still others expressed loathing for the colour red, as they would tear to pieces the red clothes and pointy shoes of any innocent bystander.

Such massive eruptions could not be contained within the confines of a single city. Between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries, numerous other chroniclers of France, Germany and Flanders recounted similar stories of the dancing plague. During the early outbreaks of Choreomania, chroniclers conveyed am- bivalent attitudes toward the crazed dancers. Some archival sources from 1374 portray choreomaniacs as helplessly unholy: “Thus there they danced and leaped. They had been besieged by demons. When the evil spirit de- scended to their legs, they could not help dancing and leaping; when it moved up into the belly they suffered great pain’

Conversely, another chronicle claims that the dancers, following their exertion, received divine visions: “They see the Son of Mary and the heavens oper [cernit Mariae filium et caelum apertum]. Thereafter, ‘They fall to the ground’ [Deorsum prosternitur].” As these examples show, the sources covering the 1374 out- Justus Friedrich Karl Hecker, The Black Death and The Dancing Mania, trans. by G. Babington (Boston, MA: IndyPublish, 2009 [1832]), p. 55; Backman, Religious Dances, pp. 201-202, 277-81. Given the severity of the dancer's symptoms, Justus Hecker construed Choreomania as a response to the Black Death, see The Black Death and The Dancing Mania, chapters 4 and 5; cf. the Strasbourg Chronicle of Kleinkawel (c. 1625), cited in Curt Sachs, World History of the Dance, trans. by Bessie Schénberg (New York, NY: W. W. Norton and Co., 1937), p. 253.

Petrus de Herenthal, Vita Gregori XI: 'Populus tripudiat nimium saltando, se unus alteri sociat leviter clamando, Frisch, friskes! Cum gaudio clamat uterque sexus' in Corpus, ed. by Frédéricq, I, p. 232. » Braekman, 'La Dansomanie de 1374; p. 345; see also Backman, Religious Dances, pp. 226-30.

* Backman, Religious Dances, pp. 199, 201, 278-81. Backman cites Belgian chronicles for the details about the shoes and the color red. He notes that the choreomaniacs' response to pointed shoes was so violent that shoemakers in Liége were forbidden to make them.

4 Liége Chronicle of 1402: 'Dansabant ac saltabant ibi. Obsessi errant a demonibus et quando spirtus descendebat in crura eorum, non poterant contineri a dansatione et saltu; quando autem ascendebat in parvum ventrem, tunc torquebantur dure' in Corpus, ed. by Frédéricq, III, p. 41. > In Corpus; cf. Petrus of Herenthal, in Corpus, ed. by Frédéricq, I, p. 232.

Downloaded from <https://www.cambridge.org/core>, Access paid by the UCSF Library, on 14 Nov 2019 at 09:37:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at <https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.> <https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787440784.010> KATHRYN EmMILy DICKASON breaks were often ambivalent. Medieval Christians construed dance mania as engineered by Satan or fuelled by God. Hence, even the earliest docu- mentation depicts choreomaniacs as (literally) dancing between demonic possession and divine inspiration. While choreomaniacs produced enough of an urban disturbance to appear in city chronicles, clerics—although suspicious—did not officially accuse them of heresy, given the apparently involuntary nature of their dancing (sin gen- erally requires evil intent). Instead, many observers of 1374 identified the choreomaniacs as demonically possessed, or demoniacs. Such stigmatised individuals played a role in Christian history since biblical times, whereas cases of female demoniacs were common in the Late Middle Ages.

In typical artistic representations of exorcism rites, the possessed person is on display, exhibiting physiological signs (e.g. arched back, wide eyes, etc.) of possession. The priest functioned as the audience or observer, as well as a partner in per- formance. The priest, sometimes with the help of a saint, administered the cure. The cleric rebuked the demon, often in the form of a black, impish figure, thus visualising the process of dispossession (literally a vomiting out of the demon), as it is expelled from the demoniac's mouth. Exorcism was akin______ Exuding gestural dissonance, the 1374 choreomaniacs were held suspect by chroniclers and ecclesiastical authorities. When treated as a variety of demonic possession, 2 Dyan Elliott, Proving Woman: Female Spirituality and Inquisitional Culture in the Later Middle Ages (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004), chapters 4 and 5; Nancy Caciola, Discerning Spirits: Divine and Demonic Possession in the Middle Ages (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2003), chapter 5; cf. Michel de Certeau, The Possession at Loudun, trans. by Michael B. Smith (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2000). Interestingly, some studies have analysed the associations between dance mania, demonic possession and hysteria, see Georges Didi-Huberman, The Invention of Hysteria: Charcot and the Photographic Iconography of the Salpétriére (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003), pp. 176-81; Anna Furse, “Making a Spectacle of Herself: Charcot’s Augustine and the Hysteric Dance, in Tanz und WahnSinn Dance and ChoroMania, 21 (Leipzig: Henschel, 2011), pp. 197-210; Dianne Hunter, ed., The Makings of Dr. Charcot’s Hysteria Shows: Research through Performance (Lewiston, ME: E. Mellen Press, 1998), pp. 21-23; see also J. M. Charcot and Paul Richer, Les Démoniaques dans l’Art (Amsterdam: B. M. Israél, 1972), p. 36.

77 Jean-Claude Schmitt, “The Ethics of Gesture, in Fragments for a History of the Human Body, ed. by Michel Feher et al. (New York, NY: Zone, 1989), II, pp. 129-47 (pp. 130-31); ‘The Rationale of Gestures in the West: Third to Thirteenth Centuries, in A Cultural History of Gesture, ed. by Jan Bremmer and Herman Roodenburg (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1992), pp. 59-70.

148 Downloaded from <https://www.cambridge.org/core>, Access paid by the UCSF Library, on 14 Nov 2019 at 09:37:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at <https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.> <https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787440784.010> DECADANCE IN THE LATE MIDDLE AGES: CHOREOMANIA

Choreomania provoked the need for clerical control. Within the realm of discerning (or diagnosing) spirits, clergy were capable of recognising legitimate or illegitimate varieties of somato-spiritual expression. That is, upon observation, clergy could distinguish between divine and demonic possession. Some sources claimed that choreomaniacs embodied and made sensorially apparent the presence of demons [se levantes quod sentierent presentiam demonis]. Contributing further to the demonic aura, certain choreomaniacs went so far as to blaspheme Christ or the Virgin Mary.

When clerics tried to contain Choreomania via exorcism, however, they experienced some initial resistance. According to Radulphus de Rivo (a Tongeren-based deacon), choreomaniacs in Lié¢ge administered exorcisms on each other and began to devise homeopathic healing techniques to treat their aching appendages. In doing so they assumed quasi-clerical roles and even threatened to usurp their local priests. (Radulphus, however, stressed that these techniques were unsuccessful.) Some choreomaniacs complained that local priests, whom they______ Beyond theories of spirit possession, Choreomania made manifest the uncanny parallel between dancing and demons within the context of medieval dance polemic. As the historian Alessandro Arcangeli has shown, dancers who appeared in medieval exempla (i.e. moralising stories often inserted in sermons) were typically punished. They acquired leprosy, received clerical curses, or suffered death and eternal damnation.*' As described in sermons and confession manuals, the devil often disguised himself as an alluring woman or a handsome lad who tempted their dance partners into hell. Indeed, pastoral texts forewarned how dancing empowered demons and rendered participants susceptible to perdition. According to the Dominican Jacques de Vitry (d. 1240), 'the dance is a circle whose center is the devil' [chorea enim circulus est, cujus centrum est diabolus]. From the preacher's perspective, dance was inherently evil. It presented a dark parody of the angelic rounds in heaven.™ Similarly, in his preaching compendium, Summa praedicantium, the fourteenth-century English Dominican John Bromyard narrated how a group of saintly men approached a certain city inhabited by dissolute dancers: They saw a demon sitting upon the ramparts of the city, and when he was asked why he sat there alone he replied: 'I do not need the help of anyone, because the entire city is obediently subject to us' [the forces of the Devil]. Entering the city they found the population in a state of the greatest dissoluteness, that is to say dancing caroles and occupied with diverse other entertainers. Terrified, they left that city.*® In their works, Bromyard and other pastoral writers typically referred to secular dances, rather than Choreomania. However, their texts demonstrated how most forms of dance could provoke demonic fury and civic disorder. Negative attitudes toward medieval dance resonate with what might be called the legendary precursors to dance mania. For example, in the famous legend of the dancers of Kolbigk (a village in east Saxony), a group of men and The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

1 (1914), 1-22 (pp. 10-20); Michele Veissiére, ‘Prohibitions des Danses Publiques les Jours Dimanches et de Fétes au Temps de Guillaume Briconnet, Revue de la Société d'Histoire et d'Art de la Brie et du Pays de Meaux, 33 (1982), 45-52; Max Harris, Sacred Folly: A New History of the Feast of Fools (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2011), pp. 221, 225-26, 229, 233-34; John Stevens, Words and Music in the Middle Ages: Song, Narrative, Dance and Drama, 1050-1350 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), p. 162. 33 Jacques de Vitry, Sermones Vulgares, in Paris, Bibliothéque nationale de France (BnF), MS lat. 17509, fol. 146”. 4 For more on the cosmic dance, see Plato, Timaeus, in Plato: The Complete Works, ed. by John Cooper (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company, 1997), 29c-36d; Honorius of Autun, Gemma Animae, in Patrologia Latina, ed. by Jean-Paul Migne (Paris: Migne, 1854), CLXXII, cols 587-88; Kathi Meyer-Baer, Music of the Spheres and the Dance of Death: Studies in Musical Iconology (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1970), pp. 12-16; Frangoise Carter, ‘Celestial Dance: A Search for Perfection, Dance Research: The Journal of the Society for Dance Research, 5.2 (1987), 3-17; James Miller, Measures of Wisdom: The Cosmic Dance in Classical and Christian Antiquity (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1986). %° John Bromyard, Summa Praedicantium: ‘Viderunt daemonum in muro civitatis, et interrogentibus cur solus ibi sederet, repondit non indigeo alicuius auxilio, quia tota civitas nobis obedienter est subiecta, et intrantes civitatem invenerunt hominess in maxima dissolutione, videlicet choreizantes, aliis diversis ludis occupatos. Ipsi vero timentes exierunt de civitate illa, cited and trans. by Christopher Page, The Owl and the Nightingale: Musical Life and Ideas in France, 1100-1300 (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1989), p. 113. 150 Downloaded from <https://www.cambridge.org/core>, Access paid by the UCSF Library, on 14 Nov 2019 at 09:37:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at <https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.> <https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787440784.010> DECADANCE IN THE LATE MIDDLE AGES: CHOREOMANIA women in 1027 danced incessantly in the churchyard during Christmas Eve mass. St Magnus, the patron saint of Kélbigk, cursed the disobedient parishioners and forced them to dance without respite for a full year. Some died following the incident, whereas others were left with permanent tremors.** Another episode occurred at Maastricht (______ However unruly and dissolute, Choreomania provided a space for dance to be reconstituted within a spiritual economy. One problem with the traditional image of exorcism is that it tends to position the possessed person as a passive and pathological recipient. A re-consideration of choreomaniacs as performers helps reinvest them with a sense of agency and autonomy. Trance theory provides a heuristically fruitful perspective with which to re-evaluate dance mania. According to most anthropological studies, trance is a form of dissociation. By dissociation, I refer to

Ingrid De Geer, "Legends of Saint Magnus Extracted from the Thirteenth-Century Fornsvenska Legendariet, in St. Magnus Cathedral and Orkney's Twelfth-Century Renaissance," ed. by Barbara E. Crawford, trans. by Evan MacGillavray (Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press, 1988), pp. 264-71 (pp. 264-67). See also Rohmann, "The Invention of Dancing Mania, pp. 31-38; Harald Kleinschmidt, Perception and Action in Medieval Europe (Woodbridge: Boydell and Brewer Press, 2005), p. 43; Backman, Religious Dances, pp. 172-76; Arcangeli, 'Dance and Punishment; p. 35. For additional accounts of dance mania in the Early Middle Ages, see Rohmann, "The Invention of Dancing Mania, pp. 25-30; Tanzwut, esp. pp. 329-55.

Backman, Religious Dances, pp. 179-81; Hecker, The Black Death and the Dancing Mania, pp. 61-62. For an illustration, see Hartmann Schedel, Nuremberg Chronicle (Liber Chronicarum) (Nuremberg: Anton Koberger, 1493), fol. 217. Consonant with this iconography, an edict from Maastricht forbade dancing in public places, notably the church, see Corpus, ed. by Frédéricg, III, p. 44.

Rohmann, "The Invention of Dancing Mania, p. 38. For more details on peasants or rustici, see Braekman, 'La Dansomanie; pp. 348-50; cf. Paul Freedman, Images of the Medieval Peasant (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999), pp. 137-38; Arlene Pearsall, 'Johannes Pauli and the Strasbourg Dancers, Franciscan Studies, 52 (1992), 203-14 (p. 206).

In religious contexts, trance is often a public phenomenon that requires an audience to validate the transformative experience of the trancer. As Erika Bourguignon argues, trance can be a form of dissociation 'in service of the self' That is, the momentary suspension of selfhood can allow the subject to act with an authority that is uncharacteristic of their quotidian lifestyle. Bourguignon's study on women and trance highlights the empowering capacity of trance. For women in patriarchal societies, Bourguignon claims that trance constitutes a psychodynamic response to powerlessness. Trance supplies a means to gratify wishes that are normally denied to women. Through the performance of trance, women can express through alters in ways that would not otherwise be socially acceptable. As Bourguignon explains, 'acting out the identity of spirits in ritual possession trance offers women an accept- able, and consciously deniable, way to express unconscious, forbidden thoughts and feelings, particularly in situations of social subordination. According to Bourguignon, the suffering that trance entails is actually a precondition for power and for transcending an oppressive, patriarchal regime. In this way, trance is a transformative, self-othering performative technique. Although I am not necessarily studying Choreomania from a feminist perspective, I find Bourguignon's framing instructive. Her theoretical lens allows us to perceive the dance maniacs as powerful agents, rather than suffering victims. Through physical exertion and repetitive motions, the choreomaniacs created their own performance practice. This practice informed their spirituality by generating apocalyptic visions and mystical states.

Similar to Bourguignon's trancers, the dancers cultivated varieties of religious experience normally unavailable to them. Within the theatre of trance, choreomaniacs used performance as a means to explore and experiment with their religiosity. Anthropologically speaking, Choreomania was a technique of ecstasy.

Erika Bourguignon, "Suffering and Healing, Subordination and Power: Women and Possession Trance," Ethos, 32.4 (2004), 557-74 (p. 558).

I. M. Lewis, Ecstatic Religion: An Anthropological Study of Spirit Possession and Shamanism (Middlesex: Penguin Books, 1975), chapter 2.

Erika Bourguignon, "Trance and Ecstatic Dance," in Moving History / Dancing Cultures: A Dance History Reader, ed. by Ann Dils and Ann Cooper Albright (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2001), pp. 97-102 (p. 100).

Bourguignon, "Suffering and Healing, p. 558.

"Ibid, p. 557.

Ibid, p. 558.

% Ibid., p. 563; Trance Dance, repr. in Dance Perspectives, 35 (1968), 1-61 (p. 14).

During the fifteenth- and sixteenth-century epidemics, a more disciplined variant of Choreomania began to impact urban piety. In early fifteenth-century Zabern (modern-day Switzerland), Strasbourg and Cologne, pilgrimage replaced rites of exorcism in the response to Choreomania. The ancient martyr St Vitus (d. 303) emerged as the patron saint of dancers, entertainers, and plague victims as a consequence of the cultic activity of his followers at this time. (Hence another name for dance mania is chorea sancti viti, or St Vitus' Dance.)

A German chronicle from Konigshoven reports that Strasbourg was sieged by dancing mania in 1418: 'In Strasbourg many hundreds of men and women began to dance and jump in the marketplace, the lanes, and the streets. Many of them went without food for days and nights until their mania subsided. The plague was called St Vitus' dance.'

For the victims of St Vitus Dance, pilgrimage emerged as the preferred mechanism of somato-spirtual reconstitution. Wagons transported groups of choreomaniacs to St Vitus' chapel in Zabern. Upon arrival, the dancers circumambulated a shrine that reportedly cured them.

Within sacred space, choreomaniacs began to hone a liturgical practice. In the Latin Church, liturgical procession constituted the most disciplined and most common form of sacred dance. The medieval liturgist Guillaume Durand (d. 1296) explained how ring dances, once a staple of worship, eventually shifted to two linear formations to prevent clerical confusion. The liturgical procession was also a part of sacred history. For medieval Christians, Christ's entry into Jerusalem on a donkey (Matthew 11. 1-11; Mark 11. 1-11; Luke 19. 28-44; John 12. 12-18) established the first liturgy. For Bishop of Paris William of Auvergne (d. 1249), this humble entry marked the genesis of processions, as well as the very word "processio." In a liturgical setting, choreomaniacs' disordered movements morphed into a regularized ritual. Kinesthetic exercise was in many cases curative. In the choreography of the "Viel hundert fingen zu Strasbourg an zu tanzen und springen Fray und Mann Am offnen Markt, Gassen, und Strassen. Tag und Nacht ihrer viel nicht asses Bis ihn das Wiithen wieder gelad St Vits Tanz ward gennant die Plag;" cited in Frances Rust, Dance in Society (London: Routledge, 1999), p. 20. The dance epidemic of 1418 should not be confused with the dance epidemic in 1518, also in Strasbourg, see John Waller, A Time to Dance, A Time to Die, chapters 4 and 5.

* R.H.R. and M. P. Park, "Saint Vitus" Dance: Vital Misconceptions by Sydenham and Bruegel; Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 83 (1990), 512-15 (p. 513).

* Guillaume Durandus, Rationale Divinorum Officiorum VII.42.15: 'Quia enim ordo ille antiquitus incertus erat, nam in canonibus antiquis quandoque uocatur sacer et quandoque non, ideo subdyaconi certain ad festandum non habent diem, et eorum festum officio celebratur confuso' in Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Medievalis, ed. by Anselme Davril and Timothy Thibodeau (Turnhout: Brepols, 2000), CXL B, p.113.

* Guillaume d' Auvergne, Sermo III; Franco Morenzoni, 'Les Explications Liturgiques dans les Sermons de Guillaume d'Auvergne in Prédication et Liturgie au Moyen Age, ed. by Nicole Bériou and Morenzoni (Turnhout: Brepols, 2008), pp. 255-83 (pp. 267-68).

153 Downloaded from <https://www.cambridge.org/core>, Access paid by the UCSF Library, on 14 Nov 2019 at 09:37:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at <https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.> <https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787440784.010> KATHRYN EMILY DICKASON procession, the dancers abandoned demonic possession for ecclesiastical discipline. From the perspective of the clergy, choreomaniacs, by rhythmically moving their bodies within the sanctioned space of the church, corrected their bodily comportment and refined their spiritual identity. Within a liturgical context, the performance of Choreomania became integrated into pilgrimage and devotion to the saints. Rather than threatening religiosity, the fifteenth-century epidemics revitalized pilgrimage and the cult of local saints. While pilgrimage in the Early Middle Ages connoted a form of exile, during the High and Late Middle Ages this ritual morphed into an individual journey of penitence, healing, and self-reflection. Pilgrimage provided a means for choreomaniacs to demonstrate their personal piety. Choromaniacs embarked upon pilgrimages to churches associated with St Vitus as well as the Virgin Mary, the most beloved healer in the medieval Christian pantheon. In fact, some of these saints' feast days occurred during Pentecost and perhaps led chore______ The choreomaniacs' display of saintly devotion is evident from reports of their dancing in front of shrines and statues of patron saints. As a result of medieval dance mania, St Vitus emerged as the patron saint of dancers. This is especially striking because most saints and martyrs denounced dance as an idolatrous, pagan pastime. The Golden Legend (c. 1260), a voluminous hagiographic compilation by Jacobus de Voragine, contains numerous anecdotes of saints who deliberately avoided dance or punished sacrilegious dancers. During the dance epidemics of the Late Middle Ages, however, saints sympathized with, and healed, dancers. In spite of their peculiar status, choreomaniacs shaped their own religious landscapes in positive and substantive ways.

To build a following for cultic centers, clergy attached to particular sanctuaries would advertise spectacular miracles in collected compilations known as libelli miraculorum (little books of miracles). The miraculous reputations of certain shrines or relics in turn inspired competition between pilgrimage sites, as pilgrims brought considerable prestige (and revenue) to medieval cities. See Jonathan Sumption, The Age of Pilgrimage: The Medieval Journey to God (Mahwah, NJ: HiddenSpring, 2003), p. 215.

Diana Webb provides sources indicating that singing and dancing occurred at pilgrimage sites, see Medieval European Pilgrimage, c.700-C. 1500 (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2002), pp. 156-62. Jacobus de Voragine, ‘De Sancto Benedicto, ‘De Sancto Nereo et Achilleo, ‘De Sancto Hieronymo, and ‘De Sancta Elizabeth, in The Golden Legend: Readings on the Saints, trans. by William Granger (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2012), pp. 188, 310, 599, 689, 698.

With its religious associations, dance mania exemplifies how kinetic spectacles can influence culture. In Strasbourg, Zabern and Cologne, choreomaniacs' kinetic performances participated in the creation of culture, by both embodying and challenging social norms. As theorist Carrie Noland has argued, the gestural capacity of the body mediates between vitalism (individual agency) and constructivism (social determinism): "kinesthetic experience, produced by acts of embodied gesturing, places pressure on the conditioning a body receives, encouraging variations in performance that account for the larger innovations in cultural practice that cannot otherwise be explained. The performative nature of Choreomania allows scholars to move beyond the rigidities of social constructivism and explore the possibilities of individual agency through dance. This creative element of culture helps to rid choreomaniacs of irrationality, and, by extension, prompts the valorization of bodily performance. Noland's theorization of embodied culture helps subvert previous interpretations of Choreomania as a psychosomatic disease. Furthermore, Noland's sophisticated understanding of kinesthesia helps us grasp how dance maniacs' performance practices reflected and affected religious beliefs. Culture, as Noland explains, is both embodied and challenged by corporeal performance." An altar painting from Cologne Cathedral demonstrates a similar equilibrium between cultural determinism and individual intent [Fig. The following text is OCRed from a book. Please clean it up, removing extraneous characters and separating wrongly appended words. Whenever you encounter a number, verify if it is part of a header or footer, showing a page number. These must be removed. Important: do not continue unfinished sentences. Reply ONLY with the corrected text:

2a]. In this image, St Vitus is paired with St Valentine, the patron saint of the ‘falling sickness,’ or epilepsy. The painted plinths at their feet depict a group of choreomaniacs (left) and epileptics (right) [Fig. 2b]. The choreomaniacs’ bodies exude vigor and suppleness, while the epileptics have impaired motor control. While Choreomania was identified as an involuntary affliction, the dancers pictured here, though certainly exuberant, show intentionality and self-control. Pilgrims ambulating through Cologne Cathedral reawakened devotion to St Vitus; this ritualized recovery conflated liturgy, pilgrimage, procession, and dance. The Choreomaniac-as-pilgrim offers penitential meanderings to the patron saint in exchange for physical and spiritual renewal. This system of spiritual exchange distances dance mania from its earlier deviance, and, by extension, recasts Choreomania as a religious practice that revitalized urban piety. Incidentally, Choreomania shares some affinities with certain late medieval dance practices. Both religious and secular spheres nurtured new dance forms characterized by excessiveness and decadence. In the Low Countries

Carrie Noland, Agency and Embodiment: Performing Gestures/Producing Culture (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009), pp. 2-3.

Ibid., p. 2.

155 Downloaded from <https://www.cambridge.org/core>. Access paid by the UCSF Library, on 14 Nov 2019 at 09:37:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at <https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms>. <https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787440784.010> And then, in the presence of the community, she danced so lovingly in God's praise that all who saw and heard it felt longing and anguish for the joy that was so unknown to them. 5°

Dyan Elliott views these penitential, purgatorial women as relics, as their bodies may have technically died but they continued to exert spiritual power among the living, see Proving Woman, pp. 74-80. 5%

Thomas de Cantimpré, Vita de S. Christina Mirabile Virgine, 11.16: Tterum cum oraret, et contemplationis in ea gratia divina descenderet, velut calefacta cera, omnia membra ejus in unum globum concludebantur, nec poterat in eis nisi tantum corpus sphaericum deprehendi. Cumque spiritali ebrietate digesta actuales sensus propria membrorum loca reciperent, instar ericei conglobatum corpus redibat ad formam, et extendebantur membra, quae sub informi prius materia claudebantur in Acta Sanctorum (28 July, 1868), V, p. 651; trans. by Margot King and Barbara Newman in The Collected Saints' Lives: Abbot John of Cantimpré, Christina the Astonishing, Margaret of Ypres, and Lutgard of Aywieéres (Turnhout: Brepols, 2008), p. 136.

Thomas de Cantimpré, Vita de S. Christina Mirabile Virgine, III.35, trans. by King and Newman in The Collected Saints' Lives, pp. 145-46.

Gertrud Jaron Lewis, By Women, for Women, about Women: The Sister-Books of Fourteenth-Century Germany (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1996), pp. 79-80, 261-62.

Cited and trans. by Lewis in ibid., p. 261.

Downloaded from <https://www.cambridge.org/core>, Access paid by the UCSF Library, on 14 Nov 2019 at 09:37:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at <https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms>. <https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787440784.010>

KATHRYN EMILY DICKASON In conversation with Choreomania, these sources suggest that the Late Middle Ages, and particularly the Flemish and German regions, accommodated ecstatic and exuberant dancing as a form of religious practice. Like female mystics, choreomaniacs' bodily performance endowed them with visionary acumen that gave them a privileged proximity to Christ, the saints, or the Virgin Mary. Outside the confines of the monastery, secular dance practices assumed a new aesthetic. Charivaris, for instance, paraded the motif of misrule with wild masks, collective movement and strident music. Generally a folk custom, the charivari was most often a protest against a questionable marriage in the community. Through the charivari, carnivalesque dancing became part of the folk repertoire. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the moresca (or morisca, mauresque, Moriskentanz, morris dance) became fashionable in several European countries. Although the moresca acquired several regional variations, it typically exhibited a danced pantomime of a woman and her several suitors. In the extant illustrations, the male dancers don extravagant costumes, including turbans and blackened faces. The moresca reveals a late medieval appetite for spectacular, acrobatic and exaggerated entertainment. The penchant for decadence reached its apex with the danse macabre, in which dance became a sign of death and decay.* Within the dance of death tradition, dance oper- ated as a metaphor for illness or______ Actes de la Table Ronde Organisée à Paris (25-27 avril 1977) par l'École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales et le Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, ed. by Jacques Le Goff and Jean-Claude Schmitt (Paris: Mouton Editeur, 1981); Natalie Zemon-Davis, “The Reasons of Misrule: Youth Groups and Charivaris in Sixteenth-Century France,” Past and Present, 50 (1971), 41-75; Tom Pettitt, ‘Protesting Inversions: Charivary as Folk Pageantry and Folk-Law, Medieval English Theatre, 21 (1999), 21-51; ‘Nuptial Pageantry in Medieval Culture and Folk Custom: in Quest of the English charivari, Medium Evum Quotidianum, 52 (2005), 89-115; Susan Crane, The Performance of Self: Ritual, Clothing, and Identity During the Hundred Years War (Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2002), chapter 5; Danielle Quéruel, ‘Des Gestes 4 la Danse: L'Exemple de la Morisque à la Fin du Moyen Age’ in Le Geste et les Gestes au Moyen Age (Aix-en-Provence: Presses Universitaires de Provence, 1998), pp. 499-517; Catherine Ingrassia, ‘La Moresque, Danse au XV°Siécle’, in Thédtre et Spectacles Hier et Aujourd'hui: Thédtralisation (Paris: Comité des Travaux Historiques et Scientifiques, 1991), pp. 131-43; Claire Sponsler, ‘Outlaw Masculinities: Drag, Blackface, and Late Medieval Laboring-Class Festivities, in Becoming Male in the Middle Ages, ed. by Jeffrey Cohen and Bonnie Wheeler (New York, NY: Garland, 1997), pp. 321-47; Bourcier, La Naissance du Ballet, pp. 70-73; Jennifer Nevile, The Eloquent Body: Dance and Humanist Culture in Fifteenth-Century Italy (Bloomington and Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press, 2004), pp. 8, 23-25, 33-39, 47; Elina Gertsman, The Dance of Death in the Middle Ages: Image, Text, Performance (Turnhout: Brepols, 2010). Tom Pettitt also discusses the charivari in his contribution to this volume.

158 Downloaded from <https://www.cambridge.org/core>, Access paid by the UCSF Library, on 14 Nov 2019 at 09:37:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at <https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.> <https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787440784.010> DECADANCE IN THE LATE MIDDLE AGES: CHOREOMANIA Although I am not forging a causal relationship between Choreomania and other late medieval dance forms, the growing trend toward extravagance and misrule is noteworthy. In this way, Choreomania partakes in a larger project of dance practice, and helps diversify the repertoire of bodily experience in medieval culture. Moreover, reassessing Choreomania as a performance practice helps de-pathologise choreomaniacs. Contextualising Choreomania within late medieval dance history shows how Choreomania belonged to a larger trend of religious and artistic experimentation in late medieval France, the Low Countries and Germany. As the Middle Ages waned, Choreomania's omnipresence in western Europe gradually withered. Attitudes toward Choreomania shifted as well. The sixteenth century witnessed a medicalisation and feminisation of dancing plagues, as detailed by the writings of Paracelsus and______ Every Whit Tuesday (a Pentecostal feast), the Dancing Pilgrims of Muelebeek, as depicted in Breughel the Younger’s (after the Elder’s) The Dancing Pilgrims of Muelebeek, were possibly depicted in Breughel the Younger’s (after the Elder’s) The Dancing Pilgrims of Muelebeek. For more on dance mania as possibly depicted in Breughel the Younger’s (after the Elder’s) The Dancing Pilgrims of Muelebeek, see McAlister, “The Dancing Pilgrims at Muelebeek, pp. 315-16; Backman, Religious Dances, pp. 244-51.

For post-medieval representations of dance mania, see Arthur Dickson, ‘Browning's Source for “The Pied Piper of Hamelin,” Studies in Philology, 23.3 (1926), 327-36; John Dirckx, “The Pied Piper of Hamelin: A Medical-Historical Interpretation, The American Journal of Dermatopathology, 2.1 (1980), 39-45; Brothers Grimm, Little Snow-White; Hans Christian Andersen, The Red Shoes; The Red Shoes, dir. by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger, (1948); Paul Krack, ‘Relicts of Dancing Mania: The Dancing Procession of Echternach, Historical Neurology, 53.9 (1999), 2169-72 (p. 2169); Ben Brantley, ‘Dance-Struck Little Girls: Run! Run in Horror!’ The New York Times, 23 November 2010; Felicia McFarren, Dance Pathologies: Performance, Poetics, Medicine (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1998), pp. 14-22; Alastair Macaulay, ‘Two Top Giselles, Back to Back, The New York Times, 29 May 2011; Gia Kourlas, ‘Distorting Everyday Actions, with Movements Awkward and Active, The New York Times, 20 October 2010; Katharina Stoye, ‘Die “Tanzwut” Bewegung von 1374: Individueller Tanzwahn, Tanzepidemischer “Flashmob” oder Performativer Héhepunkt einer Emanzipativen Laienfrémmigkeit? in Tanz und WahnSinn, ed. by Johannes Birringer and Josephine Fenger, 21 (Leipzig: Henschel, 2011), pp. 62-82; see also the contributions of Hanna Walsdorf, Annette Hartmann, Natascha Siouzouli, Nicolas Salazar-Sutil, Sidsel Pape, Eila Goldhahn, Neil Orts, and Fabrizio Manco in Tanz und WahnSinn.

The dance procession at Echternach during Whitsun, 2006: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?NR=1&feature=endscreen&v=cl4PoVGFYA4> [accessed 5 October 2016]

In the Echternach dance procession during Whitsun, the archbishop of Echternach, parish priests, monks, nuns, and laypeople execute a hop-like choreographic sequence accompanied by a marching band playing a popular Springprozession melody. The choreography seems to be an imitation of, and homage to, medieval dance maniacs. The aerobic parade traverses the city and culminates in circumambulations around the Abbey of Echternach and the tomb of St Willibrord, located in the abbey’s crypt. St Willibrord (d. 739), the city’s patron saint and first bishop, reportedly cured frenzied dancers centuries prior to the Choreomania epidemics of the Late Middle Ages.

After the saint’s death, his local cult enacted liturgical processions around his tomb for devotional______ The re-embodiment of Choreomania enables Echternach’s history to be topographically mapped onto live dancing bodies. At Echternach, dance practitioners simultaneously inhabit a decadent past and reimagine history through festal effervescence. Dance mania, as excess par excellence, achieves its highest degree of sanctity retrospectively, when the ‘here and now’ gestures towards the ‘there and then.’ Though dance, given its perennial evanescence, resists being captured, arrested, and immortalized, the collective mobilization of Echternach monumentalizes dance mania via kinesthetic memory. By recasting Choreomania as an orthodox practice, the dance at Echternach celebrates the decadance of devotion, enlivens the tremors of the dead, and re-enchants a post-medieval age.

Interestingly, a medieval manuscript containing the dancers of Kélbigk legend was found in the Echternach scriptorium, affiliated with the abbey, see Krack, 'Relicts of Dancing Mania, p. 2169.

Backman, Religious Dances, p. 172.

St Willibrord was known as Saint Witt (Vitus) in parts of Germany and St Guy in France. For more on these variations, see Krack, 'Relicts of Dancing Mania, pp. 2169-72.

Krack, 'Relicts of Dancing Mania, p. 2169; "The Leaping Procession at Echternach, The Irish Monthly, ed. by Matthew Russell, 14.155 (May 1886), pp. 257-60 (p. 259); Bourguignon, "Trance and Ecstatic Dance, p. 98; idem Trance Dance, p. 16; cf. Aubert, 'Charcot Revisited, pp. 156-57. Echternach declares itself a secular state, but the majority of its inhabitants practise Catholicism.